---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 February 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-02-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2007
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the DA, I will move:

   That this House –


   (1)      notes and welcomes the additional expenditure announced by the
        Minister of Finance;


   (2)      further notes the acute awareness of the critical lack of
        capacity across all spheres of government including but not limited
        to experience, skills and training, and huge numbers of vacancies;
        and
   (3)      calls on this House to debate this issues as a matter of
        urgency.


Ms H WEBER: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the DA, I will move:

  That the House discusses the slow pace at which children’s homes and
  places of safety are being registered given the huge number of Aids
  orphans.


                          FAREWELL TO MR M S MANIE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker I move without
notice:

   That after consideration of Order number one, precedence be given to the
   farewell to Mr M S Manie.


Agreed to.

 SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONDUCTING THE SECOND READING
                   DEBATE ON THE DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as printed in the name of the Chief Whip, on the Order Paper, as
follows:

  That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
  Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days have
  elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the
  purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Division of
  Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76) on Wednesday, 28
  February.


Agreed to.


                    JOHANNESBURG INNER-CITY CRIME FIGURES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv T M MASUTHA (ANC): Madam Speaker, on 8 February this year, the eve of
the President’s state of the nation address, the BBC broadcast a damning
documentary purporting to project the inner-city of Johannesburg and in
effect our country, as a whole, as the crime capital of the world.

The inner-city where I have studied, worked and lived for nearly two
decades, is not only a home to well over a million people, both young and
old, and of all races, but also a place of learning, work and conducting
business for many more, be they from near or far. It boasts of being the
entertainment Mecca of South Africa, with a concentration of cultural,
sports and learning centres ranked amongst the best in the world. Of
course, like any other big city, the issue of crime is obviously a
challenge as it is a densely populated area.

The latest annual crime statistics however, in fact, reveal a steady
decline in the crime rate in the country and in Johannesburg in particular.

Further, the Johannesburg development agencies’ annual survey reflects a
steady improvement in a number of key performance areas, including a sharp
improvement in a great property occupancy rate –from a peak vacancy rate of
25,8% in 1999 to the latest rate of 11,3% recorded last year. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                          ACTING MINISTER OF HEALTH


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Madam Speaker, the appointment of a caretaker in the
Ministry of Health will give Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang the time she needs
to make a full recovery. We wish the hon Minister well.

But Transport Minister, Jeff Radebe, is unlikely to have enough time
available to tackle the numerous problems besetting the Department of
Health, and the DA believes that the President should have rather appointed
a Minister from a portfolio less in need of such constant management as
transport.

The Health department requires constant and personal engagement by a
Minister. About 1000 people a day are infected with HIV because the
government’s prevention programme has stalled. The Hospital Revitalisation
Programme budget is being slowly cut back off the MTF period in favour of
other capital projects. The Auditor-General’s report shows provincial
health departments to be so bogged down in mismanagement that patients’
lives are at risk.

At the same time, the transport portfolio requires full-time attention in a
sputtering Taxi Recapitalisation Project and the rebuilding of South
Africa’s dilapidated transport infrastructure.

Can Minister Radebe handle both these portfolios? It remains to be seen. Of
course, the Minister deserves an opportunity to prove himself. It is
unlikely that, with the transport issues already on his plate, he’ll be
able to do justice to health issues as well. I thank you. [Applause.]




                             MEALS FOR PRISONERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Madam Speaker, section 85 of the Correctional
Services Act of 1998 makes it clear that the provision of meals to
prisoners is subject to set guidelines. In particular, the law clearly
prescribes the allowable maximum intervals between meals. For instance, the
Act states that not more than 14 hours should elapse between the evening
meal and breakfast during each 24-hour period.

However, it has come to the attention of the IFP that this maximum interval
of 14 hours is being ignored and exceeded in some prisons. For instance, we
have learnt that prisoners are often given their evening meal as early as
14:30 or 15:00, with breakfast only at 7:30 the following day. That would
mean an interval of between 16 and 17 hours.

The IFP finds this practice inhumane and completely unacceptable. It is yet
another example of the impunity with which the Department of Correctional
Services operates as it is clearly in violation of its own basic law, the
Correctional Services Act and the Constitution.

The IFP therefore calls on the Minister to immediately launch an
investigation into this inhumane practice at South African correctional
facilities and to take the appropriate remedial steps to rectify the
illegal actions of correctional officers. I thank you.




                     THE DA AND CORRUPT LOCAL GOVERNMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Me L N MOSS (ANC): Mevrou die Speaker, die DA se sogenaamde stryd teen
korrupsie is ‘n blote rookskerm, net soos wat sy opportunistiese
samewerking met die onstabiele Independent Civics Organisation of South
Africa – Icosa – aandui. Die DA verklaar byvoorbeeld dat hy nie met die
gediskrediteerde Truman Prince sal saamwerk nie, maar is besig om Prince te
herstel in sy posisie as munisipale bestuurder in Beaufort-Wes. [Gelag.] In
Oudtshoorn beskerm die DA-raadslede die amptenare van Icosa wat aan
korrupsie skuldig bevind is.

In die onlangse tussenverkiesing in Beaufort-Wes het die DA meer as 500
stemme verloor in die ooreenstemmende wyk vanweë sy samewerking met Truman
Prince en Icosa.

Die DA sal nie daarin slaag om die Wes-Kaap in te palm met elke korrupte
Jan Rap en sy maat nie. Die kiesers sal by die stembus met die DA afreken
oor sy heulery met die korrupte elemente in Icosa. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)
[Ms L N MOSS (ANC): Madam Speaker, the DA’s so-called war against
corruption, is merely a smokescreen, just as its opportunistic co-operation
with the unstable Independent Civics Organisation of South Africa – Icosa –
indicates. The DA, for example, declares that they will not collaborate
with the discredited Truman Prince, but yet they are busy restoring Truman
Prince to his position as municipal manager of Beaufort West. [Laughter.]
In Oudtshoorn, the DA councillors are protecting the Icosa officials that
have been found guilty of corruption.

During the recent by-election in Beaufort West, the DA lost more than 500
votes in the corresponding ward as a result of its collaboration with
Truman Prince and Icosa.

The DA will not succeed in its quest to gain control of the Western Cape by
collaborating with every corrupt Tom, Dick and Harry. The voters will get
even with the DA at the polls because of its collusion with corrupt
elements in Icosa. I thank you. [Applause.]]



                            FLOODS IN MOZAMBIQUE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Madam Speaker, the UDM extends its best wishes to the
people of Mozambique during their current hardships as they battle the
consequences of the recent floods which have now been compounded in the
aftermath of the recent tropical Cyclone Favio.

We want to assure them that the South African nation notes their suffering,
and stands ready to assist. In two days’ time Rositha Tedro, a daughter of
Mozambican floods, will celebrate her 7th birthday. South Africa and the
world will remember her as the baby that was born in a tree where her
mother had fled during the floods of 2000. Sophia, her mother, is an emblem
of the determination to survive just as little Rositha is a symbol of hope
even in the face of massive natural disaster. They give a face and a
personality to the tragedy that this year again has befallen our brothers
and sisters across the border.

As they attempt to do elsewhere in Africa, the SA National Defence Force
was there in 2000 to provide support, and they were able to save Rositha
and her mother and many others, thus physically demonstrating that as a
nation we are actively seeking the betterment of our continent. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]


                      THE BATTLE OF MAJUBA COMMEMORATED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Mevrou die Speaker, die VF Plus bring hiermee
hulde aan daardie Afrikaners wat vandag, presies 126 jaar gelede, die
supermoondheid van die 19de-eeu, Brittanje, by Majuba oortuigend verslaan
het.

Die Slag van Majuba het op 27 Februarie 1881 naby Volksrust plaasgevind.
Tydens die veldslag is een Boer en 96 Britte dood, en onder hulle was die
Britse bevelvoerder, Generaal Colley.

Brittanje, as koloniale moondheid, het vanaf die Napoleontiese oorloë tot
by die Falklandoorlog aan meer as honderd verskillende oorloë deelgeneem.
In hierdie tydperk – vanaf die tyd van Napoleon af tot vandag – het die
Britte slegs een oorlog verloor, naamlik die Eerste Vryheidsoorlog van 1880-
81 teen die Boere van die Transvaalse ZAR. In ander oorloë het die Britte
wel veldslae verloor, maar nie die hele oorlog nie. In die Eerste
Vryheidsoorlog het die Britte al vier veldslae ook verloor.

Die helde van hierdie oorlog was Generaal Piet Joubert, na wie Pietersburg
vernoem is, asook Generaal Nicolaas Smit. Op ‘n reis deur Europa na die
oorlog het die beroemde Graaf Otto von Bismarck die hoogste Duitse
toekenning, Ridder van die Rooi Adelaar, aan Generaal Smit, ‘n mielieboer
van Ermelo se kontrei, oorhandig. In Nederland is Generaal Smit met die
orde van Kommandeur van die Orde van die Nederlandse Leeu vereer, en in
Portugal het hy die land se hoogste toekenning ontvang.

Ons bring hiermee hulde aan ons voorvaders en die Afrikaners van Majuba wat
in een van die eerste anti-koloniale oorloë in Afrika vir vryheid geveg
het. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Madam Speaker, the FF Plus hereby wishes to pay
tribute to those Afrikaners who today decisively defeated the superpower of
the 19th century, Britain, at Majuba, precisely 126 years ago.

The Battle of Majuba occurred on 27 February 1881 near Volksrust. During
the battle, one Boer and 96 British soldiers died; and amongst them was the
British Commander, General Colley.

Ever since the Napoleonic wars and up to the Falkland war, Britain, as a
colonial power, had been engaged in more than a hundred wars. During this
period – from the time of Napoleon up till today – the British had suffered
only one defeat, namely the First South African War of Independence of 1880-
81 against the Boers of the Transvaal Republic ZAR. In the other wars,
though the British had lost some of the battles, they had not lost the war.
During the First South African War of Independence, the British were
defeated in all four battles as well.

The heroes of this war were General Piet Joubert, after whom the town of
Pietersburg was named, as well as General Nicolas Smith. During his travels
through Europe after the war, the famous Count Otto von Bismarck bestowed
Germany’s highest Order, Knight of the Red Eagle, on General Smith, a maize
farmer from Ermelo. In Holland, General Smith was awarded the Order of the
Commander of the Order of the Lion of the Netherlands and in Portugal he
was also awarded that country’s highest Order.

We hereby pay tribute to our forefathers and the Afrikaners at Majuba who
fought for freedom in one of the first anticolonial wars in Africa. I thank
you.]

                CONGRATULATIONS TO OUR SOUTH AFRICAN ARTISTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H P MALULEKA (ANC): Madam Speaker, again, our own artists have done us
proud. Today we salute, firstly, the two-times Grammy Award winners,
Ladysmith Black Mambazo, for their nomination in two categories, best
contemporary world music and best surround-sound production, for their
album “Long Walk to Freedom”.

Secondly, the 49th Grammy Award for the category best traditional world
music went to the Soweto Gospel Choir for their album “Blessed”. Drawn from
churches and communities of Soweto, the 26-member group with its rich
traditional and contemporary rhythms expresses the energy of our beloved
country in six of our 11 official languages. Accompanied by a four-piece
band and percussion section, the choir, in their debut CD “Voices from
Heaven”, reached number one on Billboard’s world music chart within three
weeks of its US release, after debuting at number three.

The ANC congratulates the Soweto Gospel Choir on their grand achievement. A
Grammy Award is no mean feat and we would like to say to the choir: You
have done South Africa proud and we wish you good health and success in the
days ahead. Thank you. [Applause.]

             CELEBRATION OF THE LIFE OF ROBERT MANGALISO SOBUKWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M T LIKOTSI (PAC): Madam Speaker, today the nation marks the 29th
anniversary of the life of one of the stalwarts of our liberation struggle,
a visionary, a patriot and a tried and tested leader, Comrade Robert
Mangaliso Sobukwe, the true and selfless son of Africa who passed on on 27
February 1978. In a competitors’ social speech at Fort Hare University on
21 October 1949 he said: “It is meant that we speak the truth before we
die.”

The PAC is extending an open invitation to this House, and to the nation at
large, to join it in celebrating the life of a man who sacrificed his life
and suffered the worst torture at the hands of the enemy. He was poisoned,
isolated for nine years on the notorious Robben Island and denied expert
international medical attention, and he was banished to Kimberley in the
Northern Cape until the last days of his well-deserved life.

Sobukwe was a true Africanist, one of the few champions of Pan-Africanism
as an ideology for total freedom in our country and the return of the land
to its rightful owners, the indigenous African people, and total freedom
for economic emancipation and preservation of human dignity. Let the spirit
of this undisputed intellectual live within us and the unborn until the
whole of Africa and our country Azania are totally free. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                          TRANSFORMATION OF SPORTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE (Azapo): Madam Speaker, Azapo believes that in the
context of our history of racist settler colonialism and its deliberate
programme of black impoverishment, blacks were not allowed to participate
in other sports codes such as rugby, hockey, cricket, golf, swimming, etc.
That meant the concentration of resources in the hands of a racial
minority.

Our national teams in hockey, cricket, rugby and swimming are still too
white. It must be demanded of them to become fully representative of all
players. The question we must ask of South African sport is: How much
longer are we going to give support to untransformed teams? Our country is
now in the fifteenth year of sports unification, and we have had more than
10 years of democracy and freedom. The transformation of society is most
imperative.

Azapo is of the view that there can be no democracy in this country if the
structures that form the basis of apartheid sports are not done away with.
In this context, the process of transformation in sports must continue to
reverse the legacy of centuries of colonial rule, but this transformation
process must not be in the form of assimilation into already set up
systems, and it must not suggest the substitution of white faces for black
faces in roles of mere window-dressing. It must be a genuine process all
the way.

Sports is a vital component of our culture and it must be accessible to
everybody. Sports must be broadly organised amongst the masses, and
facilities must be built throughout the country, commencing with the
upgrading of facilities in poor communities. Indigenous sports must be
funded and promoted up to Olympic levels. All sports codes must be
transformed. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         CRIME LEVELS IN RANDFONTEIN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv H C SCHMIDT (DA): Madam Speaker, during the recess, and in particular
five days before Christmas, four killers fatally shot a five-year-old girl,
Danielle Esterhuizen, in her mother’s arms at the Riebeeck Lake, a public
amenity in Randfontein.

Despite requesting help from the SAPS, no such assistance was forthcoming,
to such an extent that the father of the deceased girl had to take his own
daughter to hospital, who was certified dead on arrival. In addition, poor
police investigation has been displayed in solving the crime and bringing
all the suspects to justice.

It is alleged that one of the two suspects arrested in connection with the
murder was a suspect who had been released on bail for another murder
charge.

To worsen matters, a man was found murdered at the same Riebeeck Lake
approximately one week after the death of the five-year-old girl. No
arrests have been made in connection with this case.

In addition, the owner of a farm stall in Randfontein was also shot and
killed one week after the discovery of the murdered man at the Riebeeck
Lake. No arrests have been made.

In fact, no fewer than two armed bank robberies, as well as an armed
robbery of a furniture store, in broad daylight within the CBD of
Randfontein took place during the period of the commission of the above
crimes.

Despite the above incidents, the commander of the Randfontein Police
Station, the Gauteng Provincial Commissioner, the National Commissioner as
well as the Minister of Safety and Security are all of the view that crime
is under control.

Quite clearly, Madam Speaker, it is not. It is time for the executive
authority to realise the dire consequences of such crime on a local
community such as Randfontein as well as on South Africa as a whole. What
is needed is a firm commitment from government to stamp out crime. I thank
you.

                           ACHIEVEMENTS IN HOUSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B N DAMBUZA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the democratic government under the
leadership of the ANC continuously work tirelessly to ensure that the
rights of the people to live where they choose, to be decently housed and
to bring up their families in comfort and security are fulfilled. The house
of Ms Nothi Makhala stands proud and serves as a symbol of a new beginning
for the Joe Slovo informal settlement near Port Elizabeth in the KwaDwesi
Township in the Eastern Cape.
The house is one of many houses built under the Federation of the Urban and
the Rural Housing Programme. The programme is supported by the People’s
Housing Process, which is a government programme which encourages people to
build their own houses. The programme also encourages communities to work
together and save.

The houses that are built in this process are much bigger and of good
quality. By working together the communities gain skills as the
construction work will be done by the members themselves. The ANC believes
that it is initiatives like these that can speed up the journey to a better
life for all.

Ndiyabulela. [Thank you.]

                                UBUNTU VALUES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu V B NDLOVU(IFP): Somlomo neNdlu yakho ehloniphekile, okokuqala, ngithi
angiphakamise ukubonga uNgqongqoshe Wezezimali ngenkulumo yakhe ayenza
yokubuyisa ubuntu, lapho athi khona, “Umuntu ungumuntu ngabantu.” Lokho
wakusho ekubhekise kwinqubomgomo yokuphilelana kwabantu e-Afrika nalapha
ePhalamende esikulona.

Okwesibili, ngithi angiphakamise ukubonga kuyena uNgqongqoshe ngoba emuva
kokuba esekhulumile kwaba khona isethulo sencwadi ekhuluma ngobuntu ebhalwe
uMnu Mfikiselwa John Bhengu, ilungu elihloniphekile lale Ndlu, nayo
egcizelela khona njalo ukuthi umuntu ungumuntu ngabantu. Uma le nqubomgomo
noma le nqubokucabanga ingaba nengqalasizinda lapha eNdlini, isho khona
ukuphilelana kwale Ndlu kuzokhula njalo.

Sithi asibonge Somlomo ngoba wakhuluma uNgqongqoshe kwaze kwaba sengathi
wake waba yilungu le-IFP [Uhleko]. Ngikusho lokho ngoba kuyinqobo
nenqubomgomo yenhlangano yeNkatha yeNkululeko ukuthi umuntu ngumuntu
ngabantu. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Speaker and your august House, I rise firstly
to thank the Minister of Finance for saying in his Budget Speech that a
person is a person through other persons. The Minister said this referring
to the culture of helping each other and mutual symbiosis here in Africa
and in this Parliament.

Secondly, I rise to thank the Minister, because after his Budget Speech
there was a launch of a book by Mfikiselwa John Bhengu, an hon member of
this House. Even this book too, emphasizes that a person is a person
through other persons. If we continuously follow this good trend, we will
have a solid foundation in this House, because all this to me means that
this fellow feeling in this House will grow.

We are therefore very thankful, Madam Speaker, because the Minister spoke
so compassionately that it seemed as if he were at one stage a member of
the IFP. [Laughter.] I am saying this because it is the policy of the
Inkatha Freedom Party that a person is a person through other persons.] [I
thank you.]]

                    RECOGNITION OF GAY AND LESBIAN RIGHTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A F MADELLA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC has always committed itself to
fight against all forms of discrimination, including discrimination based
on sexual orientation. This is further endorsed by section 93 of the
Constitution, a clause that gives protection to gays and lesbians against
unfair discrimination.

South Africa must be proud as it is the first African country to enshrine
gay and lesbian rights in its Constitution. We also acknowledge the
remarkable achievement by our Parliament in passing ground-breaking
legislation that seeks to broaden rape so as to define it as a violent
crime that is happening to every citizen, be it between woman and man or
between man and man.

The implementation of this legislation, the Sexual Offences Bill, will go a
long way in addressing the challenges of under and nonreporting of rape
committed between man and man. I thank you.
                            NO-FEE SCHOOL POLICY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Madam Speaker, poor schools around the country are
being bankrupted by the Minister of Education’s overhasty implementation of
the no-fee school’s policy. Parents with children at non-fee schools have
not been paying school fees since January. However, the fund will only be
available from the beginning of the 2007-08 financial year, on 1 April. In
her haste to broadcast her policy, the Minister neglected to plan for its
proper implementation. This has left already dysfunctional schools
substantially worse off than they were before, and has made quality
teaching at these schools even more of a challenge than it already is.

While the intention behind this policy was good, it is unacceptable that it
was implemented without ensuring that the necessary funding was in place.
The Minister needs to explain how she is going to rescue these schools from
the troubles she has inflicted on them. Thank you. [Applause.]

                            COMPULSORY EDUCATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

MS D G NHLENGETHWA (ANC): Madam Speaker, education is not a privilege; it
is a right. The ANC is committed to moving as rapidly as possible to free,
dynamic and compulsory education. We are committed to making sure that no
learner is excluded from public schools because a family cannot afford to
pay school fees; that public schools remain viable and that resources for
learning are equitably spread.

The implementation of the no-fee school policy is gathering pace across the
country. Recently, the provincial government of Mpumalanga has increased
the number of no-fee schools to reach over 400 000 learners. The ANC
believes that the dream of the free, compulsory, universal and equal
education for all children is realisable. I thank you. [Applause.]

                            MINISTERS' RESPONSES

                         ACHIEVEMENTS BY GOVERNMENT
                          ACTING MINISTER OF HEALTH

                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMISEBENZI YOMPHAKATHI: Somlomo, malungu eNdlu
ehloniphekile yePhalamende, ngithanda ukuphawula kokubili okushiwo amalungu
kwinkulumo noma izincomo zawo. Ngithanda ukuphawula maqondana nodadewethu
obekhuluma ngezindlela lo hulumeni ozama ngazo ukuthuthukisa izimpilo
zabantu, ikakhulukazi ekwenzeni ukuthi sonke sikwazi ukuba nezindlu futhi
sikwazi nokuthola amanzi. Udadewethu kade encoma-ke esikwenzile laphaya
ekwakhiweni kwezindlu eDwesi; encoma futhi indlela esizakhe ngayo yokuthi
sidale amathuba emisebenzi ukuze labo bantu bazakhele izindlu zabo
ngokuhambisana nalo mgomo obizwa phecelezi nge-people’s housing process.

Ngiyathemba-ke ukuthi baningi omasipala abazokwazi ukulusebenzisa lolu
hlelo ngoba, ngale nje kokuthi sakha izindlu, kodwa senza nabahlali uqobo
kube yibo abazakhelayo lezo zindlu zabo. Ngaleyo ndlela bathola amakhono,
baphinde bathole ukuxhaseka ngokwezimali okwesikhashana.

Okwesibili, mangisho nje kwilungu elihloniphekile le-DA ukuthi ngiyadumala
nokho ngalokho ebelikukhuluma kokuthi ngabe uNgqongqoshe Wezokuthutha
uzokwazi yini ukumelana nalo msebenzi anikezwe wona uMongameli.
Kubalulekile sikhumbule ukuthi vele kuyinhlala yenza ukuthi uma kukhona
uNgqongqoshe ophumile kuleli ngomsebenzi, noma uma omunye uNgqongqoshe
engaphilanga, kufanele uMongameli abeke uNgqongqoshe ozokwazi ukubamba lowo
Mnyango okwesikhashana. Ngakho-ke angiboni ukuthi kuzoba nzima ukuthi lo
msebenzi awunikeziwe uMnu Radebe akwazi ukuwenza.

Masingabi sesibheka kumbe sigijime kakhulu kunokufanele sikwenze, size
sifake noMongameli amazwi emlonyeni okuthi ngabe wenzani manje. Uma
sekufanele akwenze lokho, siyofika isikhathi futhi akwenze ngendlela
afanele akwenze ngayo. Kodwa okwamanje asithokoziswe nje ukuthi ukhona
umuntu ozohola lo Mnyango okwesikhashana ngenkathi esalulama udadewethu
uManto Tshabalala-Msimang. Ngiyabonga.] (Translation of isiZulu minister’s
response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Madam Speaker, hon members of the House of
Parliament, I would like to comment on two things said by the members in
their statements or compliments. I wish to comment on the statement by my
sister there regarding the ways in which this government is trying to make
the people’s lives better, more especially in making sure that we all have
houses and clean water. My sister over there was complimenting us on what
we have done at Kwa-Dwesi. My sister also complimented the way we built
those houses there because employment opportunities were created, and thus
people built their own houses using the government policy known as the
People’s Housing Process.

I just hope that there are many municipalities that will be able to use
this project, because we do not only build houses through this project, but
we also make people build their own houses. And thus, these people acquire
new skills, and also incentives for that particular time.

Secondly, let me also say to the hon member of the DA that, I am
disappointed by what this member said here. The member was asking if the
Minister of Transport would be in a position to do the task that the
President has assigned to him. It is important for us to remember that it
is common cause that, if there is a Minister who is perhaps outside this
country on duty, or if one of the Ministers is indisposed, the President
has to appoint an interim acting Minister for that particular department. I
therefore do not foresee that it will be difficult for Mr Radebe to execute
the duty placed on him.

We need to be careful not to simply rush things and do what we are not even
supposed to do. We do not have to put words in the President’s mouth and
say what he should be doing now. If the time comes for the president to do
that, he will do it accordingly. But as for now, let us be content and
happy that at least there is someone to lead this department in the interim
whilst our sister Manto Tshabalala-Msimang is recuperating. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

                               NO-FEE SCHOOLS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, education is indeed a
fundamental and a basic right to all our learners. I think we can celebrate
the fact that more than 5 million learners in our country are now the
beneficiaries of attending no-fee schools. The introduction of no-fee
schools is not something new. It has already occurred last year where 20%
of our schools were covered. This year it has been expanded to 40% – this
means that 12 000 schools have now been declared no-fee schools.

Obviously, in the context of the large number of schools that are involved,
you may have some difficulties. It would have been very helpful if the hon
member had drawn the attention of the Ministry to the particular schools
that are affected. However, whilst we celebrate this, we have a
responsibility in ensuring that provinces are able to implement the policy
and that resources are provided to the provinces in terms of the Division
of Revenue Bill and that they are indeed available. It means that there has
to be better management and planning.

The Minister is currently undertaking a survey on the impact of the no-fee
schools in the various provinces. This means that whilst the policy is
good, we have to ensure and take the responsibility of ensuring that the
implementation occurs with due regard to the interest of the learners and
not to inconvenience any of the schools.

May I also add that, in addition to the 5 million learners who are the
beneficiaries of attending no-fee schools, we’ve had a wonderful
announcement by the hon Minister of Finance that there is going to be R800
million set aside for FET bursaries. This would increase the volume of
access to our schooling institutions.

May I further add, for the benefit of the hon member, that no learner can
be excluded from school on account of the inability of his or her parent to
pay school fees in terms of current legislation. We cannot then say that
because there are difficulties in a few schools with regard to
implementation we should withhold the resources generally to schools and,
therefore, deny access to thousands of our learners who are afflicted by
poverty. We have the responsibility to ensure that we provide quality
education and free access to our learners wherever it is possible. I think
what we should do rather is celebrate the wonderful strides that had been
made in education. I will not even comment on the wonderful further
contributions that treasury is making in terms of education. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

                     CRIME CHALLENGES FACING GOVERNMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr A G H Pahad): Madam Speaker, I
rise to express my deep concern about what the member has referred
regarding the BBC programme on crime in South Africa on the eve of the
President’s state of the nation address. What we can’t understand is why
the BBC, which has such a good reputation generally, saw it fit to show a
programme that was so one-sided, so selective and so distorted. We have
acknowledged on many occasions that crime is a problem that we are trying
to tackle. And as the President said in his state of the nation address, we
have consistently, all these years, put sufficient resources in the
criminal justice system to enable us to tackle this. Why the BBC went in
this direction, I believe we need explanations on. I hope all members of
the House, including the opposition, will be able to see this programme
again so that we can all in a united way respond to such distorted
reporting from such a reputable TV station.

Let me quote before I say something. A newspaper recently wrote:


  People are fed up with crime. They’re tired of being afraid to walk alone
  at night and of worrying that some creep is going to break into their home
  or steal their car. Honest people living honest lives shouldn’t have to
  put up with this crap. It’s not safe to work in a gas station or
  convenience store. You’ll be threatened, maybe beaten and robbed.


  Those of us lucky enough never to have been the victim of breaking and
  entering, or random vandalism, or an opportunistic thug with a fetish for
  other people’s wallets, purses, iPods, etc. all know someone who hasn’t
  been so lucky. And that makes us scared.

But before the opposition jumps to conclusions, that’s not a South African
newspaper report. That’s an editorial in the The Daily News in Halifax,
Canada which is a reflection of the reality that crime is not unique to
South Africa and that we must fight it as we are fighting it all over the
world. It is in this context that I would argue that there are many areas
in London that you cannot go to precisely because of this problem. So, if
you go to those specific areas and look for distorted reporting, you will
get such distorted reports. Thank you. [Applause.]


                             MEALS FOR PRISONERS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, hon Speaker, I
would like to respond to the statement made by the hon Seaton – and
unfortunately I don’t see her in the House, I don’t know if she is still
around – about the meal times and the intervals between the serving of
those meals.

It is indeed a challenge that is facing Correctional Services. The matter
that we are grappling with is, as we speak, still on the table of
Correctional Services. And when we are ready, we will come and report to
the portfolio and select committee.

Last year, for the first time, we launched what we call “Corrections Week”,
where, as Correctional Services, we actually reach out to communities, to
NGOs, to all our partners out there who work with Correctional Services,
and indeed anybody who has an interest in working with Correctional
Services in overcoming some of the challenges that we do have, and indeed
the portfolio committee, hon Seaton and everybody out there are also
invited actually to come and assist us in grappling with this challenge
that we are facing.

As I said, we will come and report to the portfolio committee when we are
ready, because the matter is still under discussion in the Department of
Correctional Services as well. Thank you. [Applause.]


                             MAJUBA MUNICIPALITY


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, I
would like to respond to the hon member that spoke about Truman Prince.
[Interjections.] That is right, Truman Prince. [Laughter.]

I would just like to inform the DA that I am a daughter of the soil of
Beaufort West. [Interjections.] I know Beaufort West better than you do. I
know Truman Prince better than you do. [Interjections.] Now, there is one
thing that you must tell us as the people of Beaufort West.
[Interjections.] Tell us the truth: Are you trying to resuscitate Truman
Prince for your narrow interest? You must tell us the truth.
[Interjections.] What are you trying to do? I’m particularly referring to
the hon Doman. [Interjections.]

I’d like to warn the DA. [Interjections.] I’d like to warn the DA, Madam
Speaker. [Interjections.] Give me a chance! Don’t be nervous. Don’t be
nervous.

The SPEAKER: Order! Order!

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: I’d like to warn
the DA that in respect of those municipalities that you say you are
governing together with Icosa, that are so unstable – and they’ll continue
to be unstable until the next election – you will live to regret it!
[Interjections.] Thank you. [Applause.]


                             MAJUBA MUNICIPALITY


          CRIME LEVELS – RANDFONTEIN ARMED ROBBERIES AND NO ARRESTS


                          VALUES RETAINED BY UBUNTU


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, a few quick
responses. On the anniversary of the Battle of Amajuba, I think we want to
congratulate the sons and daughters of the Afrikaners. It’s just a pity
there wasn’t a TRC after the South African War. Some of these things kind
of need to be resolved and it is a very important part of nation-building.

The hon Schmidt has left the House. Now, I am familiar with the case,
partly because the father of the young girl he referred to is an employee
of the Revenue Service. I just hope that the hon member, rather than
standing here and making hollow statements, is active in building the
community police forum in Randfontein, because we need local oversight, we
need local accountability. That is the message. There is no point in
standing here and making a member’s statement and then running off from
Parliament. We must be active in the communities and that is part of the
honour and responsibility of service to the electorate.

In respect of the hon Ndlovu, I think when our forebears met in
Bloemfontein in 1912, they established a parliament of the people. And when
others left that parliament of the people to form different organisations,
we are glad to see that they retained the same values that have been there
in the parliament of the people from 1912. Some of them have even retained
the colours and added a few more colours. We are grateful on this side of
the House. [Applause.] Thank you. [Laughter.]

     ENSURING RESPECT FOR AND PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE BETWEEN ALL RELIGIOUS
                COMMUNITIES AND BELIEFS IN A GLOBALISED WORLD

                                  (Debate)

uMnu S J NJIKELANA: Somlomo, hayi obekekileyo kuphela kodwa nothandekayo,
abaPhathiswa abahloniphekileyo, malungu ePalamente, kunye nani nonke bemi
boMzantsi Afrika, namhlanje mawethu sithi masike siphicothe lo mbandela
weenkolo namasiko kuzwelonke. Endiza kukuphakela umzi ke kumalunga
neendlela ekuzanywa ngazo kuzwelonke intsetyenziswano nokuhloniphana
kweenkolo, amasiko nezithethe.

Gxebe xa ndinaba, ngumntu ekufuneka enzile, hayi inkolo, isiko okanye
isithethe. Kuninzi okwenzekayo kumazwe ngamazwe malunga nalo mba kwaye
ukunyamekelana nokuhloniphana phakathi kweenkolo namasiko yintsumantsumane
esaqhekeza iintloko, itshise namabunzi kwabo baphethene nemicimbi elolu
hlobo. Mandikhe ndigocagoce ukuba kutheni le nto lo mcimbi
uyintsindabadala, kodwa sibe sibona iinkokheli zethu zikunye neenkcuba-
buchopho, bechininika amabunzi bezamana nesisombululo. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S J NJIKELANA: Hon and beloved Speaker, hon Ministers, Members of
Parliament and all South African citizens, today I would like us to explore
the issue of beliefs and customs as it is a national question. My
presentation in this House is in relation to mechanisms that are being
generated nationally in an endeavour to bring about harmony and respect
amongst the various religions, beliefs, cultures and traditions.

Furthermore, it is a person’s responsibility to perform, not the belief,
culture or tradition. There is a lot happening in different countries
around this matter and tolerance and respect of other people’s religion and
customs is still a burning issue to those who deal with matters of this
nature. Let me explain why this issue has become a big problem which is
causing our leaders, together with experts, to perspire with the effort to
come up with solutions.]

The history of mankind is littered with both religious and belief tolerance
and intolerance amongst nations, races, tribes and social groups. We have
yet to see any abatement of the wars and tensions rampant in Palestine,
Sudan, Somalia and Sri Lanka, to name a few.

Many are still licking their wounds and emotional scars in Yugoslavia,
Nigeria and Algeria. What we are made to believe is that religious
differences are the underlying causes for such conflicts.

If we assume that every society has an obligation to ensure that all
citizens have the right to freedom of association and freedom of thought or
choice, then this topic would be redundant if that was practised. The
reality is that the world is reeling and agonising due to conflicts caused
by religious differences. From the days of colonialism to present-day
neoliberalism, religious conflicts are still rife. Discrimination on the
grounds of religious differences has caused untold harm, especially on our
continent.

Obviously, one of the reasons for calling Africa the Dark Continent was the
contempt for our religions, traditions and beliefs. In fact, Danielle
Mezzana states:

   For centuries African traditional religions have been subjected to the
   same misinterpretations, underestimation and basic stigmatisations which
   have been reserved and continue to be reserved for the societies,
   cultures and actors of Sub-Saharan Africa in general.

At the core of abuse of religion is the unquenched desire for material
gains. Expeditions to discover and spread the Word of God were abused to
advance colonialism, and crusades under the pretext of spreading Islam were
used to plunder nations. Whilst the values, principles and ethics of all
religions are worthwhile, the abuse thereof must always be condemned and
obliterated without mercy. Capitalism and its parent, imperialism, have
been very crafty in abusing religion for material gains.

Let me further assert that using the fight against terrorism as a guise to
undermine certain religions, due to the imperialist gluttony to buttress
and sustain its insatiable appetite for dominance, must be condemned as
well.

Countries such as Iran, Iraq, Sudan, Somalia and Afghanistan are amongst
those enduring untold suffering due to the so-called crusade against
terrorism. I maintain very strongly that the most appropriate action
against terrorism should not only be its elimination, but also addressing
its underlying causes.

The evidence of a series of resolutions and conventions in international
bodies such as the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union is
quite abundant; however, evidence of effective implementation is
unfortunately quite scant. The question is: Why, in spite of so many
resolutions and conventions that oblige governments and even ordinary
citizens to ensure respect and coexistence of religions and beliefs, is the
world still shaken now and again by conflicts arising from religious
differences?

To me, the lack of political will amongst those in authority cannot be
ruled out. Using incorrect, and at times distorted, ideological tools to
address such conflicts do not, unfortunately, yield the desired and
sustainable results. Overreliance on legislation rather than
resocialisation of those entangled in such conflicts will always run the
risk of limited impact. I therefore argue for resocialisation, because a
resocialised person will always behave of his or her own volition without
compulsion due to statutes.

Obviously, international bodies such as the IPU and the United Nations are
in one way or another committed to ensuring that all nations strengthen
respect for human rights, democracy, tolerance and pluralism – all
attributes that are important for the maintenance of peace.

Some of us believe in, and have actually implemented, the practice of
keeping the state separate from religion, and also that the institutions of
religion should be entirely free from governmental interference. This is a
principle that is found in various constitutions throughout the world. Let
me quote a few. Chapter 3 on the fundamental rights of the constitution of
Sri Lanka asserts:

  Every person is entitled to freedom of thought, conscience and religion
  without the freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his
  choice.

The dilemma is that in reality there is strife and tension due to religious
differences, and even hostilities that are triggered despite constitutional
obligations to do the opposite. When the distinction between state and
religion is blurred, there are bound to be certain sectors that will suffer
unavoidable discrimination of some form.

We also need to guard against practices that aim to maintain the dominance
of one religion at the expense of the other. The SA Communist Party argued
in 2003 that the SABC needs to review existing religious programmes with
the intention to promote comparative education and analysis of religions
and other forms of beliefs and nonbeliefs, and tolerance of different
religious beliefs, and to ensure that African traditional religions, Islam,
Judaism, Hinduism and other minority religions get increased exposure on
the SABC.

Another display of religious intolerance happened in January 1998 when Pope
John Paul visited Cuba. The Pope was received as a divine messenger by
millions of Cubans. President Castro said in a conference:

  The success of the visit of the Pope must be a success of the country and
  a success of the revolution. It is a manifestation of confidence.

Even here in South Africa, within our new political dispensation, we’ve
been able to experience a very clear turnaround in terms of discrimination
which was rampant before we got our freedom. It is therefore understandable
when the ANC claims that every neighbourhood in our country has religious,
political, commercial, educational and social communities who are concerned
to build a just and peaceful nation.

Amongst some of our achievements in this current dispensation is plausible
religious coexistence, an accolade which we need to share with other
countries which are still immersed in unfortunate religious conflicts.
What we need to share is not only the outstanding legislation that has
ensured that discrimination on religious grounds is flung into the
political dustbin, but also our daily campaign and dialogue, especially the
noble effort of resocialising the behaviour and attitudes of ordinary South
Africans. We need to share this with others throughout the world.

But how do we promote sustainable respect and coexistence amongst those who
practise different religions globally? Our leadership, guided by our
country’s well-supported conventions, has engaged in debates on various
international platforms and has vigorously promoted interreligious dialogue
and understanding, including awareness of differences and commonalities
amongst peoples and civilisations. I feel that this is the starting point
if we are to ensure the sustainable promotion of respect and coexistence.

However, let me point out that changing the material conditions of the poor
for the better will go a long way in addressing the neverending strife that
tears families apart, that triggers wars and pushes communities asunder
into rampages. Using the correct and time-tested ideological tools to
promote religious tolerance and therefore co-operation is the undoubted
choice that humanity needs to opt for with the greatest passion.

Godfrey Igwebuike Onah claims that at the centre of traditional morality is
human life. Africans have a sacred reverence for life, for it is believed
to be the greatest of God’s gifts to humans. I therefore maintain that we
need to be guided by this dictum.

Once again, some of us have gone, and will still go, out into the world to
champion tolerance, co-operation and dialogue so that humanity can ensure
respect and coexistence. We need to be mindful of what President Mbeki
said:


  The process of change has created space for religious communities by
  guaranteeing all freedoms, particularly religious freedom, which should
  give these communities all possibilities and opportunities to play their
  part in the reconstruction and development of our country.

I conclude by asserting that this pertains not only to our country but to
the world as a whole. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Modulasetulo, se sugele ngwana thari mpeng. [Chairperson,
don’t count your chickens before they are hatched.]

Despite the long title of the subject of debate, one can only begin the
discourse by picking on the key operative words of the title and these are
respect, peaceful coexistence between all religious communities, beliefs
and global world, because with a sober approach we could be able to begin
to lay the ground for the ideals that are espoused by this very long title.
Respect can only be meaningful if it’s reciprocal and mutual and not mono-
directional.

Peaceful coexistence between all can only mean that a strong element of
justice and mutual recognition of each other’s sovereignty and space, so to
say, are essential for global cohesion and tolerance. In most democratic
societies it is imperative that there should be a culture of the
recognition of fundamental freedoms and human rights undergirded by
tolerance and the preparedness to uphold these tenets unselectively and
fearlessly. To ensure respect and peaceful coexistence of all these bodies
or religious bodies, the dialogue between all religious bodies is also
critical. Ecumenism and interfaith dialogue are critical in sustaining the
sentiments as expressed by this topic.

Much work has been done in this area by bodies such as the World Council of
Churches and similar circular institutions. The foregoing contention is
borne out by the resolve ensuing from the 1998 12th Summit Conference of
the Heads of State or Government of Nonaligned Movements in Durban which
expressed itself thus:

  The Heads of State or Government expressed their concern at attempts to
  suggest division between cultures and civilizations and reiterated that
  despite conflict and war throughout human history, positive interaction
  and fusion between cultures and civilisations have continued for the
  benefit of all humanity, and expressed their resolve to facilitate and
  enhance this dialogue between cultures and civilisations.

Therefore, the peaceful coexistence between all religious communities can,
on the other hand, be strengthened and enhanced by joint social justice
ventures, meaning from word to deed witness between these different and
globally situated communities.

In conclusion, I would also like to say that it would be a useful exercise
if we, our Parliament, explore the possibilities of contributing to these
ideals and sentiments as conjured up by the subject under discussion. If we
believe in the validity of the subject, we, as Parliament, must live out
the sentiments and begin to be what we espouse as an institution –
individually and severally. We need to take note of what Bishop Francisco
Claver said in his pastorals. He says in a very short pithy way: “We must
separate the chaff of rhetoric from the grains of reality.”

The ideals, therefore, envisaged by this topic are certainly acceptable to
all freedom-loving and democratic societies. Therefore, it is imperative to
endorse such aspirations. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is an honour for me to
follow on the possible new leader of the DA [Applause.]

At the end of April the International Parliamentary Union will meet in
Indonesia to discuss serious matters affecting the people of this world.
About 150 parliaments will try to find solutions for the problems of this
planet. One of the issues to be discussed concerns religious communities;
there are literally thousands of different religious beliefs on earth and
they all have to be respected and have to coexist peacefully and contribute
to create a better life for all human beings.

Those members of the South African Parliament attending the forthcoming IPU
meeting cannot simply arrive there and take stands. They represent the
South African Parliament and must reflect this Parliament’s views. For that
reason this debate is taking place so that the South African delegation can
today be briefed on what stands we are to take, not only on the issue we
are debating today, but also on other issues to be covered later by this
House.

Religion is supposedly all about faith, hope and love and yet, one will
have to go far to find another issue that is so filled with divisive
elements such as intolerance, disrespect, hatred and even war. In many ways
religion has shaped the modern history of the world. Witness, for instance,
the Christian Crusades to the Holy Land and the penetration of Islam into
Europe hundreds of years ago.

The reverberation of those monumental historic epochs can today still be
felt and for some still serve as a rallying point. It is very important
that all people recognise and respect freedom of religious choice and
practice and especially to be tolerant of differences and divergent
approaches to religion.

We therefore have to give the people of the world room to practise their
religion of choice freely. But unfortunately hard-lined religious
fundamentalists refuse to be tolerant of other religions, and they refuse
to give room to other believers to practise their choice of religion
freely. They thrive on intolerance, hatred and fear and have become a
danger to humanity and to world peace.

One needs to take an example from the Roman Catholic Pope who, having
raised the ire of Muslims everywhere with his misunderstood speech in
Regensburg, went on a bridge-building visit to Turkey where his humility
and respect for Islam went a long way towards rebuilding a fractured
relationship.

The IPU must, therefore, at the forthcoming meeting in Indonesia, urge its
member parliaments, about 150 of them, to make it possible for religious
communities and leaders to enter into a dialogue of which the main aim
should be guaranteeing respect for and peaceful coexistence between
religious communities and beliefs in a globalised world. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we call the next speaker, just to remind the
House that this Parliament will be represented in Indonesia, and amongst
the topics to be discussed is this topic that very few people are paying
attention to. The reason has always been that you are being represented
elsewhere without your input, so we thought that by bringing the topics
here you would either participate in the debate or follow the debate and be
able to advise the delegation before it leaves. I am just pleading with you
to assist us to give the best that South Africa can give to other
countries.

Ms F BATYI: Deputy Speaker, everybody in this House knows that we live in a
globalised world. Whether we are all for globalisation or against it, it’s
almost irrelevant since we are all part of it now, whether we like it or
not. Despite the obvious benefits that it brings, globalisation has opened
the world’s eyes to what happens all around it and has sparked a sense of
fear and insecurity that has led to the loss of many lives.

This fear and insecurity is a result of people realising that they have
different beliefs, and their unwillingness to accept and embrace each
other’s otherness. This is a simple reason for why we are faced with a war
on terror. This is the reason why the Middle East has yet to find a
solution to a conflict that has been going on for decades. And this is why
there is fear around the globe of a third world war based on the conflict
between the West and the East, or more extremely, Christianity and Islam.

Strong leadership is necessary if we want to foster respect and peaceful
coexistence between all religious communities and beliefs. Sadly, prominent
international leaders have failed to do this and have instead imposed more
fear on the peoples of the world.

The ID believes that South Africa, as a new member of the UN Security
Council, can help to reverse this trend by showing the world how to
reconcile different cultures, religions and beliefs under one flag. South
Africa has survived its apartheid era, and our country now flourishes with
acceptance and respect for all cultures and beliefs in our land. This
Parliament, along with other sectors of government, must therefore do what
it can to discourage unnecessary warfare and the abuse of human rights.

Finally, the ID hopes that the South African government will use its power
at the UN Security Council wisely. We urge them to recall the memories of
our conflict-ridden country whenever they have to vote on the situation of
another state, and we trust that it will always vote humanely for the
duration of its term. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP believes that it is entirely
possible and desirable for all religious communities to coexist in a
globalised world.

In a report approved by the 9th Assembly of the World Council of Churches,
representatives from 120 countries reaffirmed their commitment to
respectful dialogue and co-operation between people of different faiths and
other convictions, declaring that the international community must work
together to nurture global respect for diversity, culture and religion.

Sadly, the reality has been that efforts in this direction have instead
undermined diversity, culture and religion. Anyone claiming a distinct
identity or holding to unique and absolute values is seen as an obstacle
and hindrance to an envisaged one world order.

Christians, for example, worship Jesus Christ who claims to be the one true
God, the way, the truth and the life and the only way to the Father. This,
in the opinion of those driving the new world order, makes an enemy of all
Christians who will not compromise their belief.

Many cultures perceive themselves under threat which does not augur well
for peaceful coexistence, when the mere expression of one’s faith is said
to constitute hate speech and people are intimidated into accepting laws
promoting unacceptable practices such as abortion, homosexuality,
experiments on human foetuses, pornography, assisted suicide, sexual
immorality and evolution.

The World Council of Churches’ report goes on to state that the real
tension in our world is not between religions and beliefs, but between
aggressive, intolerant and manipulative seculars and religious ideologies
used to legitimise the use of violence, the exclusion of minorities and
political domination.

Respect for and peaceful coexistence between all religious communities and
beliefs in a globalised world will not happen if it is at the cost of
religious freedom and genuine diversity. The right to hold and articulate
one’s belief, the right to worship freely and even exclusively, and the
right to refuse to participate in practices which violate one’s conscience
is fundamental and cannot be wished away or ignored.

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, friends and colleagues,
South Africa is generally regarded as one of the religious countries of the
world according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union’s 116th Assembly and
related meetings. Its religious population is constituted as follows:
Christian 68%; African religions 28,5%; Muslim 2 % and Hindu 1,5%.

South Africa’s religious history is linked to the European powers’
involvement in Africa when the colonial powers divided the African
continent among themselves and in that process became actively involved in
missionary actions. As from 1890, missionaries became involved and they
were more associated with the ruling political powers in Africa. In many
African states religion became the cornerstone of the African education
systems and social, political and economic life in Africa.
South Africa’s history provides sufficient proof that this country followed
the trend of the rest of the African continent during the country’s native-
settler wars. Some of the conflicts were motivated – in the opinion of the
warring parties – by a God-given mandate, eg The Piet Retief and the Zulu
wars. Let us avoid that.

Babe nesandla sika Esawu kodwa benezwi lika Jakobe. Babe khombisa ukuthi
bazojikela kwesokudla kodwa bajikele kwesokunxele. [They had hands like
those of Esau and yet had the voice like that of Jacob. They indicated that
they would be turning right only to find that they turned left.]

In subsequent years South Africa in a great way succeeded in creating a
climate conducive to the peaceful coexistence of the country’s religious
groupings. The South African Constitution, Act 108 of 1996, makes explicit
reference to the following: It emphasises and enacts religious sensitivity
in a country with potential ethnic and social divisions.

The Bill of Rights protects religious freedom. Everyone has the right to
freedom of conscience, religion, thought, belief and opinion. The
Constitution does not only acknowledge the rights of religious communities
to assembly without prejudices, but also acknowledge the right of religious
communities to join and maintain cultural, religious and linguistic
associations.

The Freedom Charter says that the law shall guarantee to all their right to
speak, organise, meet together, publish and preach and to worship and to
educate their children. Sadly, international conflicts and wars are
increasing at a rapid pace, some in the name of religion. South Africa
remarkably, particularly given the country’s divided tragic past, succeeded
in escaping scourge of armed conflict but also in enabling its various
religious groups to live together harmoniously.

Kusho ukuthini nalokhu? Ngabe kusho ukuthi sifanele silwe ngoba inkolo
yethu ingafani? Cha kodwa sifanele siphile sonke kuleli zwe esilinikwe
nguMdali wethu. Munye uMdali, uthi yena unguAlfa no Omega, uyisiqalo
nesiphetho. IBhayibheli lithi “Hambani niye ezweni lonke, nishumayele
ivangeli kwabakholwayo nibabhaphathize egameni lendodana nelikayise
nelikamoya ongcwele, bese nibafundisa ukwenza konke enginitshele khona”
Alisho ukuthi bacindezeleni abantu kodwa lithi okholwayo. Lokho kusho
ukuthini na? Kusho ukuthi okholwa yile nkolo engizobe ngiyishumayela
ngaleso siskhathi. Lisho ukuthi ke asimhloniphe futhi sibahloniphe nabanye.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[What does this therefore mean? Does it mean that because we are from
different religions we must fight? No, because we all need to live in this
country which was given to us by our Creator. There is only one Creator. He
says that He is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.  The Bible
says, “Go therefore and make disciples of all nations baptising them in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them all
that I have commanded you.” It does not therefore say oppress people, but
it says he who believes. What does this mean? This means that whoever
believes in the kind of religion that I would be preaching at that
particular time, should be respected and should respect others too.]

The World Council of Churches’ declaration on religious liberty of 1948
remained as topical as it was in the middle of the previous century. The
protection of the religious rights of others must be on top of the agenda
of the international global world. This is also important to South Africa
since this country’s religious groupings are to play an important role in
advocating global justice.

Thus it is important to protect the religious rights in a democratic state
like ours, and to determine to what extent is the Constitution and other
legislations in line with the international trends regarding the protection
offered to religious communities. These include the right human rights
instruments with reference to religion and belief, eg the United Nation’s
Charter, the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women,
racial discrimination, the declaration on the rights of the child, the
rights of indigenous people, the protection of human rights and the Arab
Charter on human rights, etc. The question is: Are religious differences
and religion to be blamed for wars and conflicts? The answer is no.

Sifanele sihloniphane. Abenzi balezi zimpi banezandla banezandla zika Esawu
kanti banezwi lika Jakobe. Bakhombisa ukujikela kwesokudla kodwa bajikele
kwesokunxele. rmrmKithina abashumayela ivangeli lithi iZwi, asiphakamise
uJesu yena uzobadonsa abantu beze kuye. Umsebenzi wethu ukushumayela abantu
baphenduke. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We need to respect each other. The instigators of all these wars have
Esau’s hands, and yet have the voice of Jacob. They indicate to be turning
right, and yet they are turning left. To us who preach the living gospel,
the Word says, let us exalt Jesus and He will draw them to himself. Our job
is to preach to people to repent.]

The religious rights guaranteed by South Africa’s Constitution are further
entrenched by the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights
of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities.

The commission was established in terms of the Commission for the Promotion
and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic
Communities Act, Act 19 of 2002.

The commission is to promote respect for and for further protection of
these rights, promoting tolerance and national unity in our communities. We
have the challenge of nation-building in a diverse and deeply divided
society. Let us build together and make South Africa a better place to
live.

Asingazikhohlisi bakwethu sicabange ukuthi uma sisebenzisa iZwi lenkosi
sisazophumelela ukubakhohlisa abantu njengakulesiya sikhathi sakuqala uma
sasibakhohlisa ukuthi bangabheki okunye okungamasiko abo, bakusebenzise.
Zikhona izinto ezinhle ezazingamasiko ethu esasizenza. Ake ngenze
umfanekiso, ngithi esikweni labantu intombi yayiba yintombi ize ifinyelele
emshadweni. Nasenkolweni kunjalo, intombi ayiphile ubuntombi ize ifinyelele
emshadweni. Angazi ke Ukuthi kuhluka kuphi. Kuningi okunye ebengingakubala
kodwa ngikhetha ukuthi ngime nje kulokhu okubili engikushilo. Asiqapheleni
ke bakwethu ukuthi ukuze sakhe iNingizimu Africa enenhlonipho,
enokubekezelelana, enothando, ezoba yindawo enhle ukuthi wonke umuntu
akwazi ukuphila kuyo ngenjabulo.

Asihloniphane, sihloniphe izinkolo zabanye abantu kanti neyethu
bayihloniphe kanjalo. Mina ke njengekholwa ngiyazihlonipha izinkolo zabanye
abantu. Angigxambukeli ezintweni zabanye abantu kodwa engikwenzayo ilokho
engikushilo ukuthi ngishumayela ivangeli lokuthi abantu abaphenduke
balandele uJesu. Ophendukayo uye engizombhabhadisa bese ngimfundisa
ukuhamba njengo Jesu. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo ithuba ongiphe lona, ngicela
ukuthi ke sonke sihloniphane sakhel lelizwe lethu libe yizwe elinokuthula,
sakhe lelizwe lethu kuze nezwe ngaphandle libukele kithina ukuthi kuhanjwa
kanjani uma kuhlangene izizwe ezingafani, ezinezinkolo ezingafani,
ezinabantu abahlukile ekwenzeni izinto abakholelwa kuzo kodwa bekwazi
ukuphila ndawonye. Singavumi ukuthi izwe lethu lenziwe indawo yempi,
kusetshenziswa igama lezinkolo zethu. Ngiyabonga sihlalo. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Let us, therefore, not fool ourselves and think that if we use the Word of
God we will succeed in fooling the people around us as it happened
previously when people were told to surrender their cultures. There are, of
course, good things which were part of our cultures which we were doing.
Let me make an example here. Traditionally, a girl would remain a virgin
until she gets married. The same also applies in the religion; a girl has
to maintain her virginity until she gets married. I can’t spot the
difference here. There is a lot that I can mention in this regard but I
choose to pause here on these two that I have mentioned. Let us, therefore,
be very vigilant in order to build a South Africa that is respected – a
place of tolerance and love where everyone live happily.

Let us respect each other and respect other people’s religions so that they
also respect ours. I for one, as a Christian, respect other people’s
religions. I do not interfere in other people’s affairs, but what I do is,
as I mentioned before, to preach the gospel for repentance and that people
should follow Jesus. He who repents is the only one that I will baptise and
teach to emulate Jesus. I thank you, Chairperson, for this opportunity that
you have given me. I therefore ask all of us to respect each other, and
build this country of ours so that even the world outside can look at us
with envy and see how to live together as different races with different
religions, as people with different interests who can live together in
harmony. Let us not allow our country to be turned into a war zone through
our religions. I thank you, Chairperson.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Madam Deputy Speaker, colleagues, our universe is home to
many different races, cultures and religious convictions. The basis of
social cohesion is the willingness to understand and respect the various
religious practices around us.

It is our duty, as human beings, to build an ideology of acceptance, a
prejudice-free world where we focus on the thread that binds us together as
a people. An individual without any belief in anything in or beyond this
world is a human being without purpose.

Religion serves as a force that grants us the gift of purpose. Without
purpose there is no inspiration to live and to achieve great things. We
have to acknowledge that the greatest world leaders were compelled by
purpose to bend history and impact on millions of lives in a positive way.
For this reason, we have to accept and respect various forces that direct
us to our destinies, to live and to be great people.

Ukholo lukhona, lwamukelekile futhi luvumelekile kuzo zonke izinhlanga.
Asifunde ukwamukelana ngokuhlukana kwezinkolo zethu. Ngiyabonga. [Religion
is there, and it is both acceptable and allowed in all races. Let us learn
to accept each other and our different religions. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the coexistence of
religions is a fundamental challenge all over the world, and there is no
doubt that religion is becoming increasingly important in the political
sphere.

Nowadays that, which people believe in, has become a political issue. How
people practise their religion has become politics. And in some regimes
politics equals religion. It is always a great shock to see people fire
shots at worship centres, or even go to the extent of having to guard them
in some instances.

Religion has to be treated with the greatest caution and, above all,
tolerance. The golden rule in religion is: “Do unto others as you would
like them to do unto you.” This is common among religions such as
Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, Bahai and Hinduism. They may be
using different words, but they boil down to one thing: “Be tolerant of
others.”

All religions should be accepted as potential bearers of peace,
reconciliation and reflection. Coexistence in religion does not allow room
for the holier-than-thou attitude. It does not allow Puritanism, and
neither does it leave room for extremism and violence.

Religious intolerance has shown its face elsewhere in the world. The
current tension in the Middle East should not be apportioned only to the
Jews, while Muslims are not held responsible for the acts of radical
Muslims. Anti-Semitism and Islamophobia are two faces of intolerance that
our democratic society must fight to the end.

The global village, which the world has to be, experiences migration of
people who live their beliefs in a new environment that becomes suspicious
of such newcomers. The result is mistrust which more often than not leads
to discrimination, hate and violence. These manifest themselves in a
situation that leads to intolerance.

For religious communities to live in peace with one another, they should
love, respect, consult and be tolerant of one another. None should view
themselves as better than others. The principal word should always be
“tolerance”.

Our argument has always been that we all strive to become better with the
dawn of each day. Those attending worship centres should not walk on air
and look down on others. They should accept that a church or a worship
centre is not a museum for saints, but a hospital for sinners.

In conclusion, it has to be noted that nowadays foreign policy extends
beyond management of natural resources to the management of religious
diversity, faith and cultural pluralism in the globalised world.

Foreign policy is about a quest for high ideals, paving the way for
freedom, human rights, democracy, justice, as well as global understanding.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Speaker, the religious communities of the world have
constantly been sending misleading and conflicting messages to
international religious communities and others at large. There has been a
superiority struggle amongst them, with some claiming to be more relevant
and more authentic than others: Christians, Muslims, Hindus, African
culture, etc. They all believe that there is only one God, named
differently: uQamata, Jah, Tlatlamatjholo, Allah, Here, etc, but still
there remains a strong feeling amongst them that the one’s God is better
than that of the others.

Amongst Christian religious groups there are sharply diverging views and
approaches. The Catholics, the Protestants and abazalwane or the Zionists
find it very difficult to coexist with one another, although they are all
Christians.

There are repeated incidents of violence amongst some of these groupings,
as seen through conflicts in Northern Ireland between the Catholics and the
Protestants. These matters of nonrespect and lack of coexistence are
sometimes caused by political interference, such as marginalising other
religious groupings as nonmainstream.

In our country the mainstream religious communities are foreign-originated
churches, such as the Roman Catholic Church, the Nederduitse Gereformeerde
Kerk and the Methodists. African churches include the ZCC, Shembe,
Rastafarianism, amaPostile and IPCC and they were regarded as uncivilised
religious groups.

The African cultural beliefs are a factor and may not be ignored. Anything
that relegates these beliefs to zero creates unnecessary tensions that may
result in global disturbances. Each religious community should learn to
respect the others and forge co-operation among people of different faiths,
cultures and other convictions to prevent pain and suffering as seen in
some of the places in the world. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen,
since the scientific temper, the enquiring and challenging temper, is a
temper of a free person, can we truthfully say to the world, especially to
our children and all the children yet to come, that we, all of us, are
assured by our deeds and respect for one another, which are directed
towards peaceful coexistence with all religious communities and beliefs in
our globalised world?

Humbly put, I think, there is very little evidence of this, but given the
faith we have in one another as fellow compatriots, we can and must build
on and enhance this evidence so that it may bloom into millions of flowers
– South African flowers – that are diverse in form, colour and scent, but
majestic in their collective grandeur.

I ask the question: Why else would Kofi Annan, the former Secretary-General
of the United Nations, have said in this very Parliament that, and I quote:

  Your robust economy, stable democracy, support for the rule of law – and
  perhaps most important – your fully inclusive Constitution have made
  South Africa a beacon of tolerance, peaceful coexistence, and mutual
  respect between people of different races, languages, religions and
  traditions.


Hardly 12 months ago, from this very podium, he went on and emphasised
that, and I quote:


  South Africa’s particular wisdom, derived from its own history   of
  overcoming resentment and mistrust, can be used to convince other
  countries that injustices and misunderstandings are not cured by
  confrontation or threats, since these only strengthen the determination
  of the powerful to keep power in their own hands.

I believe this refers to political power, religious power or otherwise.

  South Africa can teach all of us that, on the contrary, the way to a
  better balance lies through dialogue, and the establishment of mutual
  trust.

These sentiments, bordering on an article on faith, no doubt must humble
us. Indeed they do.

With equal humility, whilst we acknowledge our major victories and many
achievements, we are seized with the responsibilities of addressing the
many problems that we as South Africans and the world at large face.

Of course, for us human rights were proclaimed, the anchor of our secular
Constitution, and they are the cornerstone in determining our policy
options for governance and foreign policy. More than this – and I’ll
repeat, more than this – our Constitution invigorates us to think about the
ultimate purpose of life.

Indeed, we seek to affirm our lives to the fullest. However, we are also
conscious, as our transition to democracy demonstrated, that we should
resist the temptation to become a victim and a slave to life, which is
rooted in self-centredness.

It will not be an exaggeration to assume that it is this self-centredness
that has given rise to our current global nightmare, a nightmare that makes
peaceful global coexistence seem beyond our reach. But, this must not be
so.

In our globalised world, it is unthinkable that our economic, political and
social institutions and practices will remain insulated from influences
other than our own. It is encouraging to note that the IPU is convening a
conference to address the issue of peaceful coexistence, especially in
light of the growing communal temper of religious intolerance that
characterises major parts of the world.

And since parliaments are repositories of power, it is within their scope
to ensure that the preservation of our essential identities are not allowed
to become bigoted. These identities must also not be given the scope to
assume for themselves a self-righteous indignation for others. This should
become the guiding principle of statecraft for all nations, religious
states not excluded.

Communalism based on religion has the capacity to build and manipulate
aggressive attitudes, which in turn stimulate another form of communalism.
Religious communalisms feed each other, and the doctrine of resorting to
force at will becomes the order of the day.

Globally we are descendants of people who were capable of establishing
civilisation. Today we are faced with the challenge to either negate our
lives or affirm them. The current global situation, especially in the
regions where conflicts and wars based on competing faith systems abound,
is that there is a significant decay of simple human values.

Out of these crucibles of conflicts and wars emerge a particular tendency
of intolerance and lack of respect for life, where we witness the
undermining of our common advanced civilisation.

Whilst it should be our duty to add to the great advances and achievements
of humanity, as well as the essential values that give meaning to our
lives, we are preoccupied, on the basis of existing power and in seeking
sectarian power over others, coupled with the arrogance that goes with it,
with an uncanny mission to sow the seeds of self-destruction.

In conclusion, peaceful coexistence among all religious communities and
beliefs in our globalised world demands respect for one another and for one
another’s beliefs. All the parliaments of the world must carry this forward
or else religious fanatics will give expression to our human capabilities
of destroying ourselves and much else.
Finally, I wish to quote from one of the greatest religious thinkers that
walked this earth, Swami Vivekananda. He says:

   I’m thoroughly convinced that no individual or nation can live by holding
   itself apart from the community of others. And whenever such an attempt
   has been made, under false ideas of greatness, policy or holiness, the
   result has always been disastrous to the secluding one.

With these words I thank you very much.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, globalisation has been defined in
Wikipedia as the increasing convergence of markets, economies and ways of
life across the world. It goes on to explain that there are a variety of
ways that globalisation may befall a country and, in light of our topic
cultural globalisation, in which the growth of cross-cultural contacts is
highlighted.

In late November of last year, the former president of South Africa, Mr F W
de Klerk, made a valuable contribution voicing his sentiments on
globalisation. He was talking at the Africa and Middle East conference when
he correctly advanced that inequalities in the global economic and
political system, and failure to deal sensitively with cultural and
religious differences, were driving the global village apart. Economically,
the world’s people were divided by ongoing poverty and a widening gap
between poor and rich nations.

He could not be more right. Each time we turn on the news, we hear of the
world’s division, war and imbalanced markets. We know of the existence of
the first and second markets that are dominated by a few wealthy countries.

If we are to breach the divide, we need to realise that the human rights
that South Africa so proudly boasts in our Constitution need to be carried
out in our global dealings. We need to realise the benefits of trading with
East and West, acknowledging the potential benefit to both markets.

To do so, we also need to engage in respecting and valuing all races,
cultures and religions. South Africa is building great trading agreements,
both with East and West.

We need to educate ourselves that to label terrorist activities with a
religion is wrong. If we are to research the various religions,
monotheistic and polytheistic, we would realise that all inscribe values
and uphold the purest and greatest respect for human life, equality and
harmonious living.

The MF acknowledges that as Parliament we have a mandate to investigate the
progress of business human rights and, if need be, drive efforts to
motivate such progress in our markets. [Time expired.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the UPSA supports the ideal of creating
respect for and peaceful coexistence between all religious communities in a
globalised world, and we further believe that it would go a long way in the
eradication of present conflicts around the world.

We don’t have to look beyond South Africa since it became a democracy in
1994. Prior to South Africa becoming a democracy, the world stood in awe
waiting for a revolution or a civil war to take place, but because of a
mutual desire to coexist, we achieved what we have today, notwithstanding
some domestic issues.

The relatively peaceful manner of our transition was a result of South
Africans, irrespective of their religious convictions, demonstrating
respect for one another’s desires and beliefs.

Met Suid-Afrika as voorbeeld is ons oortuig dat met dieselfde ingesteldheid
van wedersydse respek vir ander, soortgelyke vlakke van vreedsame
naasbestaan tussen verskillende godsdiensgroepe in die wêreld bereik kan
word. Hierdie plaaslike ervaring kan dus globaal herhaal word.

Daarom moet ons waak teen godsdiensgroepe in die wêreld wat in die naam  van
demokrasie hul geloofsoortuiginge in  politiek  en  staatsadministrasie  wil
afdwing, want as dit toegelaat word, is  hierdie  debat  van  nul  en  gener
waarde. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[With South Africa as an example, we  are  convinced  that,  with  the  same
disposition of  mutual  respect  for  others,  similar  levels  of  peaceful
coexistence could be reached  between  different  religious  groups  in  the
world. Therefore this local experience can be repeated globally.

Hence we must guard against religious groups across the world that  want  to
impose their religious beliefs on politics and governance  in  the  name  of
democracy, because if this is allowed, then this debate is futile.  I  thank
you.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson and hon members, the FD believes in and strongly
supports the peaceful coexistence between all religious communities, and we
believe in a globalised world in which there will be freedom of religion.

Tolerance is not equal to compromise. To tolerate someone else’s religion
does not mean one must sacrifice one’s own faith.

History records man’s inhumanity to man because of religious intolerance.
The history of intolerance is well recorded. In 1517 Martin Luther nailed
his 95 theses on the church’s door at Wittenberg, and he was persecuted for
his beliefs. As a result of religious intolerance, the Protestant
Reformation was born.

One hundred years before Luther, John Hus was burnt at the stake, because
he stressed the authority of Scripture instead of the corrupt papal
authority of the day. He was burnt at the stake because his society did not
believe in peaceful coexistence between the religious communities.

In 1564 John Calvin, a French Protestant, was imprisoned because of his
faith. He was forced to worship in secret because of the religious
intolerance in Germany in that period.

In 1572, 30 000 Protestants were massacred while worshipping on St
Bartholomew’s Day, and they were also, of course, known to us as the French
Huguenots. The Huguenots became convinced of the necessity of using force
in self-defence, and they articulated their biblical reasoning in the
document called A Defence of Liberty Against Tyrants. Many French Huguenots
fled to South Africa to find a new home of religious tolerance.

William Tyndale was burnt at the stake as a heretic in 1536. Before his
death he spent 12 years in exile. His only crime was to translate the Bible
into English so that it would become accessible to the common man.

We must jealously defend our religious freedom in South Africa and
throughout the world, and therefore we commend the IPU for putting this on
the agenda. I thank you.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Hon members, salaam alaikum. I wish more time
was dedicated to such an important subject, because historically, religion
has always played a significant role in the lives of millions of people,
shaping societies, communities and even the geopolitical landscape of the
globe, and it continues to do so even today.

A large part of the South African population adheres to some form of
philosophy. We all have some kind of concept of the universe and our place
in it. We, therefore, cannot ignore the potential of religion and religious
communities in making a meaningful contribution towards the socioeconomic
development of countries.

However, and sadly so, religion also has the potential to disrupt peace and
stability in society, when hijacked, by planting seeds of hatred and
intolerance. It is a law of history that every ideological community starts
with certain values and from these values emerge certain norms, then follow
certain principles, then emerge certain laws and, finally, under those laws
emerge definite rules, regulations and practices. A community adopts a
certain philosophy of life in its pristine purity and, depending on the
vitality and cohesion of the value system, the community moves forward and
wins laurels. But what happens after that?

All values and ideals stand in need of certain institutions for their
preservation. Sadly, though, after long periods institutions become more
important and the values are forgotten, forgetting that the soul is more
important because it survives the body. When the values and the spirit are
forgotten, those institutions become stereotyped, moribund, static and
stagnant.

Followers and religious leaders of the respective religions then find
themselves in a straitjacket. On the other hand, the vested interests which
emerge in a community come into conflict with one another, not only through
politics, but also through conflicting sects in religion. Ultimately, it
becomes a dangerous tool in the hands of a few, leaving behind a silent
majority, helpless and unable to wrest control.

Even Islam, the faith to which I belong, presents itself as a comprehensive
philosophy and code of life which seeks to establish the universal
brotherhood and sisterhood of humankind. Taking this to be its greatest
social ideal, it too became a victim of the same treatment at various
periods in its history.

The point I’m making is that religion itself is not to blame for the global
conflicts fought in its name. It is in fact the practitioners of the
various religions who have abused them. Take, for example, the role of
religion in apartheid South Africa. It was both a participant in the
maintenance of the apartheid status quo as well as an active and effective
participant in the struggle against apartheid.

Fortunately, we now have a constitution which guarantees freedom of
conscience, religion and belief. As long as faith-based communities, in
respect of the Constitution, do not impose their beliefs and values on
others, have mutual respect for one another’s religious traditions, refrain
from stereotyping, shun racial prejudice and view the “other” as an
integral part of the human race, these fundamental human rights are
recognised.

Furthermore, as long as governments, and our government too, treat their
subjects and the various religious communities equally and protect their
respective rights, there is no reason why South Africa should not become a
model of what a truly pluralistic society should be; that it should not
become an example for others to emulate. I believe we can achieve this goal
if the religious and political leaders in our country and the world act
responsibly and lead by example.

Peace is not a white dove that will miraculously appear from heaven; peace
is the absence of conflict, conflict is but a symptom of fear and fear is
the product of ignorance. So, fellow South Africans, let us reach out to
one another across the cultural, linguistic, religious and racial divide.
Let us get to know one another better so that we may stop viewing one
another as “the other”. Then we shall be able to speak the language of “us”
and “we” instead of “I” and “me”. When this happens, South Africa will
truly become a great country. I thank you. Salaam aleikum. [Applause.]

Ms N P KHUNOU: Chairperson, Deputy Ministers, hon Members of Parliament, I
greet you all in the name of our Lord and Saviour. We live in such exciting
times with abounding opportunities. We are all alive, young or not so
young, wealthy or less well-off, clever or just average, therefore, let us
make the most of everything. Let us be alive and well. Do we ever think
about ourselves and try to understand who we are? Have we ever thought how
special we are? Do we ever think and thank God that we are alive? Why can’t
we live life to the fullest, without thinking less of one another, least of
all let religion prescribe to that.

God has created us all in his own image. We are all equal in his eyes
irrespective of who we are. God is no respecter of persons or religions,
therefore there is no religion that can claim superiority. Therefore, let
us learn to respect and accept one another. We, people of South Africa,
believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
diversity. As this is our Constitution, let us all recognise the fact that
the entity described as the South African nation is made out of diverse
linguistic and cultural groups.

There is a difference between beliefs and religion. We have different
beliefs as human beings and they are not formalised, but religion, on the
other hand, is formalised. We have different religions in this country and
we call God different names as Mrs Ntuli has said. Some call him Allah and
some call him God Almighty. He is still the same God, the Creator, infinite
God, Alfa, Omega and our Protector.

In South Africa Christianity dominates other religions, but that does not
mean that we have to belittle others. We are living in diversity. I need to
emphasise this! It is important to respect and tolerate each other.
Religion is made of social issues which become a binder. For instance,
peace is a binder and therefore we are bound, as a society, to live
peacefully. That is religion! Love binds all people.

People who have grown spiritually and are advanced always create an
enabling environment for other religious groups. We need to have a common
platform for coexistence, as my other colleagues have said. That is the aim
of government – for all religious groups to create an environment that is
conducive to coexistence.
Comrade Cedric Mason, the co-ordinator of the ANC Commission for Religious
Affairs, in his attempt to describe religious heritage says: “It falls on
to two parts, which are religion education and religious education.”
Religious education means the instructor of an adherent tenet and practices
of a particular religion, nurturing of faith and advocacy of membership. It
seeks to inculcate a specific viewpoint on faith and religious adherence
which is our responsibility at home, in our families and churches and not
government.

The Freedom Charter is a deeply spiritual document. Every clause thereof
can be supported by chapter and verse quotations from the Bible and the
Quran, the Hindu scriptures and other holy books. It is noted in the great
religious concepts revealed to humanity through the ages: justice, peace,
liberty, government, authority, land, brotherhood, opportunity and freedom.

Scriptures make it clear that religion is concerned about the whole of
human life, about society, justice, loving our neighbour as we love
ourselves, the land and the role of people and cultures. Jesus, in the
Christian religion, proclaimed to the suffering people of his age that God
will bring the kingdom of heaven so that the poor, oppressed and the
downtrodden can be redeemed.

It was not a mistake that Father Trevor Huddleston and other religious
personnel met in Kliptown in 1955 and discussed religion. Religion is a
very important subject. One of the greatest needs today is for religious
people to study the Freedom Charter again and rediscover and reinterpret
its truths for the generation which is moving from liberation into
transformation.

Se ke mokgatlo wa ANC. Ga re akanye gore motho o mongwe o botoka go na le o
mongwe. Re lekana botlhe. Sengwe le sengwe se re se buang re le ANC re se
nnela fatshe, re tle ka ditshwetso gore ke eng se re tshwanetseng go se
dira. ANC ga e atlhole batho. La Beibele e re e buisang ka metlha yotlhe ga
e atlhole batho. Modimo ke ena fela moatlhodi. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[The ANC does not view people differently, because it believes that all
people are equal. We ensure that any matter that we discuss is endorsed by
everyone before we decide what should be done. The ANC, like the Bible we
read every day, states that we should not judge people because it is only
God who does.]

Earlier I alluded to the fact that we as parents need to educate our
children on religious values, and not the government. We don’t expect our
children to be taught religion at school. Somebody would impose what they
believe on our children. I would like to cite examples. One Muslim scholar
in Cape Town got married and according to her religion she can fall
pregnant because she is married. When she went back to school, she
encountered problems because other teachers didn’t want to re-register her.
I think it is the right of the child to be registered if she wants to go
back to school. No one must oppress that child. Secondly, in North West,
one school governing body decided that instead of praying at assembly, they
would rather observe a moment of silence. This caused conflicts amongst
parents. It is important for all parents to teach their own children their
religious values, norms and standards. The school cannot do it, because
children come from different religious backgrounds.

Some Africans believe in sangomas and traditional doctors, which are called
witchdoctors by the westernised organisations. When people go to hospitals
and cannot tolerate Western medication, they are said to be hallucinating
and having delusions. In some instances people impose yoga on us. It’s OK
for the Jewish to do yoga, because it is their own cultural belief and I
think we, as Africans, also need to be respected. When we believe in our
sangomas and ancestors, it should not be anybody’s problem.

In conclusion, the nation has experienced spiritual dryness for some
decades, and now we are witnessing a lifting up of heaviness and bursting
forth of a new season of brotherly and sisterly love. There isn’t any
national change and renaissance, but a repairing of the nation into a
cohesive unit of oneness in spirit and in mind. We are experiencing a
bursting forth of days where the Spirit of God is bringing an understanding
between religious communities, beliefs and cultural groups all rallying
around issues of peace and national interest.

Whilst differences and similarities in other cases could be viewed as
opposing factors, when it comes to nation-building, they become the
foundation for ensuring respect and for peaceful coexistence. Truly, the
plans that God has for South Africa are not written on paper, but are felt
and witnessed by the discerning heart. Without a doubt, we each possess a
level of inner knowing that God is preparing the nation for a season of not
only spiritual healing, but of reconstruction that goes way beyond
religiosity. He has anointed many minds and is giving divine strategy for
the cutting away of the dross of discrimination and belief system bars.

These strategies and measures bring us, as people, to a level of spiritual
maturity, and we experience a liberty from the bondage of intolerance,
religious exclusion and resentment. We are a highly acclaimed nation that
hungers and thirsts for deeper understanding and possess lofty levels of
thinking, and view the world from an informed position as victors in issues
of national unification. Perhaps the world, as a global system, can learn a
few things from us as we master our national genius and customise our own
excellence. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): That concludes the debate on this
subject. As agreed earlier, we will now take farewell speeches to the hon M
S Manie upon his resignation from the National Assembly.




                        FAREWELL TO HON MR M S MANIE


Mr M S MANIE: Madam Chairperson ... [Interjections.] [Applause.] Madam
Chairperson, I can see I will be missed in this House. I don’t know what
this House is going to do without me but that’s the House’s problem. Even
the DA will miss me. [Interjections.] Thank you, Mike.

When I heard that I would be given the opportunity to address this House
before I leave, I was not sure about what I would say to this House. The
obvious thing would be to say thank you and thank all the people, but then
you would have a long list of “Thank yous” only.
I have one or two things that I wanted to leave with the House. If there is
time left ... Mike, don’t heckle me on the last minute, man! [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I will keep him in order for you.

Mr M S MANIE: You see he is taking it out on me for all the years I have
given him grief. I am thankful to the ANC and Parliament for the
opportunity to have been able to serve my country for the past 13 years.
[Applause.]
Parliament’s role is defined by the Constitution of our country. It has
four elements in it. The first one is the one that we all know about and
that is to make laws for our country. The second one is to ensure that we
do our work in a way that includes public participation. The third thing is
to ensure accountability and the fourth one, an important one, is to
exercise oversight over the executive. We don’t have any choice about these
four things that the Constitution says we must do.

I thought it would be important for me to state that we have done an
enormous amount of work in this Parliament since 1994. We have been able to
do what very few other countries would have been able to do over this
period, like writing hundreds of laws as well as getting a new Constitution
in place. It’s not only the ANC which has done this, it’s also the
opposition parties. Together we’ve been able to achieve this.

However, one of the points I thought would be important to make here today
is to say, in my view – because now I can say what I want; they can’t sack
me and I am leaving tomorrow anyway – Parliament cannot execute that
mandate because it is underresourced. If we do not allocate more money, we
will not be able to execute our constitutional mandate.

I think this is important. If Trevor Manuel had been here today, I would
have preferred to say this to him myself. However, he is still busy
appearing on TV explaining his Budget, such that he obviously doesn’t have
time to say goodbye to me. The passing of the laws is one component.
Members and portfolio committees need more resources. Unless that is going
to be addressed urgently, we are still going to have the same problem.
[Applause.]

Just as a throwaway proposal, I have this to say: Don’t try and do this
internally. I have been part of some of these processes myself. Try and get
an independent outside party, maybe international people and some experts,
and let them come up with a proposal recommended to Parliament as to how
this should be dealt with, maybe it will be dealt with quickly. I want to
leave that as a proposal.

Another point I want to raise is that I have noticed that we often speak
past one another when we appear in this House. I am talking about political
parties, not necessarily from the ANC’s side or the opposition benches.
People tend to speak past each other, and I don’t understand why people are
doing this.

On a previous occasion, I cited an example of what had happened to me. I
think I would want to mention that example again before I leave this House.
One day when I came home from Parliament, I didn’t have time to go to the
barber and asked my daughter to cut my hair. My wife overheard this and
asked me where I was going to cut my hair. I replied and said I was going
to cut my hair in the bathroom. She then said that I must make sure I
cleaned up and picked up all the hair before I left the bathroom.

I went into the bathroom and took off my shirt and spectacles and put them
on one side, and my daughter cut my hair. Before she left I asked her to
bring me the vacuum cleaner. I was going to make sure that I vacuumed that
place myself, because I know how my wife can go on if I don’t listen to
her. [Laughter.]

I took the vacuum cleaner and cleaned every single corner. I made sure it
was clean. I went around the toilet cistern and cleaned everything. I
looked again to be 100% sure that everything was clean.

So, when my wife heard that the vacuum cleaner was switched off, she came
and popped a head just around the corner of the door and looked at the
floor and said, “I asked you so nicely to clean this place, look at the
mess!” But I had just made 100% sure that the place was clean. I looked
around, the place was clean. I became very cross. I was so cross that I was
going to fight. I put on my shirt and specs and as I was walking out, I
suddenly saw the hair because now I had my specs on. [Laughter.]

Comrades and colleagues, this might sound funny to you. It was like
somebody had smacked me, because I suddenly realised that I had been given
insight into something much bigger than just the dirty floor in front of
me. How often are we convinced that we are right, and we fight about it
because we see it from a particular perspective? The moment you put on the
spectacles of someone else, and you look through their eyes, you see a
completely different picture.

It is not only in politics, it’s in every walk of life. I want to ask that
we reflect on this example, because often when we are so sure that we are
right, but there is a possibility that we might be wrong.

I think we will find many more solutions if we are able to look through the
eyes of other people, especially if we come from different experiences and
different backgrounds.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Manie, you will have another
three minutes at the end.

Mr M S MANIE: Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr P J GOMOMO: Chairperson, hon Members of Parliament, I rise to represent
the ANC in saying farewell to the hon Member of Parliament and Chairperson
of the Portfolio Committee on Labour, Comrade Salie Manie, as he surrenders
the mandate back to his people through this Parliament and his party, the
ANC.

It is rare for the National Assembly to come together during an occasion
like this to say farewell to an ordinary Member of Parliament, at the level
of Comrade Salie. It is uncommon for ordinary Members of Parliament to
provide us with an opportunity to say this when they depart. We therefore
want to say thank you for that, Comrade Salie. Your footprints are clear
for us to follow.

You are departing during the time when this House, in particular, and
Parliament in general, has the responsibility to champion the cause of the
poor as we intensify the struggle against poverty, backwardness, ignorance
and crime, to mention just a few. We recognise your heroic footprints.

You are departing during the time when we have just entered our second
decade of freedom with a clear mandate to address people’s expectations, to
deepen democracy and to accelerate service delivery through active public
participation derived from tolerance for one another. And your unwavering
commitment in this regard is printed boldly on your footprints.

You are leaving Parliament during the time when we are giving more
attention to oversight work with a view to accelerating the implementation
of the policy responses by our ANC-led government, and your vigilance and
determination will guide us like your footprints.

As we say farewell to this hon Member of Parliament, we want to acknowledge
that he is not just an ordinary Member of Parliament and committee
chairperson, but he is a people’s person, a trade unionist, a
revolutionary, a fighter, a leader and, amongst all, a highly organised
person. I worked with Comrade Salie during my days as Cosatu leader and
through activities both in the SA Municipality Workers Union and Cosatu,
and the tripartite alliance.

He would always advise us to remember that the needs and interests of
workers are linked to the needs and the interests of the whole society. And
that any programme to fight for the needs and interests of the workers, is
in fact, a programme to fight for the needs and interest of the society as
a whole. He would always advise us that those who would argue for dichotomy
between the struggle for the rights of the workers and the general
political struggle for liberation should be helped, for he believed that
they were trapped in the confusion of ignorance.

Comrade Salie, you are departing from Parliament during the time when the
alliance has to provide leadership to this Parliament and the government as
terrains of struggle to realise a better life for all the people. Your
vocal submissions are a guide to us as, of course, you are busy walking to
produce more footprints.

It is at a time like this, Comrade Salie, that, as you always provided
leadership, your footprints will guide us not to focus on trifles and
selfish agendas that may only seek to address our temporary and personal
needs at the expense of the goals of our liberation struggle.

In conclusion, as we say farewell to this hon Member of Parliament, we are
confident that, even in a small way, Comrade Salie will not betray the
masses and will always keep contact with the masses of our country. Comrade
Salie, we all love you. We used to call you the “weteman” and the ox that
pulls the wagon when it is in difficult times. Do so, even when you leave
this Parliament. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr T D LEE: Voorsitter, dit is snaaks. Die agb Manie sê hy was baie
lanklaas hier. Ek was net so lanklaas hier voor by die podium.

En nou moet ons vanmiddag totsiens sê aan die agb Salie Manie. Dit is met
gemengde gevoelens dat ons vandag afskeid neem van mnr Salie Manie. In ’n
mate sal die Opposisie ’n sug van verligting slaak, want nou kan ons in
vrede, sonder die bytende tussenwerpsels van die agb Manie debatteer.

Sommer so van tussenwerpsels gepraat, wie van ons wat hier was, sal ooit
die agb Manie se tussenwerpsel aan die destydse Minister van Welsyn en
Bevolkingsontwikkeling, mnr Abe Williams, vergeet toe hy hom gevra het,
“Abe, waar is my pa se pensioen?” [Gelag.]

Terwyl u ’n bydrae tot die ligter oomblikke in hierdie Raad gemaak het, was
ons ook daarvan bewus dat u ’n hardwerkende en toegewyde lid was. En dit is
werklik so; ek kan daarvan getuig, want ek het saam met u in komitees
gedien. Ek is seker dit is as gevolg van hierdie toewyding dat u bevorder
was en destyds voorsitter van die Portefeuljekomitee oor Staatsdiens en
Administrasie geword het.

As Suid-Afrikaners roem ons ons graag op wat ons deur ’n onderhandelde
skikking in ons land bereik het, en dit is reg dat ons ons daarop roem.
Daarom kan u en die arbeidsbeweging – dit het mnr Gomomo ook nou hier
genoem – se bydraes hierin nie geringgeskat word nie. U het ’n groot bydrae
daar gemaak.

U kan met reg sê, agb Manie, “Ek was daar”, want jy was orals. Die  DA  wens
u sterkte toe. “As-salaamu-alai-kum. Fi-amanillah.” [Vrede vir jou.  Ek  los
jou in die sorg van Allah.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, it is funny. The hon Manie said that  he  has  not
been here for some time. I have not been here at the podium  for  some  time
as well.

And now we must say goodbye to the hon Salie Manie  this  afternoon.  It  is
with mixed emotions that we say goodbye to Mr Salie  Manie  today.  To  some
extent the Opposition will give a sigh of relief, because we can now  debate
in peace, without the biting interjections of the hon Manie.

Talking about interjections, whom of us who were here, will ever forget  the
interjection  of  the  hon  Manie  to  the  then  Minister  of  Welfare  and
Population Development, Mr Abe Williams, when he asked him,  “Abe,  waar  is
my pa se pensioen?” [“Abe, where is my father’s pension?”][Laughter.]

Whilst you were contributing to the lighter  moments  in  this  Council,  we
were also aware that you were a diligent and dedicated  member.  And  it  is
indeed so; I can  testify  to  that,  because  I  served  with  you  in  the
committees. I am sure that it is because of this dedication  that  you  were
promoted and  became  chairperson  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Public
Service and Administration at that time.

As South Africans we like to boast about what we  have  achieved  through  a
negotiated settlement in our country, and it is right that we  should  pride
ourselves on that. Hence the  contributions  made  by  you  and  the  labour
movement towards this – and Mr Gomomo  also  mentioned  that  here  today  –
should not be underestimated. You have made a big contribution there.

Hon Manie, you can rightfully say, “I was there”, because you were
everywhere. The DA wishes you all the best. As-salaamu-alai-kum. Fi-
amanillah. [Peace be with you. I leave you in the care of Allah.]]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, in conveying the IFP’s
goodbye to Mr Manie, if you think of it, of more than 45 million citizens
of our country, only 400 are given the privilege to sit and serve in this
important forum of our nation to better the lives of our people. It should
really humble us, and we should thank God and our ancestors for giving us
the opportunity. You are one of those lucky and privileged ones, hon Manie,
to have served at this important level.

I also want to agree with you that it is very important that one should
look at other people from their perspective, because when I arrived at
Parliament in 2000, when I used the spectacles from this side, I only saw a
Manie that always shouted about his father’s pension. [Laughter.] But then,
when I looked and worked with you through the years, I saw that this was a
dedicated patriot who wants the best for our country. I only hope that you
are not leaving Parliament because you’ve got the perception that there are
peanuts around here, therefore there will be monkeys, but that you are
leaving to serve a better place. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Chairperson, hon members, the UDM joins the House in
bidding farewell to the hon Salie Manie. We hope that the future has only
good things in store for you, sir.
After a long period of service in the NA, we salute the hon member for his
contribution. Even though we are from opposing political organisations, and
while we may not have agreed on certain political and ideological matters,
we can still recognise that the hon member was a dedicated democrat and
public representative.

Our common commitment to freedom and democracy calls upon us to acknowledge
his contributions and to feel regret at his departure. We would like to
wish the hon member success in his future endeavours. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, one always has mixed feelings
when speaking on an occasion of a farewell, particularly to a vociferous
man like Mr Manie. It becomes even more complicated when one has to speak
on behalf of 11 other parties.

Mr Manie showed that he is a unionist to the bone. He is hard-pressed to
keep quiet. Notwithstanding his indisposition that came to characterise him
post-2003, he was always vocal on issues he did not agree with.

As chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Labour, there were times when
I thought he mistook that role for that of chairing a labour movement in
the Chamber here.

He is second to none as a heckler in this Chamber. [Laughter.] This he did
consistently when he asked, as my colleagues who spoke before me indicated,
former member Abe Williams when the latter was going to pay his father’s
pension. I hope he did eventually get the pension.

This man, whose otherwise outward and quiet disposition belied the activist
he is, will be remembered for a long time to come in the corridors of this
Parliament. On behalf of the ACDP, the FF Plus, Nadeco, UCDP, PAC, MF, UIF,
Azapo, FD, UPSA and PIM, we wish Mr Manie the best of luck in all his
pursuits in life. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M S MANIE: Chairperson, I am worried about my own pension now because it
is not enough. In fact, on a much more serious note, I want to advise
people to actually go and check how little it is for you to retire on. It
is not enough.

I do not have enough time, but all I want to say to you is that this
Parliament has been far too generous to me. I sincerely appreciate the
opportunity and time that I have had to serve my country and the small
contribution that I have made.
I just want to say two things. Firstly, that I will remain a loyal ANC
member so that nobody has any ideas of who and what I am. [Applause.] I
will die a loyal ANC member, and I hope to serve my community in the same
way and be loyal to all my principles, but I will do it from the outside.

Secondly, I do want to leave a message for all my colleagues on both sides
of the House, and I say to you now as public representatives that the rich
and the people who have access to resources will find a way of getting
their voices heard. Never forget that you are here to represent the voices
of those people who find it difficult to be heard in places like these. The
poor, the sick and the elderly, keep them in mind. [Applause.] I thank you
very much, comrades. Viva ANC, Viva! [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): That concludes the farewell speeches
to Mr Manie. The Presiding Officers and I also wish to take this
opportunity to wish you well, Mr Manie. We will now take Orders two to
seven together. These are the first to the sixth report to the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts. Hon Godi, please come to the podium.

 CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - SA
                    LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION (SALGA)
  CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES (DCS)
  CONSIDERATION OF THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                        MARINE LIVING RESOURCES FUND

  CONSIDERATION OF FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                      THE SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT FACTORY

  CONSIDERATION OF FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                            NATIONAL SKILLS FUND

  CONSIDERATION OF SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
               GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM

Mr N T GODI: Madam Chairperson, comrades and hon members, as indicated, we
are presenting the six reports in front of you for adoption by the House.
It will be noted that these are reports, except the last one, arising out
of the hearings that we have had with these entities.

I would like to start by thanking my colleagues in the committee because of
the amount of hard work that they put into our work despite, of course, the
observation made by Comrade Manie around being underresourced.

The first report is on the SA Local Government Association. As hon members
and comrades would have noted, there is a whole range of issues that we are
not happy about around noncompliance with laws and regulations, as well as
weak internal controls in the appropriateness of accounting transactions,
as well as in human resources.

The recommendations that we have made there are around the need for
building capacity, that is, ensuring their vacancies are filled, ensuring
that they have skilled persons, especially in the finance departments, as
well as ensuring that there are proper systems to manage their affairs.

When one looks at the Department of Correctional Services there would still
be, to a very large extent, similar problems except that when one looks at
internal controls there have been a problem in that department for four
successive years. The same could be said about medical expenditure for four
consecutive years, and I think in our reports we have made recommendations
on what we think needs to be done. Of course, also including the question
of vacancy rates which we know are problematic. In the finance sector it is
34% which has a great bearing on the ability of the department to manage
its finances appropriately.

The third report is on the Marine Living Resources Fund, which is an entity
in the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism – the same problem
around noncompliance with laws and regulations, and the question of skills
and capacity which affects their internal controls. Of course, in this
particular entity there is an added dimension of the need to finalise the
governance arrangements, whether it has to be the trading account of the
department or whether it should be a stand-alone public entity.

Our recommendation is that in view of the failure of the entity to run its
affairs appropriately – for the last three financial years there were no
reports, and even those that we received last year came in very late – we
are of the view that the department should take complete charge of the
entity to ensure that the strategic purpose for which it has been
established can be better fulfilled. As things stand right now, they do not
go accordingly.

The fourth report deals with the Sheltered Employment Factory under the
Department of Labour. The entity also has governance and accountability
problems in terms of the clearly defined framework within which governance
and accountability has to take place. Even the director-general of the
department agreed that the entity is in complete disarray and has been like
that for quite some time on the question of internal control which impacts
negatively on the ability of the entity to run its affairs. We believe that
this needs to be sorted out.

There was a special investigation after the suspension of the manager and
as a committee we feel that Parliament should also actually insist that the
investigation should continue, and the reports thereof should be given to
Parliament and action be taken against those who would have misused public
funds.
The fifth report is also of an entity from the Department of Labour, which
also, just like the Sheltered Employment Factory, has serious governance
issues in terms of accountability arrangements, as well as reporting which
makes it difficult for us to define exactly how the department features in
terms of assisting and monitoring the activities of the entity. We feel
that these do need to be sorted out. There are very serious shortcomings in
terms of internal controls that negatively impact on the ability of the
entity to control its resources.

The last report relates to the Government Communication and Information
Systems. The House will recall, as it is indicated in the preamble of that
report, that we passed a resolution authorising the write-off of an amount
of about R1, 6 million incurred as a result of an unauthorised expenditure
incurred by one, Moses Kotane, who was in charge at that time.

What we overlooked was the fact that, at the time when we passed this
resolution, the interest accrued out of this amount was actually bigger
than the original amount. The interest stood at about R1,8 million. So, the
GCIS came back to us to request that Parliament should allow them to waive
this interest because if they were to pay this interest, which is more than
the principal debt, it would certainly not make sense.

They have discussed with National Treasury, and we have also checked with
it, and we are in agreement with National Treasury that this can be done on
condition that, firstly, the High Court judgment against Mr Kotane should
stay until the 30-year period lapses. This means that if he were to win the
Lotto before these 30 years, the state should be able to recoup the money
that it has lost through his reckless action.

We want to commend these reports to the House and request it to adopt them.
I have been very generic in my input, but I think that my comrades and
other hon members are going to go more into details in terms of each of the
reports that we present before you. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P A GERBER: Madam Chairperson, colleagues, comrades and friends, I would
like to quote two paragraphs from the 8 January Statement of the President
of the ANC, President Thabo Mbeki, and I quote:

  We must vigorously counter all corrupt practices, not merely through
  effective rules and regulations, and scrupulous monitoring, detection
  and, where appropriate, prosecution, but also through the strengthening
  of political consciousness and the values associated with ubuntu.

  Similarly, these values must infuse the work of all those who provide a
  public service. Amongst other things, ubuntu should give content to the
  Batho Pele campaign ensuring that, at all times and all instances, the
  interests of the people are prioritised, and that any impediments to
  optimal public service are identified and removed.

These are our marching orders. With that in mind, I would like to highlight
one of these resolutions, namely the one on the Marine Living Resources
Fund. This seasick entity has been in a terrible financial state for quite
a few years, receiving disclaimers for four years in a row from the Auditor-
General. We hope that this resolution will assist to cure this financial
seasickness.

There have been numerous problems with this entity, and I would just like
to highlight and read the headings. There has been noncompliance with the
Public Finance Management Act; problems with harbour fees; problems with
levies on fish and sea products; problems with application fees for
fishing; problems with value-added tax; problems with debtors’ management;
problems with opening balances; problems with skills and capacities;
problems with accounting systems, performance management and reporting; and
also problems in the abalone industry.
I would like to highlight a few of these issues, if I may. Regarding clause
2.2 that deals with the levy on fish and sea products, I would like to say
that the average price, in Hong Kong, of South African abalone is 342 to
855 US Dollars per kilo. In other words, it is between R2 394 to R5 985 per
kilo; in other words, it is R2,2 million to R5,9 million for a ton. The
average canned price of abalone, which is this size, is about R180 plus.
These are the figures for 2006. This industry is worth about R2,5 billion
just with the figures from Hong Kong. The levy that we as government charge
to the factories and the people harvesting the abalone is R25 a kilo for
abalone.

So, it is nothing else but criminal to give an asset away for R25 a kilo
where it’s actually trading in the international market for more than R2
000 a kilo. The poor diver who gets paid anything from R180 to R220 a kilo
for the perlemoen, that he delivers to the factory suffers. If I were a
diver, I would also sell my abalone to anyone who was prepared to pay more
than that. Therefore, as long as we have abnormal profits in an industry,
we’ll have smuggling and poaching.

According to the traffic bulletin of 2002, Hong Kong trade statistics show
that, apart from South Africa, abalone is also imported from other African
countries, such as Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe. These countries are
landlocked and don’t have a coastline. So, the abalone was probably
smuggled from South Africa. Swaziland alone supplies 4% of the imported
abalone to Hong Kong, and it does not even have a sea! So, colleagues know
that we are allowing illegal asset stripping in this country in terms of
abalone. Therefore, we need to recommend that a new and market value-
related levy structure be determined and implemented as soon as possible so
that we can get better monetary value for the taxpayer.

Regarding the abalone industry, we are also asking in this resolution that
the Auditor-General do a cost-benefit audit regarding the tonnage that is
harvested; tonnage that is locally sold; the value of the exports; the
amount of money that is being returned to South Africa; the amount of tax
that the SA Revenue Service is receiving; the amount of money that the SA
Police Service is spending on policing the industry, Environmental Affairs
on managing the industry, Justice on enforcing the law and Defence on
protecting the industry; and any other information that is relevant to this
issue.

We ask for this so that there can be an informed decision on whether we
should have an abalone industry, whether we should ban abalone harvesting,
or whether we should have an aquaculture abalone industry. At the moment,
it appears as if we act in a haphazard way when it comes to monitoring,
managing and policing of the industry.

In 2.3 of the resolution, we note the complicated structure of application
fees for fish and sea products, which complexity might deter potential
applicants and affect potential revenue. For example, the application fee
to collect seaweed is R1 900, but the fee for crayfish is only R300. These
amounts are just to get the physical application forms. To get an
application form for a mineral mining permit from the Department of Mineral
and Energy Affairs costs you nothing. In fact, you can draw it from the
website. Whether you want to mine gravel or gold, it costs you nothing.

If you look at some of the companies, for instance, and close corporations,
they have been awarded fishing permits and quotas. Many of them have
African names, and I don’t want to name any of them, but if you look at the
Companies and Intellectual Property Registration Office report of the names
of the directors and the members, the only thing that is black there is
probably the ink on the permits. So, we need to look at this. For example,
you have a fishing company with a postal address in Mossel Bay, but with a
physical address in Paarden Island, or you have a fishing company with a
postal address in Mavuso location in Alice, but the physical address is in
Bloubergstrand.

The fish product quotas are all determined by kilo or per tonnage, yet the
whole seaweed industry is regulated by allocated geographical areas. For
instance, nearly the whole Eastern Cape coast is allocated to one company
with the postal address in Ganubi, but with a physical address in Sandton.
Three very high potential areas are also allocated to one company in
Rivonia. If seaweed were also regulated in terms of mass or volume, our
beaches would not have been littered with high-potential washed-ashore
kelp.

With these matters as background, the committee recommends that the
application system, including fees and structure, should be simplified so
as to allow as many applicants as possible, ensuring more value for money
to the taxpayer.

Regarding the future of the Marine Living Resources Fund ...
[Interjections.] ... we noted that the fund is being administered by
dedicated employees of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
on a seconded basis. Also, the fund cannot operate on its own financially
without an annual government grant. It does not have a board that exercises
oversight. The director-general was of the opinion that the fund, as a
public entity, as opposed to a trading account, should be looked at and
reviewed.

This comment on whether the Marine Living Resources Fund can do so as a
directorate of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism was
quite significant. It will serve the country much better if it reverted
back to the department. There will be better control, rules, regulations
and financial discipline.

For example, the Department of Minerals and Energy does not have a separate
entity to administer mining rights and fees. Thank God for that, otherwise
we would have had similar problems.

It is in this light that the committee recommends that the Marine Living
Resources Fund be reincorporated into the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism so as to have a proper accounting authority in
promoting proper management of this important industry.

I believe that the entity is going to workshop this specific
recommendation. I don’t think that they should do this as they have too
many vested interests in that. We don’t need workshops or talkshops; we
need action on this problem.

Chairperson, I would like to end by saying that we really need to make this
industry seaworthy again. Too many of the poorest of the poor – the people
that Salie Manie has referred to – are dependent on the sea and its
harvest, and we can’t fail these people. We trust that this entity will get
rid of the seasick attitude and pull itself together, as we owe it to the
generations to come. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr E W TRENT: Chairperson, I would like to focus my contribution this
afternoon on a few broader issues rather than on the reports. The reports
are all printed in the ATC for everybody to read, and I hope that those who
are interested will do so.
I will also include in my speech a few ``Tips for Trevor’’ with respect to
the effective, efficient, economical and also honest expenditure of
taxpayers’ money. The hon Minister – I see he is gone now – earlier on made
the speech specifically for himself. Maybe somebody will give him a copy.

The first issue that I want to deal with is performance measurement and
reporting. The Auditor-General reports the following shortcomings on
performance reporting: Firstly, that Salga did not ensure that its business
plans had measurable objectives with proper monitoring and evaluation of
identical key actions; and secondly, that the committee noted with concern
that the Marine Living Resources Fund has not disclosed or reported on the
achievements of the objectives it has set.

The question is very simple: How can Parliament rely on the accuracy of the
performance information presented in the annual report if the AG is, for
whatever reason, unable to order that information? And that is a quick tip
to those in the standing committees. How can you rely on that information
if it has not been audited? How can we trust the statistics on, for
example, crime and a number of houses built if they cannot be audited?

In the open market, no wise shareholder would invest in companies if their
results were not audited. Why should it be different in government?
My first tip for Trevor is: Use the considerable leverage and the many
tools that you have at your disposal as Minister of Finance to ensure that
institutions of government provide auditors with performance information in
a format that can be audited in terms of the PFMA.

Noncompliance with laws and regulations and poor internal control is the
second threat that weaves its way through the fabric of each of these
institutions and the overwhelming majority of the 280 others that come
before SCOPA each year.

I just want to give you some examples. Of the 12 issues on procurement and
tendering of all provinces that were raised by the Auditor-General in the
provinces, 10 of them were issues of noncompliance which could relate to
corruption or lead to corruption. Nineteen of the 26 issues raised in
hospital administration were issues that could lead to corruption. In order
to prevent a heart attack, your doctor will make sure that your blood
pressure and cholesterol are within certain parameters. Likewise,
corruption and theft also have indicators that can be monitored in a
similar fashion. One of these indicators is the existence of opportunities
for corruption to take place, and the other is the issue of ethical
standards, that is, what is deemed acceptable or not in the management of
government finances.

Let me deal with opportunity first. The PFMA requires managers to put in
place systems designed to minimise risks and therefore to minimise the
opportunity for corruption, and then to manage those systems. It makes no
sense to put in place systems and then overlook noncompliance.

My next tip to Trevor is: In the interest of clean honest administration,
implement a policy of zero tolerance against those who fail to comply with
the laws and regulations administered by National Treasury. If compliance
is too onerous or beyond the capability or capacity of government
departments and entities, then amend the laws and regulations without
compromising standards. It serves no purpose to set people up for failure.
In this respect, it is instructive to note that the PFMA has not been
amended in the six or seven years that it has been in existence.

In terms of the question of ethics, I would like to mention at the outset
that the sense of entitlement in the echelons of the ruling party is not
constructive at all.

Then, there is also the flagrant abuse of space in our legal framework by
the governing party to use its influence and its resources of state to
facilitate and sell access to Cabinet Ministers and senior civil servants
in order to raise funds.

As put by Professor George Devenish, this scheme is politically unethical
and is clearly in conflict with the ethos of the Constitution, even if, in
a very narrow sense, it is not illegal.

I have read many press comments on this latest fundraising scheme of the
ANC. The one issue that I have not seen raised is the very issue that I am
talking about. Yes, it may be debatable whether it’s legal or not, but what
it does do is that it opens the doors of opportunity for corruption to take
place.

I would like to use an analogy. I can remember in the years of the former
regime, in my city, Port Elizabeth, it was rather strange that somehow a
certain individual always happened to have the premises that were required
for a government department tailor made. Wherever there was a tender put
out, one or two individuals always just had the right building, at the
right place, at the right time. What was not strange about this was that
those business people, who were repeatedly awarded tenders, were all major
donors of the former government.

If we continue with this scheme we are going to open the doors of
temptation and corruption. Of course, it stands the governing party free
not to heed our wisdom in the fight against corruption. But lest they
forget, if the impression is created, as it currently is, that it is fine
to be corrupt, then the example set by Cabinet and senior civil servants
will be followed with impunity by others. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, SCOPA’s reports on the SA Local Government
Association, the Department of Correctional Services, the Marine Living
Resources Fund, the Sheltered Employment Factory, the National Skills Fund
and GCIS yet again bring into sharp focus the inability of many state
institutions to comply fully with the public finance laws and regulations.

The Public Finance Management Act was created specifically to improve state
financial administration, but now some nine years after its creation the
law is still not being properly implemented and is perhaps not taken
seriously enough by accounting officers. By way of example, Scopa’s reports
also highlight a lack of proper internal controls, inappropriate accounting
transactions, lack of performance audits and weaknesses in financial
administrations at these six institutions.

Some of the more glaring weaknesses identified by the Auditor-General
include the following: Firstly, Salga purchased a building without
obtaining approval from the executive, resulting in an amount of R3,2
million paid in commission that still has to be recovered; secondly, Salga
opened and used bank accounts without having obtained approval from
National Treasury; and thirdly, at 30 June 2005, Salga was still owed R136
million in outstanding membership fees. Those are from the municipalities
which are supposed to pay that.

Fourthly, the same weaknesses and problems at the Department of
Correctional Services have been identified for four years in a row. This
included the inability of the Auditor-General to verify the validity,
accuracy and completeness of medical expenditure – and in this case I am
not even talking about Schabir Shaik’s medical history in Correctional
Services; that’s another aspect.

Fifthly, the department had a vacancy rate of 34% in financial management,
which at least partly explains why it was unable to spend an amount of R150
million. Sixthly, the Marine Living Resources Fund bought an accounting
system for R3 million; then discovered it was not functioning properly and
bought yet another system at a cost of R5 million.

Finally, the Department of Labour has still not made any progress on the
appropriate governance and accountability arrangement and reporting
procedures for the National Skills Fund.

Mr Chairperson, the IFP wholeheartedly supports the various recommendations
of the committee. We hope that vigorous implementation of the
recommendations will improve the state of affairs at these institutions,
and we assure them of our support, but also our vigilance in monitoring
their future performance. We are concerned about the lack of competence and
the question arises whether some entities should indeed be further
supported.

We would also like to express our appreciation to the chairperson of the
committee, the hon Themba Godi and our colleagues from all the parties for
their hard work and dedication to clean, accurate and proper financial
management. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon members, the failure by certain
departments and institutions to adhere to the Public Finance Management Act
and the National Treasury regulations is cause for concern. The
transgression of these auditing standards is often the first sign that poor
service delivery, mismanagement and even corruption is afoot.

When it comes to the Auditor-General’s report on Salga, we are doubly
concerned because it highlights weaknesses that have bedevilled many local
governments themselves. The inability to account for vast sums of money,
failure to collect its dues, inadequate administrative and management
systems and too many staff vacancies are indicative of an institution in
serious disarray.

How can we expect local governments to adhere to these most basic of
management and accounting standards if Salga does not? The UDM fully
endorses the recommendations in the report, specifically that a progress
report be submitted by Salga within 60 days of the adoption of this report.

If Salga’s affairs are cause for concern, then the Auditor-General’s report
on the Department of Correctional Services makes for dismal reading. The
same serious lack of internal controls has now been highlighted in four
consecutive years. We support the report. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr T J BONHOMME: Mr Chairman, I would like to refer to the Budget Speech of
21 February 2007, by our most esteemed Minister of Finance, hon Mr Trevor
Manuel, which I believe was the most outstanding speech this country has
ever heard, a speech that was full of wisdom and hope, and guarantees a
better life for all, especially for the underprivileged, lower-income group
and the homeless.

One line in this speech will stay with me forever, when Minister Manuel
stated that, and I quote: “Human life has equal worth.” A human being is a
human being; there is no lesser human being.

That phrase drove home every reason we are in Parliament, why we have
sacrificed ourselves in the struggle for our liberation and for the
liberation of all the people of South Africa.

It drove home the reason I am placed in the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts, Scopa. It told me that the taxpayers’ money must be protected. At
Scopa we are the watchdogs of public finances. The public’s money must not
be wasted, but be protected. We must guard against fraud, corruption, and
abuse of people’s money, and remedial action must be taken where there are
discrepancies.

Hon members, we have been doing just that. We find, on examining our
Auditor-General’s report, that some departments’ performance was shocking.
They have no respect for the controls that have been put in place to
protect the public’s money.

We have very serious concerns, as stated in our resolutions, with
deviations from the Public Finance Management Act, mismanagement and lack
of discipline in respect of adhering to proper policies and procedures.

There is a major problem of the poaching of staff. Senior staff members,
for example, directors-general and chief finance officers mess up their
departments and resign. They move to other departments and leave their
previous departments in shambles.

When we call specific departments before the committee to account, they
cannot account because chief financial officers often have taken up the
position only recently. So they are off the hook, because we always get
audit reports a year later.
Serious weaknesses have been exposed at Salga and Correctional Services. At
Salga, through noncompliance with the Public Finance Management Act and
Treasury regulations, an amount of R3,2 million was paid out on commissions
in 2004-05 for the purpose of the purchase of a building. The transaction
was subsequently cancelled and the monies were recovered.

Three bank accounts, with a total of R15,8 million, were not accounted for.
No approval from National Treasury could be submitted for the opening of
the bank accounts. There were no risk management procedures in place.

Remedial measures were recommended to Salga, with properly formulated
policies and proper systems in place to monitor finance-related matters and
to comply with its own internal control policies, as well as with the
requirements of National Treasury on delegation of authority. They have to
report back to Parliament within 60 days of the report being adopted by
Parliament.

Salga must also comply with section 51(a) of the Public Finance Management
Act, which clearly states that a public entity must have effective and
efficient transparent systems, with risk management procedures.

Regarding the Department of Correctional Services, serious inefficiencies
with internal controls have been reported in the past four years.

These include insufficient data capturing and monitoring of assets,
insufficient verification, and no files were found of newly appointed
staff. The department had the highest qualified staff in 2005-06 compared
to any other department.

Regarding surplus funds for the year 2004-05, the department did not spend
R155, 9 million. The excuse was a late changeover to the BAS system.

The committee found it unacceptable that the department was unable to solve
these problems. Therefore remedial action was taken by the committee and
the department to ensure: one, that all assets are barcoded and managed
properly; two, completeness of files of newly appointed staff; three, that
management reviews take place; four, that a compliance improvement plan is
embarked upon; and five, that the weaknesses highlighted by the Auditor-
General are addressed as a matter of urgency.

It was also pointed out by the Auditor-General that the financial
management process also points to poor performance and poor information
processes in the Department of Correctional Services, and that the
department also lacked a process for management of its financial
information.

We have now put remedial measures in place, with recommendations. Our task
is to find the defects and weaknesses and to apply remedial action to
ensure that public money is protected and utilised for the purpose for
which it was allocated.

In closing, I want to thank members of Scopa, who work so hard with courage
and conviction, and they do their work gallantly, with a passion. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, with regard to the first report, the MF agrees
with the recommendations made by the committee regarding noncompliance with
laws and regulations. We further feel that Salga needs to take these
recommendations seriously and implement them to ensure effective and
efficient management in this regard.

As for report two, the MF values the committee’s contribution. And with
regard to report three, we gladly welcome the levy on the fish and sea
products, which is crucial to the Marine Living Resource Fund.

We look forward to the shelter and employment factory at Parliament, as
indicated in report four.

Regarding report five, we agree that if we were to expect results, the
steering committee will have to function more effectively and that the use
of funds for training will have to be highlighted for improvement.

As for report six, we support the waiving of the interests accrued, and the
writing off of the debt owed by Mr Kotane, as long as this does not violate
National Treasury regulations. The MF supports the public accounts. Thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr V G SMITH: Chairperson, hon members and comrades, it is inevitable that
in conditions of abject poverty and where basic financial management
systems are weak or nonexistent that corruption and maladministration would
thrive.

In his Budget Speech last week, the Minister of Finance again made it clear
that bad management of resources that are meant to eradicate poverty have
no place in our society. The costs and consequences of maladministration
and corruption are that resources, that otherwise could have been directed
towards the production of goods and services, are deviated by individuals
who are bent on plundering the life savings of ordinary South Africans who
are poor and desperately in need to improve their material conditions.

The ANC’s Statement of 8 January 2007 has declared 2007 as, “the year to
intensify the struggle against poverty as we advance in unity towards
2012.” It is with this in mind that the Statement of 8 January calls on all
of us to vigorously counter all corrupt practices through effective rules
and regulations, greater monitoring, greater detection and, where
appropriate, through the prosecution of those that are found guilty.

As millions of South Africans seek to escape the cycle of poverty by
improving the quality of their lives, 13 years after liberation, there are
some within the public sector administration who continue to retard the
struggle through poor provision of services to our people. Parliament has,
by the authority of the Constitution, a very crucial role to play in terms
of oversight over the executive and the administration.

When analysing the Auditor-General’s report on government departments’
finances, we must ask the question: What are the root causes of
maladministration and what can be done to remedy the situation? In our
humble view, the root causes include the following: the inability of
departments to implement the requirements of financial management
legislation such as the Public Finance Management Act and the Municipal
Finance Management Act; the incapacity of government departments to spend
the budget wisely with maximum value for money impact; the lack of
appropriate financial management skills and the continued high vacancy
rates in senior management, as alluded to by my colleagues; the absence of
internal control systems; poor filing or archiving systems of support
documents required for audit purposes; and the inadequate management of
fixed assets.

In answering the second part of the question about what needs to be done,
we suggest the following: Firstly, the disciplinary procedures in relation
to misconduct must be refined with the aim of ensuring that there are no
instances of officials being suspended for unacceptably long periods with
pay before the matter is concluded.

Secondly, performance-linked remuneration must become the order of the day
within the public sector as soon as possible.

Thirdly, that the public must be empowered and encouraged to maximise
legislation that is meant to hold officials accountable.

Fourthly, an environment conducive to whistle-blowing and the utilisation
of corruption hotlines must be created.

Fifthly, Parliament must develop an effective system to follow up on the
executive on resolutions that have been adopted by this House – like this
resolution that we going to adopt today.

Sixthly, the Chapter 9 institutions established to entrench democracy and
good governance must be more accessible to all citizens of our country; and
very important in our view, all portfolio and standing committees of
Parliament must consciously and regularly interrogate the information
related to strategic plans, budget and actual expenditure, and demand
explanations from the department throughout the year and not only when the
Auditor-General’s report has been tabled 18 months after the effect.

The purpose and the intention of the budget allocations last week meant
that the child born and brought up in Soweto must have just as much of a
chance of passing Grade 12 as a child that was born and brought up in
Sandton. [Applause.]

The end results of resources awarded must ensure that my mother living in
Alexandra will receive the same medical services as my mother living in
Houghton. The social grant earmarked for the elderly and the disabled must
not find its way into the bank accounts of ghost beneficiaries. The quality
and the quantity of houses built must be the best value that money can buy.
Procurement procedures and tender adjudication policies must be such that
there is no room for any corruption or abuse of power or position.

Our promise to South Africans to create a better life for all can only be
realised when the executive implements policy as effectively and
efficiently as possible. A better life for all will only be realised when
Parliament exercises its mandate of oversight effectively. When the
judiciary enforces the provisions of the Constitution and when civil
society demands the best possible provisions of service from government
departments, only then can South Africans be assured of a better tomorrow.

For the sake of our children and in honour of those who lost their lives in
the struggle for a democratic, nonracial, nonsexist, united and prosperous
country, we must fight for better management of our resources.

Koos, ek hoop ek was nie te lank nie, en u kan nou huis toe gaan. [Koos, I
hope I didn’t take too long, and you can go home now.]

Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
report be adopted.

Agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:01
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                          FRIDAY, 23 FEBRUARY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
         (a)     South African Judicial Education Institute Bill [B 4 –
              2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 29625 of 9 February 2007.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     a) Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of misconduct
        regarding Mr K Suliman from Durban, in terms of section 13(3)(f) of
        the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


     b) Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of misconduct
        regarding Mr M K Chauke from Pretoria, in terms of section 13(3)(f)
        of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


     c) Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of misconduct
        regarding Mr M S Makamu from Benoni, in terms of section 13(3)(f)
        of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


     d) Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of misconduct
        regarding Mr M F Mathe from Johannesburg, in terms of section
        13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).
2. The Minister of Education


     a) Medium Term Strategic Plan for 2006-2010 and the Revised
        Operational Plan of the Department of Education for 2006-2007.


3. The Minister of Home Affairs


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


National Assembly


1.    The Speaker


   (a)     Reply from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development to recommendations in the Eighty-Third Report of the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Legal Aid Board), as adopted
        by the House on 7 November 2006.


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.


   (b)     Letter from the Minister of Home Affairs dated 7 February 2007
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
        65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
        the Film and Publication Board for 2005-2006:


         ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FILM AND PUBLICATION BOARD FOR THE YEAR
         2005/2006


         The above matter has reference.


         In terms of section 14 of the Films and Publications Act, 1996 as
         amended, as the Minister of Home Affairs I am required to table a
         report on the activities of the Film and Publication Board and the
         Review Board, as well as an audited balance sheet and accounts
         within fourteen days of receipt thereof.


         The Annual Report for 2005/2006 has been delayed due to the Office
         of the Auditor-General. The reasons for the delay are as results of
         internal quality controls issues between the Office of the Auditor-
         General and their service provider. Office of the Auditor-General
         subsequently appointed another service provider to re-perform an
         audit for Film and Publication Board 2005/2006. (Attached are the
         correspondence letters from the Office of the Auditor-General).


         I’m now in a position to table the report together with the audited
         financial report. I wish to apologise for the late tabling of this
         report.


         Kind regards,


         signed


         MS N N MAPISA-NQAKULA, MP
         MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1. Report of the Mediation Committee on Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and
  Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B35B and B35D – 2005] (National Assembly –
  sec 76), dated 21 February 2007:

    The Mediation Committee, having considered the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics
    and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B35B and B35D – 2005] (National
    Assembly – sec 76), as well as papers referred to it, reports that it
    has agreed to a new version of the Bill [B35F – 2005].


2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on a  Study  Tour
  to the Peoples Republic of China, 02-10 September 2006:

   1. TERMS OF REFERENCE


   The Committee had agreed  to  undertake  a  study  tour  of  the  Peoples
   Republic of China pursuant to an invitation from the  Ambassador  of  the
   Chinese Embassy on behalf of the Ministry  of  Commerce  of  the  Peoples
   Republic.

   2. LOGISTICAL ARRANGEMENTS

   A delegation from the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry undertook
   a study tour of the Peoples Republic of China, from  02  –  10  September
   2006. The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee, Mr B  D  Martins  (ANC)
   accompanied by Mr S Maja (ANC), Mrs D Ramodibe (ANC),  Mr  L  Labuschagne
   (DA), Mrs E Chang (IFP) and Ms M Williams (Committee Secretary), led  the
   multi-party delegation.


   3. BACKGROUND
   As a developing country, China with an economy driven by a strong  export
   performance and public investment, shares similar  positions  with  South
   Africa with regard to the reform and governance of  the  global  economic
   system.  Reform of the economic system is a key element in South Africa’s
   multilateral agenda and China has the potential to be an  effective  ally
   in this regard.  The growth of China and its  manufacturing  prowess  has
   had  a  significant  impact  on  global  trade,  and   it   offers   vast
   opportunities and potential to absorb a higher proportion of  value-added
   exports.  In light of  the  commonalities  that  emerge  from  comparable
   levels  of  industrial  development  and  economic  growth,  China  holds
   significant and unique opportunities for South Africa’s  own  development
   more specifically  in  the  areas  of  investments;  joint  ventures  and
   technology  transfer,  as  well  as  the  regeneration  of  the   African
   Continent, in which China has  shown  great  interest.  The  China-Africa
   Forum on the renewal of Africa and co-operation in the globalising  world
   enhanced  the  strategic  understanding  between   the   two   countries,
   particularly within NEPAD and in the SADC region.


   Conversely, the rise in Chinese imports  particularly  in  the  clothing,
   textile and footwear sector has impacted immensely on the  South  African
   economy and subsequently prompted the Committee to embark on this visit.


   4. OBJECTIVES


   The objectives of the visit to China were informed  by  a  need  to  find
   answers to the following questions or challenges:


         • What government support programmes are currently offered to  the
           Chinese industry, from an industry, perspective,?
         • What are  the  key  drivers  for  the  success  of  the  Chinese
           manufacturing sector?
         • How the proposed SACU – China Free Trade Agreement  can  deliver
           mutually beneficial benefits in the light of the  challenges  in
           the clothing and textile sector?
         • Also, the need to devise urgent concrete bilateral solutions  to
           the challenges facing the South African  clothing,  textile  and
           footwear sector and beneficiation  of  South  African  companies
           more specifically in the  area  of  raw  materials;  mining  and
           extraction segments.


   5. FINDINGS

   The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry  delegation  met  with  the
   official from the South African Mission in Beijing, Mr Liks  Ramushu,  on
   Sunday 03 September along with Mr  Chai  Zhijing  from  the  Ministry  of
   Commerce of the Peoples Republic of China.


   Presenter: Mr Zhao Xin Xin, Deputy Director
   Beijing Development Area (BDA), Beijing


   The presentation was preceded by a showing of a DVD footage  relating  to
   the Beijing Technological  Development  Area.  Major  Companies  such  as
   Nokia, Panasonic  and  Sony  occupy  offices  here.  A  second  phase  of
   development is planned especially for the Beijing Olympics.


   Mr Xin Xin informed the meeting that the Beijing development  area/  zone
   (BDA) was an area of approximately 40 square meters. 15 square meters was
   comprised of 2000 companies. Two development areas were  currently  under
   construction. The BDA was approved in 1994 by the Government of China and
   by 2020 it will have developed into a newly developed city. By June 2006,
   1986 companies had been registered with the BDA of which 400 were foreign
   companies and 1400 domestic. This amounted to an  investment  of  US$13.6
   billion in terms of foreign investment  and  US$11.5billion  as  domestic
   investment, US$4billion was reinvested back into  the  development  zone.
   Resident foreign investors are the  United  States  and  Europe  but  the
   Chinese  would  like  Africa  to  invest  as  well.  The  BDA  houses  80
   international companies of which 53 are from the top 500 companies in the
   world. The top three comprises the electronic, automotive and biochemical
   trades.


   The Chinese government  departments  in  co-operation  with  the  Beijing
   Municipality established offices at  these  development  zones  to  offer
   hands-on support in areas of administration. Registration of companies is
   done at the government offices located in  the  zone,  which  assists  in
   processing of applications. The Beijing office  will  use  the  BDA’s  to
   enhance the investment relationship with South Africa in terms  of  trade
   and co-operation.


   Municipalities are set up within the zones so that companies do not  have
   to travel outside  the  zones  for  registrations.  Hands-on  support  is
   available therefore location is important in setting up a  BDA.  Customs,
   taxation and quarantine offices are  all  available  on  site  at  branch
   offices.   Approximately   150   applications   are   processed   yearly.
   Applications take between 1 week to 1 month.


   When BDA’s were set up, the people factor had to be considered. Those who
   previously owned the land were compensated by means  of  monetary  value,
   employment and setting up new communities. This is a contributing  factor
   to the cost of a BDA being so high.


   China is participating in a worldwide competition to  attract  industries
   to its BDA’s.  The state  determines  preferential  policies  and  active
   marketing strategies are investigated currently. However many  cities  in
   China are using China’s features of good service and supportive BDA’s  as
   a marketing tool.


   In terms of women being empowered, there  is  no  discrimination  at  the
   BDA’s. Women prefer the fields of human resources; marketing and sales. A
   women’s rights protection agency is based at the  BDA  and  thus  far  no
   complaints have been received. Females steer away from construction sites
   because the buildings are high rises, it is  hot,  dangerous  and  labour
   intensive, however some manage.


   The BDA’s  assist  in  solving  the  unemployment  issue  in  Beijing  as
   approximately 39 000 workers  are  employed  and  intensive  training  is
   undertaken yearly of approximately 3 700 workers.  A  training  fund  has
   been established by the government for this purpose. Disabled persons are
   catered for in suitable work positions in factories. From  this  briefing
   it was clear that China and South Africa are both  developing  countries,
   however China has a higher level of development than South Africa.  South
   Africa can definitely learn lessons in best practice  and  implementation
   from it’s Chinese counterpart.


   Presenter:  Mr  Guangsheng  Shi,  Chairperson:  Economic  and   Financial
   Committee, National Peoples Congress, Beijing


   Mr Shi welcomed the  visit  by  the  delegation  in  light  of  the  good
   relations held with former President  Mr  Nelson  Mandela  and  President
   Thabo Mbeki He further  added  that  inter-Parliamentary  exchanges  were
   welcomed and should be a regular activity. Mr Shi  informed  the  meeting
   that China came from a history of Feudalism and Imperialism which brought
   along with it oppression. China had thus been left to improve  the  lives
   of its people as well as the economy. This is  the  common  objective  of
   both governments, the betterment of the lives of the nation, Mr Shi said.
    He went further to say that both governments had  done  a  good  job  in
   building up their countries.  The  Chinese  were  appreciative  of  South
   Africa’s support and assistance to China’s accession to the  World  Trade
   Organisation, especially in terms of the Doha Round of negotiations which
   is important for all developing countries. Subsidies and domestic support
   were still high from the US and  Europe,  he  indicated.  This,  he  said
   affected China tremendously especially as agriculture was a  lifeline  of
   the economy and China had a population of 1.3 billion people.  China  and
   South Africa serve as a role model to other developing nations  in  their
   development and roles of leadership, he remarked.


   Mr Shi pointed out that conflict of interest  arises  when  nations  have
   similar industries and  economic  needs,  and  for  this  reason,  it  is
   important to keep the lines of communication open. A case  in  point,  he
   said, was the Clothing and Textile industry.  It  served  livelihood  for
   both nations, and thus a  solution  should  be  found.  Political  issues
   should not impact on trade issues, he argued.


   The National Peoples Congress is the highest authority of power in China,
   which constitutes a single congress. Delegates are  elected  and  rotated
   every five years.  175  comprise  standing  committee  members  and  they
   commence a plenary  every  two  months.  The  National  Peoples  Congress
   considers nationwide legislation and endorses national leaders.


   Mr Shi continued by explaining that during his career, he  had  witnessed
   the development of China’s textile industry. This process came  about  in
   the 1970s due to the poverty experienced by the Chinese;  the  livelihood
   of many Chinese people was challenged. For this particular reason, labour
   intensive interests were mobilised. The  textile  industry  started  with
   spinning and yarning, at this  point  there  was  no  export  market  for
   textiles  due  to  the  underdevelopment  of  technology  in  so  far  as
   delivering an unfinished product was concerned. Fifteen years later China
   started  experimenting  with  clothing  manufacturing.  The   focus   was
   targeting the lower end market for export, because at this  time  Chinese
   clothing were not available in upmarket stores in the US and Europe, also
   the spinning was done with home based machines. At this point the Chinese
   government decided to intervene and assist. After a period of  10  years,
   the industry moved to making suites instead of  single  processing.  Thus
   the success of the Chinese industry  happened  over  a  period  of  three
   decades, from the development to importing raw materials, processing  and
   then supplying. The process of developing raw materials has also moved to
   where 80% of the raw materials are supplied by the domestic market.  This
   enabled the entry of high end and middle range products into the  various
   markets.


   Mr Shi added that with the experience that  China  had  been  through  it
   would be able to assist and encourage South  Africa  to  manufacture  and
   process raw materials, and future co-operation instead of competition was
   envisaged. South Africa has land masses available  and  these  should  be
   explored. In terms of  Intellectual  Property,  China  is  very  vigilant
   regarding issues relating  to  it  and  legislation  around  intellectual
   property is scrutinised carefully. China has made great strides in  terms
   of  realizing  that  Intellectual  Property  and  economic   growth   and
   development go together. From this briefing the  delegation  learnt  that
   the Chinese textile industry  is  not  an  overnight  success  story.  It
   progressed over a period of approximately 30 years to develop and  become
   market related for exports.


   Presenter: Mr Yao Weigun, Director:  Shanghai  World  Trade  Organization
   Consultation Centre, Shanghai
   Mr Weigun informed the delegation  that  the  Shanghai  WTO  Consultation
   Centre was the largest service centre of  its  kind  in  the  world.  The
   centre was founded  prior  to  China’s  accession  to  the  WTO.  It  was
   established as a nongovernmental organisation  for  WTO  affairs  by  the
   Shanghai Municipal Peoples Government. The main function being to provide
   governments, enterprises and public with law and  policy  consulting  and
   information as well as WTO-related training services. It also updates WTO
   members  on  the  creation  and  enforcement   of   trade-related   laws,
   regulations and policies in both Shanghai and China as a whole.


   A board of trustees administers the centre. It is  a  non  profit  public
   service organisation  and  mainly  financed  by  the  Shanghai  Municipal
   Peoples government, however it  is  allowed  to  receive  donations  from
   international, domestic enterprises and institutions.


   Presenter: Mr Zhou Yupeng, Vice Mayor: Shanghai’s Municipality,
   Shanghai


   The Vice Mayor hosted a banquet for the Committee and  a  short  exchange
   was held. Mr Yupeng was happy to  host  the  delegation  for  that  short
   period an added that economic exchanges should be pursued  between  South
   Africa and China.


   Presenter: Mr  Liu  Xiaodong,  Deputy  General  Manager:  Shanghai  Stock
   Exchange, Shanghai


   Mr Xiaodong informed the delegation  that  the  Shanghai  Stock  Exchange
   enjoyed a strong relationship with the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. China
   has experienced rapid economic growth over  the  last  few  years,  10.2%
   growth in the GDP in 2005, especially in  Shanghai.  Two  thirds  of  the
   shares on the Shanghai Stock Exchange are owned  by  the  government  but
   this will in fact change. Air Asia as well as Air China are  both  listed
   on the market. The technology that the stock exchange has invested in  is
   one of the leaders in the information  technology  industry  and  in  the
   world. This particular technology processes 20 000 transactions  are  per
   second. The Shanghai Stock Exchange would, in fact, like to enter into  a
   Memorandum of Understanding with the JSE and this could bring  about  co-
   operation in the running of the JSE in terms of advanced technologies.


   Since China’s accession to the WTO, foreigners are able to buy shares  on
   the Shanghai Stock Exchange. Two schemes are available for this  purpose.
   Road shows would be coordinated if South African investors are interested
   in investing in the Shanghai Stock Exchange. Also, visit  tourism  should
   be explored as well as training of entrepreneurial South African youth by
   their Chinese counterparts.


   The Shanghai Stock Exchange admires the JSE code of conduct and  believes
   strongly in the aims of corporate governance. It released  its  audit  to
   the annual report of the listed companies up-holding good practices.


   Mr Xiaodong concluded that these opportunities should be explored because
   China is definitely a friend of South Africa’s and has great respect  for
   ex-President Nelson Mandela. The Beijing games in 2008 and Fifa World Cup
   in 2010 should be used as avenues of co-operation and communication.


   Presenter: Mr Zhoa Zhali, Director: Baosteel, Shanghai
   Mr Zhali informed the delegation that Baosteel steel conglomerate  was  a
   result of the Chinese reform process started  in  the  late  1970’s.  The
   plant comprises an area of 19km squared. The first  phase  of  investment
   into baosteel amounted to RMB 12.5 billion. Of the four phases three have
   been completed. Baosteel became a public company in 2000 and is listed as
   a fortune 500 company. Last year  it  in  fact  made  372  on  the  list.
   Baosteel employs 15 000 workers and produced a turnover of  RMB  7billion
   during  2005.  Tin  plate  and  automobile  manufactured  components  are
   supplied by overseas  suppliers.  Its  automobile  share  in  the  market
   amounts to 52% and its household appliances amounts to 48% of the market.


   Mr Zhali further explained that  Baosteel  has  a  social  responsibility
   toward the underdeveloped rural sector. In this regard the company  makes
   an effort to make good business so that  the  tax  amounts  paid  to  the
   government are used to alleviate the plight of those in the rural  areas.
   A task team will be mobilized to assess  and  assist  in  developing  the
   rural areas. An  educational  fund  has  been  created  that  amounts  to
   millions of RMB to assist children in the rural areas,  40  schools  have
   been built in 11 provinces  and  millions  have  been  donated  to  areas
   affected by natural disasters. Projects are also underway  in  developing
   zones. Along  with  the  15  000  employees  that  the  company  employs,
   Baosteel, in fact, sees to approximately 320 000 people  in  terms  of  a
   four-member family.


   Baosteel investments are long-term contracts. Ten percent  of  the  steel
   used is imported from South Africa. South Africa offers quality resources
   and this is welcomed by China. The delegation was then given  a  tour  of
   this vast plant.


   Presenter: Mr Wu Yi, Vice Premier of the Peoples Republic of China
   10th China International Fair for Investment and Trade [CIFIT], Xiamen
   The China International Fair for Investment and Trade (CIFIT) serves as a
   bridge between China and the outside world  enhancing  co-operation,  and
   common development international organisations which have  supported  the
   CIFIT include the United Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  development
   (UNCTAD), United Nations  Industrial  Development  Organisation  (UNIDO),
   Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD),  The
   International Finance Corporation of the World Bank (IFC) and  the  World
   Association of Investment Promotion Agencies (WAIPA), to name a few.


   The topic for the opening of the Fair was “To adhere firmly to reform and
   opening up is an established basic national policy of China”.  In Mr Yi’s
   speech he stated that during  the  late  70s,  with  China  starting  its
   reform, China’s economic and modernisation drive has realised sustainable
    development as  well  as  achievements  that  have  attracted  worldwide
   attention. The GDP grew from $140 billion USD in the early  years  up  to
   $2.2 trillion USD in 2005, which results in a 9.6  %  growth  on  average
   annually.  China has risen in global rankings from  15th  to  4th  place.
   During this period foreign trade has increased from 20.6 billion  USD  to
   1.4 trillion USD, representing an average annual growth margin of 17% and
   a rise in global ranking from the 32nd to the 3rd place.  The  cumulative
   amount of foreign direct investment  inflow  into  China  is  nearly  660
   billion USD over the 27  year  period,  which  makes  China  the  largest
   Foreign Direct Investment recipient amongst the developing nations for 15
   consecutive yeasars. Thus Chinese enterprises have made a total  of  51.7
   billion USD worth of investment overseas and the 2005 figure stands at  7
   billion USD.


   Furthermore, the sustainable and rapid economic development of  China  is
   attributed to its reform and opening  up,  and  proactive  and  effective
   utilisation of foreign investment. The reform and opening up has  brought
   about a marked improvement in the Chinese people’s living  standards  and
   quality of life. China has now reached a point  of  building  a  well-off
   society, by increasing the pace of its socialist modernisation drive. Its
   economic development is now standing on a new historic starting point  as
   this year marks the first year of the implementation of  the  11th  five-
   year plan. This  means  by  2010  China  will  have  achieved  noticeable
   improvement in energy efficiency, reduced the energy consumption per unit
   GDP by 20% and doubled its per capita on the level of  7.800  RMB.  China
   will prioritise the optimisation of foreign  investment  composition  and
   improve the quality of foreign investment. China will  also  take  active
   measures to create conditions necessary  for  becoming  an  international
   outsource service provider. Added to this, more attention will be paid to
   improving the investment environment and protecting the legitimate rights
   and interest of both domestic and foreign investors according to the law.
   Lastly, China will be firm in implementing mutually beneficial  and  win-
   win strategies for trade enhancement and economic co-operation with other
   countries in the world for the shared development of all countries.


   In conclusion, China will strengthen its co-operation  with  multilateral
   and regional economic organisations, and continue to  promote  trade  and
   investment facilitation in order to create an  international  environment
   conducive to realising common development and prosperity worldwide.


   The China International Fair for Investment and Trade (CIFIT) ran over  a
   period of three days (08 September – 10 September). It was followed by  a
   dinner, a performance ceremony, cocktail function and an  expo  at  which
   the Department of Trade and Industry was represented by the South African
   Mission. Added to this, the DTI  held  an  investment  marketing  seminar
   which the  delegation  supported.  Mr  Martins  addressed  investors  and
   various dignitaries. He  delivered  a  speech  entitled  “the  investment
   climate in South Africa”.


Members of the South African Parliamentary delegation felt  that  the  visit
was rewarding, informative and interesting in  the  sense  of  exposing  the
committee to the development of China and its drive  to  a  market  economy,
and also proving goodwill of mutual visits. The Chinese economic success  is
a combination of government support for a  market  economy  coupled  with  a
strong work ethic.  This was inter  alia  illustrated  by  an  answer  to  a
question of what the Chinese government does for the youth.  The answer  was
that at 18 they are adults and must basically get on with life and fend  for
themselves.  Under 18 they are youth and education and support is  provided.


Speech by Chairperson, Mr BD Martins
The 10th China International Fair for Investment and Trade
2006.9.8-11
Xiamen, China
China-Africa Cooperation Forum

Introductory Briefing on Investment Environment in South Africa:

Honourable chairperson,
Distinguished Heads of Delegations,  Excellencies,  Ambassadors  and  County
Representatives,
Esteemed Guests,

Mr Martins expressed, on behalf of his Parliamentary  delegation,  gratitude
to the Ministry of Commerce of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  and  the
organisers  of  the  International  Trade  and  Investment  Forum  for   the
hospitality and kindness that has been accorded to the delegation.

He indicated that his delegation had visited China to  participate  in  this
Investment Forum to promote South Africa as a destination for  business  and
investment; to facilitate  trade  and  foreign  direct  investment;  and  to
encourage enterprises to develop transnational business partnerships.

In terms  of  the  South  African  government’s  Accelerated  Shared  Growth
Initiative (ASGI-SA), he said, the government would  spend  more  than  R350
billion ($50 billion) on infrastructure development,  during  the  2006  and
2009  period.  This  initiative’s  ultimate  objective,  he  said,  was   to
substantially increase growth and to reduce unemployment and poverty by  the
year 2014.

Focused   interventions   would   address   government’s    investment    on
infrastructure, sector development, education and skills, as well  as  macro
economic issues, including the capacity of the state to implement these,  he
indicated.

Mr Martins further indicated that the Department of Trade and Industry  (the
DTI)  would  over  the  next  three  years  pay  particular   attention   to
opportunities arising from the hosting of the 2010 FIFA World Cup. It  would
also pay attention to a massive infrastructure development programme;  small
enterprise development, and investment promotion amongst others.

He concluded by inviting the audience to view  a  short  video  on  possible
opportunities in South Africa.



6.    CONTRIBUTORS


    ▪ Mr Chai Zhijing, Chinese Ministry of Commerce


    ▪ Mr Liks  Ramushu,  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry,  SA  Embassy,
      Beijing
    ▪ Mr Rudu Conley, Department of Foreign Affairs, SA Embassy, Shanghai


    ▪ Mr Zhao Xin Xin, Deputy Director, Beijing Development Area/Zone


    ▪ Mr Guangsheng  Shi,  Chairperson:  Economic  and  Financial  Committee
      National Peoples Congress, Beijing


    ▪  Mr  Yao  Weigun,  Director:   Shanghai   World   Trade   Organization
      Consultation Centre, Shanghai


    ▪ Mr Zhou Yupeng, Vice Mayor: Shanghai’s Municipality,
    ▪ Shanghai


    ▪ Mr Liu Xiaodong, Deputy  General  Manager:  Shanghai  Stock  Exchange,
      Shanghai


    ▪ Mr Zhoa Zhali, Director: Baosteel, Shanghai


    ▪ Mr Wu Yi, Vice Premier of the Peoples Republic of China



                          MONDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 26 February 2007 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section
         76 Bill:


         (a)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2007] (National Assembly –
              sec 76).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

   National Assembly and National Council of Provinces



1. Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of SANDF
  to Burundi, dated 23 February 2007:


    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered  the  letter
    from the President on the employment  of  the  South  African  National
    Defence Force (SANDF) to Burundi, referred to  the  Committee,  reports
    that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

2. Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of SANDF
  to the Democratic Republic of Congo, dated 23 February 2007:


    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered  the  letter
    from the President on the employment  of  the  South  African  National
    Defence Force (SANDF) to the Democratic Republic of Congo, referred  to
    the Committee, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.
National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Division of Revenue
  Bill [B 3– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)), dated 22 February 2007:

    The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined the
    Division of Revenue Bill [B 3– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)),
    referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
    section 76(1) Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.


                          TUESDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2007



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Ingonyama Trust Board for 2007-2008.

