---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-06-05
---

TUESDAY, 5 JUNE 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the Council –

      1) notes that a Limpopo man intends suing the province’s Department of
         Health and Social Development after a  hospital  in  that  province
         failed to remove pieces of glass from behind his left eye;

      2) further notes that the man, Norman Mahlaule,  has  been  living  in
         pain, with the glass lodged behind his eye, for almost a year; and

      3) recognises that staff in government hospitals are very busy and  do
         work under enormous pressure, but  urges  all  hospital  staff  and
         officials to be vigilant and perform their duties with  the  utmost
         care in order to avoid incidents of negligence that could  cause  a
         patient unnecessary suffering and pain.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 14 – Education:

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Sebakeng se ke tla bitša Tona ya tša Thuto,
Mohlomphegi mma Naledi Pandor. Ebile o kile wa ba Modulasetulo wa Ngwako
wo. Mma Naledi Pandor! [Legowa.] [At this moment I will call upon the
Minister of Education, the hon Naledi Pandor. You were even the Chairperson
of this House at one time. [Applause.]]

TONA YA THUTO: Modulasetilo, baetapele ba ba tlotlegang, ke a leboga. Ke
itumetse thata go nna le lona tsatsi leno, go tla go bua le go tlotla ka
selo se se leng botlhokwa thata mo lefatsheng la rona la Aforika Borwa,
selo sa thuto.

Re kopano tsatsi jeno, ka nako e e tswanetseng e be e re tshwenya thata re
le batsadi le bagolo mo Aforika Borwa. Bontsi ba bana ba rona ba ntse ba sa
tsene sekolo go simolola Labotlhano wa maloba. Ga re itse gore go sanyeng
sekolong ga bana ba rona, go tlile go nna lobaka lo lo kae, mme ke solofela
gore baetapele botlhe ba ba leng mo Ntlong e, ba tla dumellana le nna gore
ga re ka ke ra dumela gore bana ba rona ba latlhegelwe ke nako ya go ya
sekolong, ka gore go latlhegelwa ke nako ke selo se se tshwenyang bokamoso
ba bana ba rona.

Ke ema ke le fa, kena le tshepo ya gore re tlile go fedisa kgang e, ya go
sa rute bana ba rona, ya go sa fodise ba ba lwalang, ya go sa thuse ba ba
batlang thuso mo mmusong wa rona le mo diphaposing tsa rona tsa mmuso.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson, hon leaders; I am very
pleased to be here with you today, to talk about the most important thing
in our country, South Africa, which is education.

We’ve gathered here today as worried parents and elders in South Africa.
Most of our children have not attended school since last Friday. We do not
know how long this is going to take, but I trust that all leaders who are
in this House agree with me that our children cannot lose their time for
schooling as this would affect their future.

I am standing here with the hope that we are going to solve this issue of
not taking responsibility to teach our children, of not nursing those who
are sick, and of not helping those in need of help in our government and in
its service offices.]

I am also convinced that we must, and will, improve the remuneration of
teachers in the education sector. We will devise a scale of remuneration
and performance assessment that both recognises the important role that
teachers play in society and provides irrefutable evidence that we are
doing the job of educating the nation – a very important job, indeed.

At our meeting of the Council of Education Ministers yesterday we agreed on
a draft framework for the creation of an occupation-specific category of
remuneration for school principals and education managers. I am pleased
that this aspect of the occupation-specific salary structure for principals
and managers in education is integrated in the current proposed agreement
on salaries and conditions of service that has been tabled by the Minister
for the Public Service and Administration.

The proposed dispensation moves remuneration in education in a new
direction that will improve remuneration while also providing a basis for
increased accountability. In terms of figures, the proposal, with respect
to school principals, will translate into an additional 7,5% increase for
principals from 1 July 2007. This is, of course, over and above whatever
general adjustment is agreed upon in the current dispute.

The occupation-specific dispensation gives due and necessary recognition to
professionals in the Public Service. Its intention is to reward, recognise
and attract skills to the public sector. The proposed agreement from the
employer provides for the implementation of a similar framework for
teachers from 1 January 2008 and from the following year for office-based
educators and specialists in education.

It is my intention this year to initiate discussions with teacher
organisations and education leaders in order to determine a framework for
increased support and regular review of professional practices. I plan to
continue working with teachers in an effort to secure the academic future
of our children.

The awful history of denial of education and poor learning performance
requires us, as South Africa’s education leaders, to plan and imagine
beyond the confines of the positions we occupy in government and society. I
hope to encourage the development of a set of agreed approaches which will
move beyond sectoral polemics to real change for learners and students.
A new approach will also demand a level of objective evaluation that has
been missing in our public discourse. We will need to develop the courage
to state the problems squarely and be prepared to deal with
underperformance from members – friend or enemy. This is going to be a
tough challenge, but I think we must adopt the courageous stand of the
Gauteng MEC when she indicated that poor competence will not enjoy
protection.

We have a duty to ensure learning, to ensure the realisation of every
child’s potential and also to provide professionals and other workers with
conditions of service that fully accredit the competence and ability we
expect from educationists. I believe our activities this year will lead us
to the point where we will create a firm basis for the kinds of outcomes I
have described.

While I remain concerned at the impasse in salary negotiations, I believe
we can today, and will, report real progress in education while also
alerting this Council to challenges that must be given attention. The most
valuable contributions today will be provided by our provincial colleagues.
They are at the coalface of action and delivery and directly respond to
that which must be done.

Today I thank the MECs and heads of education in provinces for their work –
hard work, I know. But I will also continue to point to our inadequacies,
many of which I sometimes share, not to score points in doing this but to
indicate that there are challenges that we must engage with if we are to
make real the promise of quality education for all our children.

Our Treasury reported a dramatic improvement in overall provincial spending
last year. Provinces spent 98,7% of their combined adjusted budgets.
However, there was both good and bad news for the education sector in this
dramatic improvement in provincial spending. On the one hand, the 1,3% of
provincial underspend amounted to R2,4 billion and was largely due to
underexpenditure in seven provincial departments. The Free State and
KwaZulu-Natal were the exceptions.

On the other hand, Treasury also reported that there was a notable
improvement in capital expenditure in the provinces. In fact, capital
expenditure at R3,7 billion, which is 96,5% of the capital budget, was R1
billion more than the R2,6 billion spent in 2005.

The increased capital expenditure is good news for education in itself, but
it is also good news for another reason. It is an indication that we are
reaching that target of an 80-20 split in the budget; 80% on personnel and
20% on nonpersonnel items. In the past, this split was always our target,
but we were never able to reach it.

The consequence has been that personnel expenditure, which was always first
call on our resources, crowded out the other two components of provincial
education budgets. The capital costs for building, those for repairing
schools, and goods and services budgets on items such as teaching material
suffered as a result. With a growing consolidated education budget - R104,7
billion this year compared to R93,2 billion last year – and with a targeted
80-20 split achieved, we have, at last, money for school buildings and
money for textbooks. [Applause.]

Let me say a few words about school infrastructure. And I see your clock
going very fast, Chairperson, so I’m in a bit of trouble. [Laughter.]
During the education budget last year I announced that I had initiated an
update of the school register of needs. Colleagues will remember that. As
some hon members will know, that mammoth, huge and comprehensive audit of
schools has now been completed and we have for the first time a complete
inventory of infrastructure at every school in South Africa.

The preliminary estimate is that the cost of making up the education
infrastructure backlog at today’s prices is R40 billion, and this consists
of a space backlog of R13,6 billion, a standards backlog of R19,8 billion
and a condition backlog of R2,5 billion.

Modulasetilo o tshwanetse o tlhaloganye gore ga re dira tlotlo ya rona mo
Ntlong e, re a ruta e bile re a bua. Jaanong go re fa nako e khutshwane ga
go re thuse go dira dilo tse pedi tse. [Ditshego.] [Chairperson, you have
to understand that when we engage in our discussion in this House, we teach
and speak. Now, giving us little time does not assist us in this regard.
[Laughter.]

Space refers to the fact that we had inadequate numbers of classrooms and
learning spaces; standards means that our facilities are available, but
below standard; and condition means that facilities are available but they
have deteriorated because of a lack of maintenance. Those three aspects
have to be addressed. The total replacement value of the asset we hold in
education infrastructure is R119 billion.

Comparing the condition of schools today with the condition of schools
measured in previous school registers of needs is fraught with
difficulties; it is difficult to make really accurate comparisons. However,
it would appear that we have made progress. In particular, we have made
substantial progress in regard to the provision of basic services to
schools.

The most notable improvement is in the provision of electricity, where 82%
of schools, that is 20 330 schools, now have electricity; and 75% of them
are connected to grid electricity, compared to 55% according to the second
register in 2000 and 40% as indicated in the first register in 1996. This
shows real progress.

We still have work to do on the costing of infrastructure improvements, and
the steps we plan to take in remedy have begun to be worked out. The full
report on the register of needs will be released for members’ attention in
the next few weeks.

We must take into account and give appropriate weight to the huge
underinvestment in black education, because it was one of the legacies of
the apartheid era. When we talk about poor academic performance today, let
us not forget to also talk about lack of infrastructure.

The education budget is the largest allocation of resources made by
national government. This year, as I said, it is R104,7 billion and it is
thus 5,53% of the gross domestic product; last year, it was R93,2 billion,
which was 5,44% of the GDP.

Hon members, you will recall that in 2006 we also indicated to you that we
would direct our efforts to improving learning outcomes in our schools. We
planned to give specific attention to underperforming schools and to
improve the matric performance of the class of 2006. Members know that we
did not meet our planned matric target despite very positive improvements
in several provinces.

This year, we began to take much stronger action against the principals of
underperforming schools. We have found that massive differences result from
a competent and engaged principal in a school. All provinces are paying
attention to the need to provide training support and leadership
development opportunities to our school principals.

The interventions by education departments have been developmental rather
than merely punitive, but I have to say that we will not be afraid to act
with vigour where punitive action becomes necessary. We cannot be tolerant
of mediocrity and underperformance. We are giving increased attention to a
clear job specification for school leadership in South Africa – a
specification that makes it clear that learning and academic progress are a
core performance requirement for school principals.

The advanced certificate in school leadership is being piloted this year.
We regard this as a critical contribution to building a new pool of capable
education leaders for our schools. We also plan to make better use of
mentoring by linking new leaders to leaders in successful schools in order
to build a system of school development that empowers through professional
collaboration and partnership.

Another target in our improvement strategy is that of ensuring that
teachers monitor learning achievement and skills acquisition from Grade 1
to Grade 12. We intend to intensify our efforts at Grades 11 and 12 as well
as at all grades in our systems, because we believe that looking only at
Grade 11 or Grade 12 will not lead us to national success. Every school
grade must aim to promote successful learning and teaching of key skills.
In addition to ensuring support to learners at all levels of the schooling
system, we have strengthened our efforts at improving literacy and
numeracy. We have provided reading books to over 10 000 schools as part of
our strategy. School principals and teachers are being encouraged and
supported in the teaching of reading and writing. Teaching aids for
reading, assessment guides and other tools have been supplied to ensure
that reading, writing and numeracy are key focus areas at all grades in the
system.

We have made it clear to all schools that the national curriculum requires
the teaching of reading, writing and numeracy from the foundation phase.
Furthermore, we have begun to prepare our schools for regular assessment of
reading and writing. Assessment and monitoring of each learner’s progress
and ability will become a normal part of our schooling system. It's too
late to begin at Grade 12.

Our departments will be training and supporting teachers in implementing
the newly developed early grade reading assessment which has been developed
in six languages, for this year. The assessment will be piloted in 16
schools this year and then go to scale in 2008. The Council of Education
Ministers has agreed that increased attention must be given to building
school libraries and resourcing them to support our literacy strategy.

In 2008, we'll have the third systemic evaluation of literacy and numeracy
at Grade 3. We intend to work with our schools to ensure a better set of
results than the outcomes of 2001 and 2004 evaluations. In 2006, we
reported that we would expand our strategy for science, mathematics and
technology. The Dinaledi schools’ initiative continues to grow with active
support from all provinces. We've grown from 102 schools in 2004 to 462
schools in 2007. With proper resourcing and support, these schools can
achieve the objective of doubling our 2004 passes in science and
mathematics by 2008.

Chairperson, we've not given up on our plan to ensure that at least by 2010
all high schools in our country should offer science and mathematics taught
by qualified, competent teachers. We're also acting on our planned use of
qualified, unemployed teachers of these important subjects.
[Interjections.] I have a cold, I was not toyi-toying. [Laughter]. We'll
fill vacant posts in these subjects and we will also relieve teachers who
need retraining or further professional development to increase their
competence in their subjects.

The new bursary programme for teacher trainees, Fundza Lushaka, is a
welcome addition to our strategies. It has attracted over 3 000 future
teachers of science, mathematics, technology and languages. I believe that
our teaching support and development programme, our new assessment tools,
the employment of new freshly qualified teachers and the employment of
teachers from foreign lands who are keen to work in our country in these
critical subjects will provide the foundations for a better system of
education in South Africa.

This belief has led us to critically assess a range of our programmes,
including our literacy and adult basic education programmes. Following a
comprehensive review of literacy programmes by a ministerial committee, we
have developed a refreshed literacy campaign and strategy. This plan will
be implemented as a pilot in 2008.

We have also agreed that there should be a rethinking and
reconceptualisation of adult basic education and training in South Africa.
The curriculum and approach we've used thus far has been closely aligned to
formal schooling programmes. We plan to offer adults a curriculum that
integrates, responds to and reflects their interests, needs and
experiences. More attention will also be given to vocational offerings,
life skills programmes and possible links with industry and other
employers. A green paper on the proposed policy will be published in 2008.

Hon members, our teachers and officials are grappling with complex and
challenging tasks. Key among them has been introducing the new national
curriculum into our schools. In 2005 we introduced the National Curriculum
Statement in Grade 10. In 2008 all learners will be studying the same
national curriculum. This is a historic achievement for South Africa; a
real achievement for democratic South Africa. [Applause]

Many negative stories have been written about our curriculum change. These
stories failed to acknowledge the work done by many provinces, by
districts, by school leaders and by many hard-working teachers. Efforts
have been made to provide support to our teachers and there have been
problems, as we have stated before. Workshops and electronic communication
programmes have been mounted, the education portal has been set up, and all
of these have provided us with up-to-date information on the curriculum.

If these provisions have not reached you in the education sector, I have to
ask, why? When there were so many workshops in your province, why were you
not there? When there was a workshop in your school, why were you not
there? When there was a workshop in the neighbouring university, why were
you not there? Why blame government when you have not utilised
opportunities? When the professionals, in professional bodies, are offered
development opportunities, they have to independently take up these
opportunities. We cannot compel, imprison or bind you to that.

There have been failures in some of our implementation arrangements. We
need many more curriculum experts in the system. We need to intensify,
expand and increase the training opportunities, but much has been done.
Further resource input must be given to schools; materials must be
developed to support teachers better; and we also need to plan our training
programmes in a more effective way. We have, of course, as the department,
improved in many of these areas on better assessment tools, easier
exemplars for teachers to work from as well as in areas of support that
assist teachers with classroom practice.

We have gone further. We have developed a curriculum package for high
school learners and greater support will be provided from this year to
teachers and Grade 11 students. Our Grade 11 students, nationally, will
write common exams in key subjects this year as part of preparation for the
new National Senior Certificate examination in 2008. The provincial teams
and our further education branch must be congratulated on their efforts in
this regard.

However, all of us were disturbed when we saw so many thousands of Grade 11
children failing the old curriculum in 2006. We anticipated these
discussions, but we did not plan proactively and efficiently as a sector.
We had agreed, as the council, to plan but we found ourselves reacting
under pressure this year rather than on the basis of a fully resourced and
well-crafted plan.

Part of the difficulty related to the inadequacies of our current
institutional framework. There aren’t many alternatives open to young
children beyond school and therefore we need to create more such
opportunities. We do not have a diversity of institutions that offer second
chances to young adults in our country. We must create these.

We also have not used the Grade 9 exit opportunities in a systematic and co-
ordinated manner. We require better monitoring of learners; improved
careers and training opportunity advice for young people; closer links
between FET colleges and schools; and the adequate development of a
summative evaluation certificate at the end of the general education phase.
We will be working on these areas.

We are planning better for Grade 12s who do not pass in 2007. Our plans
will be conveyed to schools by the beginning of the fourth term. Of course,
I have never encouraged learners to plan to fail and I believe what we
should be doing is to encourage learners to work for success because that
is the best outcome.

We continue with our efforts to develop focused schools and to introduce
new subjects to schools that have been denied arts, music, theatre and
technological subjects in the past. As all members know, a curriculum is
far more than subjects or learning fields. It is the building block for
social cohesion and a new set of values and attitudes.

Our curriculum contents reflect these imperatives, but it is clear we are
not yet teaching nonviolence, conflict management and respect for all in
our schools. We'll work closely with teachers and learners to build safe
and caring schools, to promote nonsexism and respect for diversity,
including multilingualism and the development of schools that promote and
practice inclusion.

The Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition has correctly
identified the important contribution education can and must make to
improving skills in South Africa. We have identified universities,
universities of technology and FET colleges as the key to our skills
response.

Our government has made a significant investment in the college sector.
Over R1,8 billion has been invested, and 25 000 students have registered in
new exciting FET programmes. We have also provided R600 million for
bursaries directly to students attending our FET colleges. Our National
Student Financial Aid Scheme is monitoring and administering these
bursaries.

We have also, at the university level, provided over R2 billion in new
funds to support universities in improving infrastructure, strengthening
student support services, formulating academic development programmes and
refurbishing our residences, library facilities and ICT resource centres. I
urge all members to visit the University of Venda today and then visit it
in 12 months’ time. You will see a very different University of Venda,
owing to the investment that government is making. [Applause.]

The injection of these funds means that universities can begin to build a
new cohort of scholars in South Africa. We also hope that the funding will
assist in creating space for vice chancellors to lead a process of
intellectual renewal in South Africa.

Beyond schools, skills development, knowledge production and innovation,
there are many other matters we must attend to. We have discussed, for
example, the issue of non-educator support in our schools. We intend, from
next year, that every school in our country should have a minimum number of
support staff. No more should there be a situation that, because it is a
school in a township, there is no secretary and clerk. We will have this
from 2008. [Applause.]

We are also re-examining the position with respect to post allocation and
drawing up a much more redress-oriented model of post provision for our
schools. We want to appoint more teachers and thus have smaller ratios to
schools that are in challenged conditions. You cannot justify having the
same teacher-learner ratio for schools that have millions of rands to
appoint SGB posts as schools that have very little funding or nothing at
all. Some of the inadequacies result from a shortage of classrooms or poor
allocation of teaching time. We would like to see full utilisation of all
teachers and adequate teacher support for all schools.

We'll also act on our plan to create a new education evaluation and
development unit to support our quality evaluation instruments. I was
pleased this year to declare the policy on teacher development. However, we
should not take five more years to develop the development programmes. We
have allocated over R10 million this year for the planning process of the
framework, and have assigned the SA Council for Educators to do the
preparatory work with the support of an education task team.

Finally, a great deal of careless debate on the future shape of provinces
has occupied the pages of the media recently. The call for a closer
examination and review of the financial and structural arrangements that
exist in our concurrent constitutional design has been defined by some as a
grasp for power by me. I dispute such a conclusion. I believe it is
necessary to review systems and the degree to which they reflect original
and stated policy intentions.

The fact that collaboration exists in the present form of comradely
discussion does call for reflection. It calls for reflection, not for less
power to provinces but, potentially, for the development of new forms of
collaboration that will lead to improved delivery. That is all, I believe,
we need to address.

The matter of learning and teaching support material is a case in point.
Millions are spent on learner support material. In fact, last year
provinces spent R7,9 billion of the R8 billion adjusted budget on goods and
services. Yet, many schoolchildren did not get textbooks. Would a joint
collaboration across provinces give rise to more efficient and learner-
oriented outcomes? I do not have an answer as yet, but it is a matter that
requires our attention. No Parliament, no executive member or government
can refuse to examine a policy issue - that is why we are in place.

A further issue is the review of the role and status of school governing
bodies. There have been calls for improved support and development of SGBs.
I support these calls. However, I think we need a more reflective look at
the potential for positive change that lies in school governing bodies. How
can we harness this latent energy? One of the possibilities, maybe, is to
create district-level councils that have statutory responsibility for areas
such as school refurbishment, academic review and assessment or basic
resource provision. Developing such a layer of school governance could
match skills and abilities across schools and communities, and create the
basis for partnership and development beyond individual schools’ interest.

We have been giving attention to the issue of rewards for positive
performance. Some have said recognition of excellence is an elitist notion
because they view schools in disadvantaged communities in deficit terms. I
am proposing that schools which are underresourced but which perform well
despite our lack of support to them should be recognised and rewarded, and
not be doomed to long-term neglect and underdevelopment because we think to
reward is elitist.

Why is it elitist to build a laboratory for a village school that has had
three or more years of outstanding performance in science?  Why would it be
wrong, Chairperson, to reward such a school with such a resource? Why would
it be elitist to reward teachers who are doing well in such schools? What
is wrong in affirming excellence? Why should mediocrity be more deserving
than outstanding performance? I cannot understand our attitude in this
regard.

Our tasks are varied. We intend to approach each of them with care and
attention. I think we have begun to see exciting signs of extremely
positive progress in all the provinces, and our MECs will address these. I
am proud to work with such a capable team of members of executive councils.
[Applause.]

I conclude by thanking the director-general, his team of deputy directors-
general and our officials, our Deputy Minister, all my Cabinet colleagues
who have supported education and all stakeholders who make a difference in
education. I also thank hon members in the select committee and the Budget
Committee for the work they do in our support.

To all these stakeholders I present my homily: We are not wrong in our
belief that it is possible to make quality education for all a reality for
all learners and teachers in South Africa. Focus, dedication, commitment
and hard work will ensure that we make it happen. Thank you. [Applause.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister. I hope you got your
time to teach. [Interjections.] Some of the people do not know your other
name. This “Grace” is only given to you; and other people will never get
that “Grace”. The next speaker is hon B J Tolo. [Interjections.]

Ufuna ukuthini uShiceka? Awume kancane baba uTolo. [What does the hon
Shiceka want to say? Wait a minute, hon Tolo.]

Are you rising on a point of order?

Mr S SHICEKA: Yes, Chairperson, I am rising on a point of order. This is
the first time that when I speak I start by being apologetic; I do not
normally do that. I am not sure if the Rules allow this, but could the
speech of the Minister be distributed to all members. I am saying this
because it was a good speech. I thank you. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That is not a point of order. You have misused
your point of order time. The speech of the Minister will be circulated,
and it is also available in Hansard. I am sure it is on the website as
well; you can find it there.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, MECs present
here this afternoon and hon members, ours is a country that has enjoyed
freedom for the past 13 years. In that period of time we have come to
realise that education is a bedrock on which we can and must build a stable
and prosperous country. It is for this reason that, as a people, we need to
join hands and work together for the education project to succeed. The
Department of Education and the Ministry are hard at work to realise this
noble goal, but the road ahead is not strewn with roses.

Education laws and policies are in place and flawless in many instances,
but the challenge lies in the implementation and monitoring, especially by
provinces. As a country, we have gone a long way in making education
accessible to young people. The number of children attending school has
increased phenomenally. Our tertiary institutions are today overflowing
with learners who would not have dreamt of going to a tertiary institution
in the past. In this respect, the National Student Financial Aid Scheme has
worked wonders.

However, Chair, our biggest challenge is that the quality of our results,
especially in matric, has not met our expectations. While the number of
learners who pass matric has increased, we cannot say the same about those
who pass with endorsements. A cursory look at our results in the past three
years shows that we have not even reached the 20% mark as regards those who
get endorsements. In 2004 we had 18%, in 2005 it was 17%, and in 2006 it
was 16% of those who wrote matric who got endorsements. This is a serious
indicator to us that something needs to be done if we are to improve on
quality.
Chair, something needs to be done, not only in matric but also in all other
phases of our education system, because if the foundation is not good one
cannot expect miracles in Grade 12. In the same vein, I must say that I
skimmed through the department’s framework for the national strategy for
learner attainment, NSLA. It is my view that, if implemented, this strategy
may be a panacea to all our problems in education but if not, it will not
be worth the paper it is written on.

While we, in no uncertain terms, support the R16 billion budget for the
Department of Education nationally, we must, however, point out some of the
problems we come across as public representatives when we do our committee
and constituency work. We do this in order to sensitise both the national
departments and the provinces about the gaps that exist in the
implementation of laws and policies.

In 2005 this House approved new amendments to the South African Schools
Act. Among other things, those amendments compel schools to help parents to
apply for exemptions from school fees; and also provide that the school has
to, before agreeing on the amount of school fees to be paid, make available
the financial statements of the previous year for parents to scrutinise.
These and other provisions of the law are unknown – I want to repeat: They
are unknown - to many of our schools out there.

Our expectations are that every school needs to have a copy of the basic
law that governs schools and if there are amendments, they need to have
those as well so that they can be in a position to implement them. This
calls into question whether our district or circuit managers are tracking
the laws that we pass as Parliament concerning education, with the purpose
of helping our schools to implement them.

The National Curriculum Statement is a very important tool of education in
South Africa that is meant to imbue all learners with new and progressive
values, which have nothing in common with apartheid values. In implementing
this new system we are hitting the ground running and therefore those who
are at the cutting edge of implementation - the teachers – must not have
the feeling that they are being thrown into the deep end. They need to
bubble with confidence, if they are to succeed in implementing this new
project. The reality is that the opposite is the truth, due to a great
shortage of curriculum implementers in our provinces.

Chairperson, to illustrate this fact, in the Eastern Cape, for instance,
there is a shortage of about 536 curriculum implementers, six of those
positions are for chief education specialists, 224 are for deputy chief
education specialists, and 306 are for senior education specialists. This
information comes from the curriculum directorate in the province. But I
want to say I respect the Eastern Cape, because, at least, they know the
magnitude of the problem. The other provinces from whom we wanted this
information could not give it to us. It, therefore, means to us that they
do not know the magnitude of the problem. How do they address the problem
if they do not know how big it is? That is a worrying factor.

Chair, our schools are under siege. They are annexed and occupied by drug
lords who see a drug market in our children. We need a concerted effort
from all of us, including parents, to reclaim our schools. Failure to do
this will lead to us losing a whole generation of young people, and that is
a luxury that we cannot afford as a nation. We call upon these schools and
other schools governing bodies who have not yet adopted a policy of
adopting a cop to do so as quickly as possible. We also want to call upon
Members of Parliament here to adopt schools in the areas where they live,
so that they can be in a position to help them to achieve better and to
stabilise.

We have said in the past, and we are repeating it today, that hitherto
adult basic education and training has always been a Cinderella of all
education programmes. In our engagement with the department, we were
pleased to learn that Abet and other mass literacy programmes will be
prioritised in this financial year. We hope that that will lead to
stabilisation in the Abet sector, even for Abet teachers. Today an Abet
teacher cannot buy anything on hire purchase, because they are not fully
employed.

The Dinaledi schools are a proper response by the education department to
address the problem of skills shortages in our economy. We appreciate the
fact that these are being increased every year. The challenge, however, is
whether these schools are getting enough support from the provinces. There
is a view that these schools should be put under the national Department of
Education for proper resourcing and maintenance of some standards
throughout the whole country. This view is not very unreasonable, and it
should be properly scrutinised, if a decision has to be taken.

In the same vein, the recapitalisation of FET colleges will inevitably
contribute to the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa. Many out there have not yet realised the important role that FETs
can play in the provision of much-needed skills in our country. There is a
perception that FETs are meant for those who cannot make it in matric or
for those who do not get endorsement in Grade 12. We must dispel this myth
by encouraging as many learners as possible to enrol for FET training. In
some cases, some of our best brains from Grade 12 must also be encouraged
to go into FET colleges.

The initiative by the Department of Education to build partnership among
FETs, business and universities is to be welcomed, for it is only when
stakeholders in the field of skills development work together that we can
win the war against skills shortages in our country.
Chair, for many years we have been labouring under the impression that good
teachers will make good principals or school managers. Experience has
taught us that this is a fallacy. To this end, we commend the Department of
Education for introducing a course that will equip principals to become
effective professional leaders in their schools. We do know that some
provinces like Free State and Mpumalanga have programmes where they take
some underperforming principals and put them under the mentorship of
performing principals so that they can actually learn basic management of
schools. We know that there has been some resistance in some areas, but it
cannot be stopped.

We commend the Department of Education for increasing funding for
institutions of higher learning. We agree with the Minister that, with this
funding, there will be no need for these institutions to increase their
tuition fees as this puts a lot of strain on parents and financial aid
schemes.

The problem of transformation in some universities is still far from
resolved. Hon Van Rooyen who is sitting here today and who is a member of
this House has told me, for instance, that at the University of the Free
State more than 82% of the top management are still white Afrikaner males.
He has said no-go areas still exist on the campus, regarding black students
and that there are still areas where the Vierkleur [four-colour flag] -
that is the old South African flag - is still the order of the day. We are
saying, if this is the case, then we need some external intervention.

There are many more issues that we want to speak about, but my colleagues
will do that later. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson and colleagues, I hope you will allow my time
to run very slowly so that I can say much more today. Minister, let me
start by saying that this debate is taking place when the majority of
public servants are on an indefinite strike. You have just alluded to that
and this includes the teachers.

My two children, Tebogo and Karabo, who are attending Pietersburg English
Medium School are still in Grade 4 and 2 respectively and are without
teachers in Polokwane. They do not understand why they are not being
taught. I believe that this strike could have been avoided and I believe
that perhaps all the stakeholders are negotiating in good faith. Both the
employer and employees should actually put the interest of the country high
on the agenda. I hope a speedy resolution will be reached sooner rather
than later and as you have alluded to this, Minister, I hope it will
actually happen.

This debate is taking place just after the Minister has delivered her most
forthright Budget Vote in the National Assembly, the lower House. The DA
welcomes some of the telling blows delivered in that budget speech. It only
helps our country to have Ministers are not willing to buy anyone’s favour,
but who do their job with aplomb. I want to quote some of the good things
you said, Minister, in the “lower” House:


   We tolerate public officials who are not up to the task of administrative
   and professional support, who leave work early, who fail to pay subsidies
   to schools on time and who do not yet reflect the objectives and
   principles of Batho Pele - people first.

This doesn’t happen in Limpopo. Minister, in some instances employment
equity is to blame because competent people have been ignored for critical
positions such as management. If a line functionary fails to do his or her
duties, then it goes without saying that the person must be relieved of
their responsibilities and those who are capable and willing to serve the
nation should be employed. Let us reduce our tolerance level to zero so as
to deal with this scourge of incompetence and laziness.

The Public Service Commission has just released a report in which it shows
that our Public Service is not performing in line with the Batho Pele
principles. We need to make sure that that report is taken seriously.

Mediocrity, coming late, little or no teaching, poor academic success and
constant underperformance are some of the issues you lamented, and they
cannot be accepted if South Africa is to compete equally with the rest of
the world. I hope the MECs of education in the provinces listened to your
speech with much appreciation so that they can start to deal with some of
the concerns that you raised, which are also my concerns. I want to express
my appreciation and welcome Kwazulu-Natal here today, in this Budget Vote
discussion, because last year I didn’t see them.

The DA wants to put this proposal to your office: Principals must have a
contract for a particular period in which their performance is assessed and
reviewed. If they perform, they are provided with performance bonuses and
their contracts are extended. If they are underperforming, they are demoted
back to being an ordinary teacher. If this is not done, all of us will keep
on lamenting without a solution in sight.

In one primary school in Limpopo, a principal withheld promotional reports
of learners because their parents owed fees. I visited the families
concerned to establish the authenticity of the story and guess what I
found: I found learners from poor families who could not proceed to Grade 8
in a secondary school in tears, not knowing what to do. I contacted the MEC
of education, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, who is here with us today, who promised
to investigate and deal with the matter. I am happy to report that all
those learners are today at school, after our intervention with the MEC.
But how many cases of this kind exist that have not come to our attention?
This is just one example of a principal underperforming and not being
willing to implement policy and ignoring Batho Pele principles.

In the February Noseweek, issue 88, we read how officials in the Eastern
Cape education department were milking the feeding scheme. The new MEC is
here and we hope that he will deal with the situation that has prevailed in
that particular province. The question that remains is: Who and how many
were involved in the scheme? Has the department investigated the matter,
because conditional grants are affected? Well, the common suspects in major
corruption cases are mentioned in the report. I won’t dwell on that.

Most schools in Limpopo are collapsing because they were built by
communities in the past, without assistance from the state. It is reported
that 2 700 schools are needed in the province. The MEC of education in the
province indicated to me that they are trying their best to solve the
problem by putting up decent temporary classrooms. I believe other
provinces should follow suit as well. We don’t need children learning under
trees.

We all know that Limpopo is one of the provinces that had too many
administrations and that means a lot of segregation occurred there.
Services were compartmentalised according to the homeland that they
belonged to. No wonder that six of the 11 official languages emanate from
Limpopo. Gauteng, being our subregion, just adds one more language – Tswana
- to make them seven. [Laughter.]
The DA is also concerned about the high levels of pregnancy at schools
where there are no properly trained teachers or professionals to handle the
situation. I recently read the Sunday Times, dated 29 May 2007, which
reported that a school in the Eastern Cape had 144 learners that were
pregnant. The report revealed what I had suspected were the reasons for
such a situation to develop: poverty, poor school discipline and gender
violence.

It was reported in the same article that learners were falling pregnant
because they wanted to receive child grants. They then ended up realising
that the money was not sufficient for the needs of their own children.

The other concern for the DA is violence within schools. Thank goodness,
the MEC for education in the Western Cape is here with us today - and he
will speak after me - to tell us what he is doing about the situation that
developed last week where it is alleged that one learner was stabbed with a
pair of scissors. So, safety at schools is really degenerating, and we want
to know, Minister, what it is that is being done to deal with this
particular matter. Fortunately, it hasn’t happened in our province of
Limpopo. In KwaZulu-Natal a lady teacher was shot dead in the school yard.
In the Western Cape it is the learner that I have spoken about and I am
saying that safety at schools must be improved.

The no-fee schools are commended though there are problems. The number of
quintiles has increased and more learners are going to be covered. But, I
want to reiterate and I hope I will be given more time: The system where
schools in the same ward are given the same quintile is wrong, because some
suburbs are combined with their own townships and they fall in the same
ward. Therefore, you cannot put a model C school and a previously
disadvantaged school in the same quintile. I hope this situation will be
dealt with. I had discussions with our MEC who promised that this would be
done.

Chairperson, the one-size-fits-all kind of approach cannot work. I hope you
will give me five more minutes to deal with outstanding issues. I am
pleading with you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Your time has expired. I told you that the
grace was only for Grace and not for other people.

Mr C M DUGMORE (Western Cape): Chairperson, Minister Pandor, Deputy
Minister Surty, all our MECs and hon members of the House, I am not sure
whether the previous speaker shook my hand for any specific reason. I
always find it strange when coming to this particular House, that very
often, the speakers who represent the DA fail to actually come to this
House with very concrete and firm alternative proposals. They come into
this House, selectively quote from our Minister’s speech and then imply
that nothing positive is happening in the schools of this country.
I think if anyone was there in the National Assembly and listened to what
our Minister said in terms of actually dealing with issues of mediocrity,
one would have heard that our Minister reported very clearly on progress
which is being made in our schools and teachers who are going the extra
mile. But it is these things that the DA refuses to see and refuses to take
note of.

I think it is very clear that we need to be very honest in terms of our
reflections on what is happening in our schools and also to recognise those
positive contributions which our teachers are making across the board. At
the same time, we, in the Western Cape, firmly support the view that we
cannot tolerate the situation where particular officials in our department,
and who are serving our schools, do not focus on the work that they are
supposed to do. In that context, we need to deal with those officials and
to take very firm steps. At the same time, we need to acknowledge that
there are many of our officials and teachers across the board who are
working hard and helping our schools to get on track. It is these
contributions that we need to acknowledge.

I really want to commend the Minister for the speech that she has made and
also for the guidance which she has provided to our provinces. Tomorrow, in
our legislature, I will submit our Western Cape education budget in which,
in detail, we will outline the measures in terms of how we propose to
support the call made in our Minister’s speech last year that we need to
focus very firmly on dealing with programmes to develop quality education
in all of our schools.

It is very clear that the education system of our country needs to focus on
promoting equity, expanding access and also making sure that we have
redress across the board. We have to provide knowledge and skills, and by
so doing we need to assist in the fight against poverty and unemployment.
We need to produce scientists, inventors, technologists and creative talent
to keep us, as a country, viable in the face of global challenges. This is
the excellence and quality which we seek.

We often look to our national leadership for guidance in determining
priorities, setting standards of excellence and in regard to policy. We are
very grateful for the direction given by the national department regarding
the interventions, particularly the Quality Improvement, Development,
Support and Upliftment Programme, Qids-Up. This particular initiative which
has been driven at national level has helped us to be strategic, to be
analytical about our most needy schools and, in fact, to align our funding
and focus on schools in the poorest quintiles.

The multifaceted Qids-Up approach is a useful model because it looks
holistically at a variety of elements in the learning environment at those
schools. In our province, Qids-Up - the dedicated fund that has been
secured by our Minister in this regard - is focusing, for the first time,
on providing libraries to schools that have never had libraries before;
providing teacher development in our schools; utilising those funds to
assist our teachers in terms of advanced certificates in education; and
also making major improvements with regard to the infrastructure in those
schools.

Qids-Up is one of the programmes in our province which we see contributing
directly to boosting quality in our schools. The no-fee schools project
represents a key strategic intervention and is also beginning to bear fruit
in our province. Because only 14,5% of the learners in our province were
allocated to the poorest quintiles, that is quintile 1 and 2, what we have
done as a province is to offer our quintile 3 schools, on a voluntary
basis, the opportunity to accept no-fee school status - which they have
done. We now have a situation where over 37% of the learners in our
province are in no-fee schools.

One of the important points to make is that we need to make sure that those
of our schools that are charging fees have a clear policy in place to
inform parents of their rights to apply for full or partial exemption. One
of the problems which we face is that many of our parents are not aware of
this; and we have a situation where our schools do not take active steps to
inform them of their rights in this regard.

Some of our schools are then placed in a situation where they, in fact,
begin to put pressure on our parents who, in situations like that, cannot
afford to pay fees. This is something which we are monitoring in our
province, to make sure that fees are not used by some of our former model C
schools to exclude parents who cannot pay the fees. This means ongoing
focus and monitoring.

I also want to say that the emphasis from the national Minister, in terms
of FET college recapitalisation, is also contributing in very concrete ways
to developing our provincial growth and development strategy in our
province and actually to strengthen the six colleges in the Western Cape.
In our province, we have seen that the allocation to the FET sector has
increased by over 17,5% and that the nationally driven courses are now a
reality in each one of colleges in our province. We have found that we have
full take-up across the province, regarding these courses.

Our commitment at the national level to expanding the early childhood
development strategy is something which is beginning to have an impact
across our province. Today, I want to appeal that one of the key issues we
need to focus on is a clear timeframe regarding employing our Grade R
teachers and formally making them part of the educational establishments at
all of our schools. As a province, we are moving increasingly away from
supporting ECD sites to make sure that our schools are given extra
provisions for infrastructure, to make sure that Grade R, in particular,
happens and that we support them at that level.

Hon Minister, we in the Western Cape want to welcome the pending mass
literacy campaign which you have announced. We believe that, in the context
of many of our initiatives around adult basic education, and also in the
context of some of our projects which have been initiated, which focus on
mass literacy, this national campaign is going to actively support our
initiatives to ensure that we focus on literacy amongst all the people in
our province who cannot read and write yet. We believe that this will be a
major assistance and boost to the campaigns in our province.

I believe that the combination of early childhood development as well as
the mass literacy campaign aimed at our parents will contribute to
assisting in building quality education at all levels within our province.
We believe that families’ literacy is also critical in terms of improving
basic literacy and numeracy levels, which are critical, especially in the
foundation phase.

The contribution which we have made in the Western Cape, with regard to
numeracy and literacy, is to pilot a Teaching Assistant Project through
which we have deployed over 510 teaching assistants to 163 schools. We are
working to make sure that the training that they are receiving at our FET
colleges is accredited.

One of the most exciting things about this project is the fact that many of
these teaching assistants who now find themselves supporting our educators
in the classroom have now approached our department for assistance, in
terms of actually becoming teachers and choosing that as a career path.

Our programme of testing on a provincial level has given us clear
indications that we are making strides, particularly on literacy. But,
clearly, what is required is to redouble our efforts, especially regarding
numeracy in the foundation phase.

It is true that our province faces major challenges regarding safety. We
find that the social pathologies in many of our communities impact on our
schools. It is clear to us that the measures in the Education Laws
Amendment Bill, which are going to give particular powers to our schools in
regard to testing for illegal substances and also to search for dangerous
weapons, are part of the initiatives which are going to assist us in the
province.

Unless we are able to build partnerships with community police forums to
get the active involvement of our parents and to have an initiative where
we relook at the codes of conduct in our schools and get buy-in and support
for them, we are not going to deal with the challenges that we face. I
thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr G A LUCAS (Northern Cape): Madam Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon
Minister and hon Deputy Minister, colleagues, MECs from provinces and hon
members of the House, let me state from the outset that it is always an
honour and a privilege to participate in policy debates of this House, as
they afford us the opportunity to communicate to the rest of the nation the
work and progress we are making as provinces in advancing the collective
agenda of providing quality education to all our people. This platform
gives us an opportunity to communicate the necessary tools that we are
implementing to ensure that education across the system is delivered in a
qualitative way.

We all know that education is among those areas of concurrent functions
that require the participation of provinces and national government in the
provision of quality education. I’m sure it will only be those who are
naive and selective who will not want us to review the capacity of our
state to deliver quality service to our people. It’s very important that
all of us engage in this discussion in a sober, appropriate and mature
manner in order to ensure that, at the end of the day, what is desirable
and achievable is achieved, and not pursue political interest ourselves as
those who proclaim that the discussion on the developmental state is
focused on particular interests.

We have, as a province, within the spirit of co-operative governance,
ensured that all our provincial plans are in line with the national
priorities of the education sector and that our budget adequately addresses
this national interest. Amongst the key priorities catered for in this
financial year is the implementation of Qids-Up, a programme which my
colleague has spoken about. What we would be attending to as an immediate
task is to ensure that we appropriately resource all our primary schools
with basic requirements in order for them to be able to fulfil their
responsibilities.

We will be providing the necessary learning materials, in particular the
creation of classroom reading resource centres or reading resource corners,
which will have 100 fiction books in each classroom, and we will also
provide our schools with other age-appropriate reading, mathematics and
science materials. We are doing this because it is necessary to ensure that
Qids-Up succeeds and, in that context, ensure that our schools succeed. We
would also be ensuring during this financial year that each learner in the
FET band has a minimum of seven textbooks as a further mechanism of giving
the necessary impetus to Qids-Up.

In addition to this, as a province, we are about to finalise our learner
tracking system. This innovative mechanism of the province will make it
possible to have an electronic information system that captures all the
information relating to learners in our education system. Therefore, it is
going to be possible to track where these learners are, their social
conditions, what impedes their ability to be able to succeed and the kind
of interventions we as a government must make to ensure that our children
succeed.

This learner tracking system will be able to monitor a child from Grade R
to Grade 12. Therefore, we will be able to know where that child reported
for school and whether that child has been able to exit the system. We will
be able to track if the child is not in the system and we will be able to
know where that child is.

These are the kinds of innovations that come from provinces to ensure that
we are able to succeed as a nation and not sit idle and worry about the
kind of developmental state we want to have, because our people want
delivery and that is what we need to do, Madam Chair.

We are also striving to do all these things with the explicit intention of
raising learner achievement. To this extent, we have adopted our strategy
to raise learner achievement across the system. Our belief is that all
learners are equal and that each can achieve. We must thus be able to do
everything necessary to provide the resources and support in order to make
sure that our children succeed. We have made it our responsibility to
create conducive conditions for all our schools to offer and deliver
quality education to all our children irrespective of their socioeconomic
status in our society.

The other programme on which we are beginning to make real progress is in
the area of school building infrastructure that the Minister has alluded
to. We are already moving away from only building classrooms, ablution
facilities and administration blocks and then believing that we have built
a well-equipped school.

This year, regarding our two new schools that we are going to build, we are
going to ensure that they encompass all the facilities that make an ideal
school functional, with a library, media centre, science laboratory and
computer centre. [Applause.] This, we are doing because we want our schools
to be schools and centres of learning and also of community life, and not
facilities with only physical infrastructure but nothing exciting to
encourage our learners to strive to learn better.

In the past financial year we started off with our flagship programme
whereby communities assisted us with the building of additional classrooms
at 20 of our schools. This year we will further extend this venture, which
not only contributes to job creation but also helps with skills
development, because FET colleges help us to skill these community members
to be able to build our schools.

This is our intervention in the second economy and we are hopeful that as
we roll it out, we will be able to share the expertise of other colleagues
and other provinces on how this venture of the community building schools
and ensuring that communities take ownership of the schools is assisting in
job creation and poverty eradication.

Furthermore, our school nutrition programme thus far has created 1 400 jobs
for women across the province. We feed for 174 days, which is above the
national norm. [Applause.] What this confirms is that if we manage our
feeding programme strictly, as a poverty intervention mechanism, and
therefore use the communities to feed our children, we can do more with the
resources allocated to us and be able to empower our communities. But, more
importantly, we are able to give our children nutritional meals each day.

What we are striving for is to make sure that we are able to achieve the
target of ensuring that we are able to feed our children for 200 days in
each academic year. I am sure we can move collectively with the national
department towards achieving this particular objective.

Our only area of concern is the fact that our conditional grant allocations
thus far do not take into account the new demarcated areas of Kgalagadi and
Pampierstad, but we are still able to make sure that we feed our children
for 174 days a year.

An issue that my colleague raised concerning the challenge of the no-fee-
paying schools will receive greater attention and support during this
financial year. In essence, we are looking at what other barriers or
constraints exist in some of the schools which prevent the poor from
realising the objective of receiving quality education.

One of the areas that we have given attention to is to look at our urban
and rural nodes. Is it not time that we declare all those schools in those
particular nodes no-fee-paying schools? Such a step will ensure that, as
government, we intervene in a collective and integrated manner in the areas
that we have defined as pockets of absolute poverty and will ensure that
those children in those communities are able to receive quality education.
In this context, we are looking at the intervention that we can make in
Kgalagadi to make sure that children in our schools in Kgalagadi district –
a newly incorporated rural node – are able to receive quality education.

I am informed that in Kgalagadi there are learners who travel more than 10
km each day to school. This means that when those children arrive at school
they are already tired. The weather conditions of the Northern Cape are
extreme: when it is cold it is extremely cold and when it is hot it is
extremely hot. These children have to travel every day for 200 days on foot
– most of them on bare feet – to some of these far-flung schools. This
means that our learner transport system is not working effectively.

We are working very hard to ensure that we are able to achieve these
particular objectives. We believe that these interventions will help us to
succeed as a nation.

In conclusion, let me also indicate that we all know that South Africa has
been short-listed as a possible site to host the Square Kilometre Array and
that the Northern Cape has been identified as the likely host of this SKA
in South Africa. The implication of this is that if South Africa wins the
right to host the SKA, we will become a major global player in the field of
space technology and space science.

What that means is that we will need astronomers, scientists and engineers.
It is in this context that we are working together with the Department of
Science and Technology and other social partners to ensure that our
Dinaledi schools succeed. To this end, we have made real investments in our
schools. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Sihlalo, ngibingelela uNgqongqoshe woMnyango
Wezemfundo, iPhini lakhe, oNgqongoqoshe bezifundazwe ngokwahlukana kwazo,
nabahlonishwa. [Chairperson, I greet the Minister of the Department of
Education, her Deputy, MECs from different provinces and hon members.]

We are aware that one of the department’s goals is to increase access to
quality early childhood development. Minister, such ECD work is only
visible at former model C schools and not in the previously disadvantaged
schools. There are very few centres and they are not properly structured,
are underresourced and have untrained teachers. We therefore urge the
department to speed up the establishment of ECD centres. We are aware that
the department expects to meet its target by 2010.

Coming to safety at schools, some of our schools are completely unsafe,
these days. Pupils of 13 years of age carry knives and guns at schools. In
some schools there is drug abuse and things of this kind are happening
there, and the community itself is not involved in schools. Parents
themselves are not responsible enough for their kids, and members of the
community are manufacturing and selling drugs to our pupils. There is no
longer that consciousness among our community itself.

Lafa elihle kakhulu, lapho kwakuthiwa khona ingane yakho ingane yami!
Ngqongqoshe, mangisho ukuthi kubalulekile ukuthi siqinise umkhankaso obizwa
ngokuthi i-Adopt-a-Cop ngani ngoba nginesiqiniseko sokuthi izelelesi
ezifana nalezi zizoncipha kakhulu. Kanjalo masibe nomkhankaso futhi
sibambisene nawo umphakathi wakuleli.
Mangize ezinganeni zamantombazane ezikhulelwa esikoleni. Ziyakhulelwa
ngisho zineminyaka eyi-14. Umbuzo okumele sizibuze wona ukuthi: Ubani
okhulelisa lezi zingane? Ngabe abafana besikole noma amadoda athanda
izingane ezincane? Okwesibili, ngabe umkhankaso wamajazi omkhwenyana
awufinyeleli yini ezindlebeni zabo? Okokugcina, njengalokhu lezi zingane
zizincane kangaka, ngabe zithonjiswa ngabesilisa yini? Kwenzekani ngempela
ezweni lakithi?

Ngqongqoshe, siyakuthakasela esikufunda emaphepheni okuhlongozayo, noma-ke
singazikholwa izinto esizifunda emaphepheni. Kodwa manje inkinga ukuthi
ngabe yizingane zamantombazane kuphela ezithola isijeziso noma bajeziswa
bobabili nomfana? Ngikhuluma mayelana nokuthi ingane yentombazane izohlala
ekhaya iminyaka emibili uma kade ikhulelwe. Kule minyaka emibili ngabe
kuzokwenzekani kulo mntwana wentombazane? Asibhekisise ukuthi yini engase
ivelele ingane yentombazane. Okunye, kungani yona ingane yomfana ingahlali
iminyaka emibili ekhaya ingafundi? (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Gone are the good old days when every parent was referred to as a parent
to every child! Hon Minister, let me say that, it is important to intensify
the Adopt-a-Cop campaign because I believe that criminals like these will
be diminished greatly. Let us also involve the community in this campaign.

Let me focus on the issue of girls who become pregnant whilst still at
school. They become pregnant even at the age of 14. The question that we
need to ask ourselves is: Who is impregnating these children? Could it be
school boys or old men who are abusing small children? Secondly, does the
safe sex campaign not reach them? Lastly, do these children - at such a
young age - reach puberty through men? What exactly is happening in our
country?

Hon Minister, we are happy with what we read in the newspapers about what
is intended, even though we do not necessarily believe what we read in
newspapers. But now the problem is, who is really being punished here? Is
it girls only or both boys and girls? I am talking about the fact that when
a girl is pregnant, she will have to stay at home for two years. What will
happen to the girl in these two years? Let us look at what might happen to
the girl-child. Another thing is, why would the boy not also stay at home
for two years like the girl?]

Let us embark on a serious campaign which will involve parents, teachers
and the community at large in order for us to curb this problem.

Ngqongqoshe, uma ngiza ekuthuthukisweni kothisha, siyakuthakasela okwenziwa
uMnyango wakho ekukhuthazeni izinga lomsebenzi wothisha, ikakhulukazi
othishanhloko, kodwa ngikholelwa ukuthi akwanele, ikakhulukazi kothisha
abagxile kweze-mathematics nezobuchwepheshe. Ngiyethemba uMnyango wakho
uzokwenza ngakho konke okusemandleni ukukhuphula izikole ezibizwa
ngeDinaledi schools ukuze phela kugxilwe kabanzi kuzona. UMnyango wezwe
lonke mawuzimisele, kungabi yizifundazwe kuphela.
Uma ngiza ohlwelweni lokulandelelela indlela okwenzeka ngayo izinto, omunye
umhlonishwa waseNyakatho Kapa aphawule ngalo, Ngqongqoshe, siyikomiti
elibhekele ezemfundo kwisishayamthetho sikazwelonke sinentshisekelo yokwazi
ukuthi uMnyango wakho umaphi ngalolu hlelo lokulandelela? Siyabona inani
lezingane eziqala ukungena isikole ebangeni lokuqala - inani lisuke
liphezulu; uma zifika ebangeni leshumi, inani lisuke selehlile
ngokumangazayo. Akuqondakali ukuthi ezinye zisuke sezishonephi.
Kubalulekile ukuthi sibe nolwazi ngalokhu, kanjalo sibe nolwazi nangobulili
bazo.

Uma ngiza kubafundi abanezidingo ezihlukile, ngikholelwa ukuthi ngenye
ingxenye ebalulekile eMnyangweni wakho. Mangisho ukuthi siyikomidi
Elibhekele ezemfundo eMkhandlwini Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe, sesike
savakashela eMpumalanga naseMpumalanga Kapa lapho sathola isimo
esingagculisi neze. Izingqalasizinda ziyabheda, izikole zithembele
ezinhlanganweni ezingekho ngaphansi kukahulumeni ezingasabonwa nangokhalo,
othisha abaqeqeshiwe ngokwanele. Uma ngingenza umzekeliso, ulwazi
ngezempilo othisha abanalo; abanalo ikhono lokuhlukanisa phakathi kwengane
ekhubazekile ngokwengqondo kanye nengane ethatha kancane kwezemfundo.
Sibona kunesidingo esiphuthumayo sokuthi uMnyango ubukisise lolu hlobo
lwezikole futhi ubambisane noMnyango Wezokuthuthukiswa Komphakathi.

Uma ngiza ekuthuthukisweni kohlelo lwezempilo, ngithi ezempilo zibalulekile
kakhulu ezikoleni. Makube khona isikhwama esiphatha izinsiza zempilo kuzo
zonke izikole ukuze phela othisha bakwazi ukusiza izingane ngisho
zinomhuzukwana ongatheni. Mawuqhubeke uqiniswe umkhankaso kanye nezinhlelo
zokulwa neGciwane leNgculazi kanye neNgculazi kuzo zonke izikole,
ngokunjalo nabazali mababambisane nothisha kulolu hlelo. Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Minister, when it comes to the development of teachers, we thank your
department for uplifting the status of the teaching profession, especially
for the principals. But I think that is not enough particularly for the
teachers teaching both mathematics and technology. I believe that your
department will do everything in its power to increase the Dinaledi schools
so as to concentrate on them. The national department should also be
engaged, it must not only be the provinces.

When it comes to the follow-up programme, hon Minister, the member from the
Northern Cape talked about the fact that, as the Select Committee on
Education in the NCOP, we are eager to know the standpoint of your
department in this regard. We always see a high number of learners starting
school in Grade one, and as they move from grade to grade, the number drops
drastically and only a handful of learners make it to Grade 12. It is not
clear what happens to the other learners. It is important that we have
information about this, and about the gender of learners.

When it comes to learners with special needs - which I believe is one of
the most important issues in your department - I must say that as the
Select Committee on Education in the NCOP, we visited Mpumalanga and the
Eastern Cape respectively and we found very unpleasant conditions. The
infrastructure is bad, schools depend on NGOs which are nowhere to be
found, and teachers are not adequately trained. One example here is that
teachers do not have any knowledge of health issues; they do not have the
skill to differentiate between a mentally retarded child and a slow
learner. We believe there is an urgent need for the department to look into
these kinds of schools and it must also work with the Department of Social
Welfare.

When it comes to the development of health programmes, I am saying that
health issues are very important at schools. There should be first-aid
boxes at all schools so that teachers are able to help pupils when they
sustain minor injuries like lacerations. The intensification of programmes
to fight HIV and Aids must proceed at all schools and parents should co-
operate with teachers on this programme. Thank you.[Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon
MECs and hon distinguished members of the House, our democracy is still
about dialogue; it is about expressing informed opinions; it is about
expressing genuine outrage; it is about changing one’s mind in the light of
better arguments; it is about accepting both the joys of victory and the
pains of defeat; it is about the rule of law; it is about the difference
between right and wrong; it is about orderly, efficient and caring
government; it is about rights and responsibilities; it is about the quest
for beauty, intelligence, creativity, hope, kindness, humility, co-
operation, friendliness, trust, conviction, respect and courtesy in our
living environments. I would like to reaffirm our common commitment to a
new and better society.

Prof Njabulo Ndebele’s words remind us why we are all here. We are here to
serve our people; to make sure that all promises made are kept. His words
also resonate well with the pledge we made as government, that of building
a better life for all.

In fulfilling this pledge, the Department of Education has committed itself
to working with provinces in ensuring that learners from disadvantaged
communities receive nutrition, health care and the general, academic,
physical and emotional support they need in order to participate actively
and to benefit from the education that we provide.

With regard to nutrition, the national school nutrition programme is being
successfully implemented in most provinces, with a total of 5 000 996
learners in more than 18 000 schools being provided with meals nationally.
There are 7 000 vegetable gardens which have been established in schools to
date; 12 assistant directors were deployed across all provinces to support
schools with existing gardens and to assist schools in establishing food
production projects; and 205 workshops were conducted countrywide on basic
gardening skills and rainwater harvesting. Partnerships with other
government departments and the private sector enabled access to essential
resources such as water tanks and garden implements.

We take heart from the comments made by the MEC from the Northern Cape,
when he said that they have expanded the number of days and that, indeed,
the Northern Cape has included certain high schools, because it does not
make sense that, from the same household, we have one sibling in high
school who is not provided with nutrition while the other one is provided
with nutrition.

In collaboration with the Financial and Fiscal Commission, the Department
of Education is currently assessing the feasibility of extending the
national school nutrition programme to include secondary school learners.
This will address the concern about siblings from the same household in
primary and high schools.

Our challenge still remains in most of our rural schools. According to the
Ministerial Committee on Rural Education, the most important characteristic
of rural education is poverty. Therefore an integrated approach involving
all relevant departments and other stakeholders has to be developed.

The department will be organising a national colloquium on rural education
with relevant stakeholders, including the Nelson Mandela Trust, the
National House of Traditional Leaders, the business sector and other sister
government departments. The colloquium must deal with the linkage between
education and rural transformation, a linkage that seeks to underscore the
inescapable forces of change that rural and farm communities are faced
with, and how education can equip people with appropriate knowledge, skills
and information to expand their choices and how it can enable them to
exercise these choices effectively - the issue of ICT comes to mind, for
instance.

Dr Tolo has correctly expressed concern about Abet. In fact, the “basic” in
adult basic education and training gives my hon Minister a degree of
unease, because she feels it is rather limiting and that one should talk
about adult education and training.

In addition to the elements raised by the hon Minister regarding the
review, it would be necessary to ensure that research occurs in terms of
where it is that learners are found, so that classes can be offered at
times that are suitable to the learners and at an available place other
than school classrooms. This would mean that we would have to look at the
formal working environment and the informal working environment for this
particular purpose. It would also mean that one has to link adult education
and training with the skills identified by the Accelerated and Shared
Growth Initiative for South Africa, and the Joint Initiative on Priority
Skills Acquisition in terms of food production, plastering, gardening,
building and other skills.

The hon Minister has spoken about the issue of literacy in her budget
speech and the intention of the Department of Education to ensure that we
expand this very significantly. For the period February to March 2008 we
are projecting that 1,2 million learners who are either illiterate or
functionally illiterate will be reached. We would like to thank the hon Dr
Lewis and his team for doing a wonderful job in developing a new concept
towards massification of our literacy campaign.

You may recall that during the 2001 state of the nation address, President
Thabo Mbeki directed that the Department of Sport and Recreation, the
Department of Arts and Culture and the Department of Education should
strive to inculcate the values of our democratic Constitution in our young
people. Sport, arts, culture and music are necessary vehicles to attain
such an ideal. The department has established a unit called the school
enrichment unit to co-ordinate and strengthen the delivery of national
extramural and extracurricular school enrichment programmes, not only to
promote mass participation in sport by young people but to promote social
transformation and cohesion.

Some of the arts, culture and music flagship programmes that our department
has co-ordinated in collaboration with the Department of Arts and Culture
include the SA Schools Choral Eisteddfod, the national indigenous games,
music and movement festival as well as the national language festival
concert. You may remember that the national language festival is an idea
that emerged from this House, many years ago.

These national programmes involve thousands of young people throughout the
country. Through these initiatives, learners are not only given the
opportunity to showcase their talents, but also develop love for and
appreciation of many forms of music, dance and culture. Importantly, these
events provide learners from different provinces with the opportunity to
get together and develop an understanding of each other. This helps to
build a common South African national identity.

I invite hon members to attend the provincial championships of our
Eisteddfod that will be held between June and July; and the national
championship which will be held from 2 August 2007 to 5 August 2007 at the
Coca Cola dome in Randburg.

The national indigenous games, music and movement festival will be held in
East London in September as part of our Heritage Month celebrations.
Learners will participate in indigenous games such as debeke, jukskei,
kgathi, morabaraba, drie-blikkies, hopscotch and tik-tok, which is a Khoi
and San indigenous game. They will also demonstrate a wide variety of
indigenous dances and movements and present a varied repertoire of
indigenous and traditional music.

On 17 March 2005, the hon Minister of Education as well as the hon Minister
of Sport and Recreation signed a framework for collaboration in school
sport. The national co-ordinating committee envisaged in the school sport
framework has been established, and it has drafted and adopted a 5-year
school sport programme for 2007 to 2011.

School sport events such as the national schools’ aquatics, national
schools’ athletics, South African schools’ winter games, summer games and
cross-country races are part of the 5-year programme co-ordinated by the
national co-ordinating committee. It is important to note that the national
co-ordinating committee is aiming to integrate the national school sport
programme and to make the programme as inclusive as possible.

Our department is co-ordinating extramural and extracurricular school
enrichment programmes as a vehicle, not only to strengthen the
implementation of the National Curriculum Statements but also to promote
moral regeneration and the healthy physical and emotional wellbeing of our
learners. This must surely lead to social transformation and cohesion
through building a South African nation, grounded in the positive values of
our Constitution.

The hon Tolo quite correctly pointed out that we have a particular
responsibility to dispel the myth that says FET colleges are inferior.
Indeed, the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs and I have visited eight of the
nine provinces within a year. Our next meeting will be in the Northern Cape
and will take place on 15 June 2007. This is where we will promote dialogue
in terms of democracy, the values that underpin our Constitution as well as
profile our further education and training colleges as wonderful places for
developing occupational and vocational skills.

In the past year we reached more than 30 000 learners and the fact that we
are oversubscribed in our new programme is evidence that the message has
indeed got through. We also want to assure the members that FET colleges
will provide highly sophisticated ICT capacity so that every learner has
access to the Internet and would be computer literate in terms of any of
the 11 important learning areas that have been introduced.

The journey that we have to travel is a long and arduous one. Perhaps we
should end by referring to the MEC of the Northern Cape who spoke about
learners in rural areas. It is therefore appropriate to conclude by
reflecting on the more than 500 000 learners who journey on foot for more
than one hour, daily, to and from school.

To address this urgent need, the national Department of Education and the
Department of Transport, together with the provincial departments of
education and transport, will meet to consider and develop policy proposals
on the provision of alternatives, including bicycles, establishing hostels
in sparsely populated rural areas, safety regulations, uniforms, subsidies
and a range of other issues incidental to the provision of effective
transport to our learners because that, indeed, is a matter that we cannot
overlook. My time has now expired. Thank you so much, Deputy Chairperson.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon MECs, hon members and
officials from the Department of Education, the IFP commends some of the
key achievements of the Department of Education over the past year, such as
the employment and training of teachers, school nutrition, the introduction
of no-fee schools and the roll-out of adult education and FET colleges etc.
However, the IFP will continue to remind this House of the legacy of the
infrastructure backlogs that we are faced with in the KwaZulu-Natal
province.

School pupils in KwaZulu-Natal get the smallest per capita expenditure
allocated to them each year, despite having the largest school population
and the largest infrastructure backlogs in the country. KwaZulu-Natal’s
education budget allocation is simply not enough, since KwaZulu-Natal, with
its 6 000 schools, has the biggest school population in the country.

Parents in areas such as Empangeni town have fewer schools while the
population is growing fast and increasing, and no schools have been built
since 1994 in Empangeni town where I reside. [Interjections.] No schools
have been built since 1994 and anyone who disputes that should see me.

Children who live outside towns, in the rural areas, travel long distances
and members from other provinces have mentioned this. A rural area is just
another rural area, no matter what. They travel long distances and there is
no help and no financial support for transport or whatever.

The IFP is very concerned that our educators and learners have become
victims of violence in and around our schools. Erecting fences around
schools and banning scissors is not enough, but more effective strategies
such as the employment of security guards and the installation of metal
detectors at school gates must be in place to increase the level of
security in schools.

The school nutrition programme and no-fee schools policy need to be
extended to all schools as one of the key pillars to fight poverty. Many
schools that are indeed poverty-stricken were left out of the no-fee
schools facility because of the criteria that were used.

The strikes affecting the whole nation today must be avoided through
improving employees’ salaries in good time, before they take to the
streets.

Izinkinga ezidala uhlevane KwaZulu-Natali futhi ezidinga ukubhekisiswa
yilezi ezilandelayo. Emakhaya izikole azikho eduze nalapho kuhlala khona
abafundi. Ibanga abalihambayo lide kakhulu. Sicela uMnyango usize kule
nkinga. Abafundi mabathole izinto zokuhamba ezizobasiza.

Okwesibili, ukubulala esizwa ngakho okwenzeka phakathi komfundi nomfundi,
uthisha nomfundi noma uthisha nothisha kunyantisa igazi. Akube khona
umnyakazo owenziwayo ukuqeda lesi simo. Onogada bayadingeka uma kunje –
abaphatha izibhamu, hhayi izagila.

Okwesithathu, utshwala nezidakamizwa eduze kwezikole akubhekisiswe. Lokhu
kukhona, futhi kuyabulala. Nalapho ngiqhamuka khona KwaZulu-Natali kukhalwa
ngalokho, koNgwavuma kukhalwa ngalokho. Izimali ezikhokhelwa isikole
aziphele ezikoleni ezinswempu, emiphakathini enswempu; hhayi ukukhetha
amabala abantu bebe behlupheka ngokufanayo.

Ngiyawubonga uMnyango Wezemfundo ngoba uma sikhala, noma seseqa ucingo,
awusixoshi. NoNgqongqoshe wethu uyasizwela uma kukhona izikhalo
eziphuthumayo. Siyafohla nazo ngoba (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The problems that raise emotions and that need to be looked at in KwaZulu-
Natal are as follows: In rural areas there are no schools closer to where
learners live. The distance they walk to school is very long. We request
the department to help with this problem. Let the learners be given
transport that will help them.

Secondly, the killing of a learner by another learner, or of a teacher by a
learner or between teachers themselves is shocking. And something must be
done to get rid of this situation. Security guards are needed in these
conditions – and they need to be armed with firearms not knobkerries.

Thirdly, the question of liquor and drugs near schools should be revisited.
These things are there and they kill. Even where I come from in KwaZulu-
Natal the outcry is just about these two and even as far as Ingwavuma,
there is an outcry about drugs and alcohol. School fees from impoverished
schools must be abolished, and this should not be for a selected few
communities as we know that hunger knows no borders.

I thank the Department of Education because when we raise a concern, even
if we do not follow proper channels, it does not chase us away. And our
Minister is sensitive when there are urgent concerns. We simply take a
short cut and force our way through with these concerns because ...]

... I think needs must when the devil drives.

Ngiyabonga kakhulu. [Thank you very much.]
Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die Minister het in Oktober
verlede jaar by Unisa die belangrikheid van moedertaalonderrig vir minstens
die eerste ses jaar van skoolopleiding erken en ons, as die Vryheidsfront,
verwelkom dit van harte. Die VF Plus is daarop gesteld dat Afrikaans en
ander landstale dieselfde status as Engels op onderrigvlak moet hê. Dit is
verblydend dat daar universiteite en ander tersiêre instellings is waarin
Afrikatale ontwikkel en ingefasseer word.

Vroeër vanjaar was die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies in Gauteng by ’n baie
netjies geboude skool, ’n skool wat gebou is in 1980, reeds ’n
dubbelverdieping skool. Maar daar was net 42 kinders by die skool, terwyl
die skool iets soos ’n duisend kon huisves. Op navraag by die skoolhoof het
die skoolhoof aangedui dat die ouers die kinders uit die townships neem na
die dorpe en stede toe sodat hulle daar in Engels onderrig kan word.

Opleiding in ’n ander taal as Engels is nie minderwaardig nie. Studente wat
voorheen aan sulke universiteite studeer het, het Engels mettertyd
bemeester en is vandag goed gekwalifiseerd en in goeie beroepe in Suid-
Afrika. Tans word Afrikaans by tradisionele Afrikaanse universiteite
onderdruk. By sulke universiteite behoort Afrikaans die voertaal te wees
vir daardie studente wat dit verkies. Die neiging om bloot te verengels
moet teengestaan word, en dit is wat die VF Plus doen.

Ten grondslag van ’n land se ekonomiese groei lê tot ’n baie groot mate die
opleiding van studente in verskillende ingeneurs- en tegniese beroepe. Die
bron van kennis vir hierdie studierigtings is inderdaad natuur- en
skeikunde en wiskunde en die agb Minister het daarna verwys. Dis
ingewikkelde studierigtings wat van kleins af bemeester moet word. ’n Kind
kan dit die beste bemeester indien so ’n kind of student taalvaardig is om
die ingewikkelde begrippe en konstruksies te bestudeer, aan die een kant,
en andersyds moet die studierigtings aangebied word deur ’n persoon wat ewe
taalvaardig is. Afrikaans is naas Engels ’n gevestigde wetenskapstaal. Dit
moet vertroetel word en daar moet ook geleenthede geskep word vir die ander
amptelike tale om eweneens te ontwikkel as ’n wetenskapstaal.

Afrika het baie potensiaal en die agb Adjunkminister het verwys na die vele
kultuurfasette wat by wyse van danse aangebied word en dit word verwelkom.
Dit maak Afrika aantreklik. Afrika het enorme potensiaal. Die koloniale
moondhede het ryk geword uit Afrika. Afrika se potensiaal moet ontgin word.
Daardie potensiaal is latent en die VF Plus sal enige poging om al die
kulture te ontwikkel van harte ondersteun. Baie dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chair, in October last year, at Unisa, the
Minister acknowledged the importance of mother-tongue education for at
least the first six years of schooling, and we, as the FF Plus, welcome it
wholeheartedly. It is a matter of principle to the FF Plus that Afrikaans
and other official languages should have the same standing as English at
educational level. It is heartening that there are universities and other
tertiary institutions where African languages are being developed and
phased in.

Earlier this year the NCOP visited a very neatly built school in Gauteng, a
school that was built in 1980; it was a double-storey school even then. But
only 42 children attend this school, which can accommodate approximately 1
000 pupils. In reply to an enquiry about this, the principal indicated that
parents take their children from the townships to towns and cities to be
taught in English there.

Education in a language other than English is not inferior. Students who
previously studied at universities like these mastered English in due
course and today they are well-qualified and have good professions in South
Africa. At present Afrikaans is being suppressed at traditionally Afrikaans
universities. At these universities Afrikaans should be the medium of
instruction for those students who prefer it. The tendency to simply
anglicise should be opposed, and this is what the FF Plus is doing.

To a very great extent the foundation of a country’s economic growth is the
training of students in various engineering and technical professions. The
source of knowledge for these fields of study is, in fact, physical
science, chemistry and mathematics, and the hon the Minister referred to
this. These are complicated fields of study that have to be mastered from
an early age. On the one hand, a child can master them best if that child
or student has the language competence to study complicated concepts and
constructions, while on the other hand the fields of study must be taught
by a person who has the same language competence. Next to English,
Afrikaans is an established scientific language. It must be cherished and
similar opportunities must also be created for the other official languages
to develop as scientific languages.

Africa has a lot of potential and the hon Deputy Minister referred to the
many cultural facets that are presented through dance, and this is
welcomed. This makes Africa attractive. Africa has enormous potential. The
colonial powers became rich from Africa. Africa’s potential must be
developed. That potential is latent and the FF Plus will wholeheartedly
support any effort to develop all cultures.
Thank you.]

Mr J MAKGATO (Eastern Cape): Chair of Chairs, hon Minister, Deputy
Minister, MECs present, hon members of the NCOP, members of the media,
ladies and gentlemen, my chairperson from the province who is here to
listen to the debate and take some notes, allow me to congratulate the
Minister on her well-researched and focused speech. In so doing, let me
latch on to the challenges that we have in terms of the National Curriculum
Statement.

In my policy speech at the Eastern Cape legislature, I alluded to the
shortage of maths, science and technology educators. I also indicated that,
as the Council of Ministers, we have agreed that Minister Naledi Pandor
must lead a process of contracting foreign educators. This would allow us
to improve our skills base and it would release teachers and ensure that
they are indeed reskilled to be able to discharge their duties.

Companies in the private sector are good at reskilling people to ensure
that a company is aligned with that which the company needs to do.
Education is no different, and indeed we need to ensure that we reskill our
teachers.

Without waiting for that process to unfold, I have approached universities
in the province to assist in filling the gaps in our schools. All
universities sent representatives to a meeting that we held. Subsequent to
that, I got two invitations, and I’m waiting for more.

It is interesting that, like us, universities identified one of the problem
areas as the foundation phase and they want to assist us to correct this.
If you build your house on a shaky foundation, its beauty is negated by the
faulty foundation and before you know it, it starts crumbling.

They also identified the form of assistance that they could render to our
Dinaledi schools and our FET colleges. To disprove the belief that FET
colleges are inferior, interestingly, one of our FET colleges completed a
project that could not be completed by a municipality. People from FET
colleges built and completed houses, and people have occupied them. In an
effort to ensure that we eradicate mud structures, we engage FET colleges
in order further to better their skills.

We’ve also signed an e-learning agreement with Lower Saxony. We’ll put up a
colloquium to ensure that there is competition at high school and other
levels. We will challenge competitors to come up with projects and provide
them with mentors, and we’ll get independent people to judge these
projects.

In concluding my speech, let me deal with the two issues that everybody
keeps harping on, as well as the issue of teenage pregnancy. In the
province we have done a teenage pregnancy analysis and we have discovered
that there is an area where it is prevalent. This we did together with
iinkosi [chiefs], the council and the SABC.

UQabane uDlulane uyazi ukuba emaMpondweni kuthethwa ngedikazi. [Comrade
Dlulane is aware that Pondos refer to that kind of a person as idikazi.]

We want to ensure that whilst we do not agree with words such as “idikazi”
[a woman who gives birth to a child out of wedlock, according to amaMpondo
...]

... kodwa umntwana wesikolo akalilo “idikazi”. [... but a school child is
not a “idikazi”.]

She remains a school child.

Uyayazi loo nto uBaw’ uSogoni kuba ngummandla wakhe. [Mr Sogoni is aware of
that because that is in his precinct.]

We get a speaker to speak on a different theme every day to ensure that we
bring back the culture of learning and teaching, and respect for the
privacy of our children.

Moving to the decentralisation of our districts, I would want to say to
you, Chairperson, that we have moved forward. We have appointed 468 chief
education specialists and senior education specialists, to ensure that
those districts are able to deliver on their mandates. Among other things,
we also want to ensure that they are properly aligned. Currently we have 23
districts, and that is the reason we are stretched, as a department. We’d
rather concentrate on circuits, where you bring people closer to schools to
be able to give the support that is needed.

Regarding the school nutrition programme, I’d want to say that there is a
report - and I’m sure we’ll make it available to the Minister – on the
corruption that is prevalent therein. We are putting together a plan,
together with the departments of social development, health and economic
affairs to green the fields. We are saying: Let’s help the parents to feed
their children and move away from the notion that this project is a
business. It remains what it was originally intended to be, a poverty
alleviation programme. Thank you, Chair of Chairs.

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon MECs, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, all protocol observed, we appreciate what the hon
Minister is doing, especially in relation to no-fee schools. We also
realise that Rome was not built in a day and we applaud every effort made
thus far. It is with this in mind that we collectively seek solutions to
the challenges facing our country, particularly our schools.

However, follow-ups need to be made to establish if some of the poorest of
the poor benefit from community structures and safer schools programmes. If
they do not benefit, then those in need must be assisted and empowered.

In country towns, in rural areas, one finds children begging in front of
shops during school hours. Is it not compulsory for children to be at
school? Surely, the schools mark them as “absent”. What is being done about
the parents of such children? How much of the department’s resources and
funding are geared towards networking with community structures and
parents?

We are all aware of the murder case at one of our schools, and one gets the
impression that assaults are on the increase, hence the banning of sharp
objects and scissors at schools. We would like the Department of Education
to clarify three issues: firstly, who is responsible for children begging
during school hours? Secondly, who is responsible for children in schools,
particularly in classrooms? Thirdly, who assists the parents to understand
their rights with regard to the safety of their children?

If we say that children are our future, then let the present dictate the
value systems that our children will inherit. I need to bring to the
attention of the Minister of Education that some parents are very
negligent. In November, I asked the people of a specific school around
Eerste River that we come together and discuss these issues. Only a few
turned up.

In January I asked the school and the school governing body to invite me to
the school so that we could speak to the children. Till now I haven’t
received any response. So we see negligence there.

Last but not least, I would like to note here, in the name of the ID, the
generosity of spirit on the part of the hon Minister in admitting
shortcomings. This takes the sweetness out of criticising the ruling party.
Thank you, hon Chairperson.

Ms C M CRONJÉ (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, in this report I will focus on
four key areas, namely safe schools, the Masifundisane mass literacy
campaign, rural and poor schools excelling and learner transport.

With regard to safe schools, crime and violence are social evils that
cannot be addressed by education alone. In KwaZulu-Natal there is an
interdepartmental task team consisting of representatives from education,
community safety and liaison, the SA Police Service and transport which is
looking at short-term and long-term solutions. All schools have safety
committees consisting of principals, school governing body members, local
councillors, amakhosi, and so forth.

The department has embarked on road shows to consult, inform and guide
school governing bodies, principals, district circuits and ward managers
about security issues with this joint task team. Our goal for this year is
to align the safety committees with local police structures and community
policing forums. Where the principal has identified a safety risk, he or
she must inform the police or other security structures under whose
jurisdiction the school falls. This will guide the police when drawing up a
crime-combating plan for the area.

The indaba at King Goodwill Zwelithini’s royal palace at Ingwavuma was
attended by 5 000 people and addressed by His Majesty the King and myself
in an attempt to find a solution to the problems of schools, particularly
in the Obonjeni district. These problems are teenage pregnancy and very
high absenteeism due to certain cultural practices, and of course the usual
problems.

We are making an extra effort in the Obonjeni district, because it is our
poorest performing district. His Majesty emphasised that moral values
should be installed at home and there will be follow-up discussions on
these issues on the coming weekend.

We met with the stakeholders at KwaMbonambi last year, with a view to
identifying challenges and solutions to crime in the area - which is very
rife, following a spate of incidents that led to the closure of a number of
our schools in the Dondotha area, in particular.

The Tiisa Thuto pilot project started last year in 52 schools. This
initiative of Business Against Crime and partnership with ourselves
provides training and development for educators, learners and parents on
the problems of substance abuse, conflict, violence and gangsterism in
schools and in the community. These 52 schools were identified as crime
hotspots.

The fencing of schools in all high-risk areas has been prioritised. In the
past financial year we fenced an additional 147 schools and we are
continuing with that project this year. In the pilot project in the Nongoma
area and at schools in Inanda, Ntuzuma and KwaMashu, close to 400 security
guards were trained in conjunction with community policing forum and sector
managers last year, and we will continue with this training as well.

In order to assist Aids orphans, we have launched a project in partnership
with the Royal Netherlands Embassy and Media in Education Trust to turn our
schools into centres of care and support. A total of 728 schools have been
targeted in this four-year programme and the schools are being assisted to
build capacity through meetings, workshops on peer education, counselling,
nutrition, child care strategies, first aid, food gardens and support for
child-headed households. So, it’s quite a comprehensive programme,
generously funded by the Royal Netherlands Embassy, may I add, and I wish
to thank them at the same time.

A mass prayer rally on 15 April 2007 was attended by some 5 000 people in
Esikhawini, following several incidents of violence and criminal activity
in the Empangeni district in particular. Spiritual leaders and church
members from all faith groups and denominations attended the event to join
hands in prayer with school governing bodies, learners and so on.

Hon members, I really do regret that, in the National Assembly debate, the
IFP actually condemned that prayer rally. That is not all we are doing and
it is a pity that they should have chosen to condemn this, whilst it was
very well attended and supported even by my colleagues from the Eastern
Cape and Free State. I thank you for attending that very important and
moving event.

In order to assist schools, our legal component is drafting guidelines on
search and seizure to be conducted within the law. We also have a peace
pledge that we encourage our children and teachers to sign. It is a peace
pledge and a campaign that is aimed at individual accountability and
responsibility.

The second issue that I would like to deal with is the Masifundisane Adult
Literacy Campaign. Adult learners who want to read, write and count but who
are not interested in the formal Abet, as we know it now, now have a chance
in this exciting provincial programme. The aim is to have KwaZulu-Natal
declared a territory free of illiteracy by 2009 - quite an ambitious aim
but we are working towards that.

As we speak, more than 42 000 adult learners are in literacy classes in
this Masifundisane project across the province - in churches, on farms,
many from prisons, workplaces and in communities. Ninety-two partner
organisations are involved and our first group will be graduating very
soon. Teaching is conducted by trained facilitators and volunteers.
Exciting and effective teaching and learning material that is age
appropriate has been developed in isiZulu, the mother tongue of 80% of
people in KwaZulu-Natal, and this has been developed by our own colleagues.
Materials in isiXhosa, Sesotho, English and Braille are currently being
developed, and we should be launching and using those in the near future.

We aim to accelerate the pace in the 2007-08 financial year and, hopefully,
we will reach in excess of 300 000 learners and provide work to
approximately 3 000 facilitators and 300 supervisors and assessors in this
current financial year.

The third issue I would like to deal with is poor schools that excel. Some
of our best performing schools in KwaZulu-Natal, and I want to say this
very clearly, are located in the most rural areas and in our townships. The
two top candidates in mathematics and science in the 2006 senior
certificate examination across the province came from Umlazi. They came
from Umlazi Comtech School and Velabahleke High School. [Applause.] Both
these boys, who were the top candidates, obtained 100% in mathematics and
science. [Applause.] That really takes some doing.

At Emhlwaneni High School, in Uthukela district, 75 matric students all had
merit passes. At Mconjwana High School, in Umgungundlovu district, 40 out
of 55 matric students obtained matric exemptions and all 55 passed. In
Mathunjwa High School in the Vryheid district 55 matric students passed
with as many as 45 merit passes.

Thokozwayo - this really is a success story - a rural school in Mid-Illovo,
jumped from zero in 2005 to hero status by obtaining, in one year, a 100%
pass rate. Sizaminqubeko Secondary School, on the border of Mozambique,
also managed to pull itself up from below 20% to 100%. The zero to hero
principal from Thokozwayo High School, Bongani Ngcongo, said his turnaround
strategy involved teachers, parents and the school management team.
Together they tackled absenteeism and tardiness in teachers and pupils. He
said that was a recipe for success. We should be concentrating our efforts,
therefore, in my opinion, also on the human factor.

An individual, a good principal and a good teacher can make a massive
difference if they are competent and committed to education. This year we
rewarded nine schools that improved their pass rate from below 20% to above
60%, including the ones I have already spoken about, with science kits,
sports kits and library book vouchers. Schools that obtained a 100% pass
rate were rewarded with computer laboratories, if they did not already have
them.

Turning around a school, hon members, is possible. However, it requires
strong leadership and support from the department. Excellence can and must
be attained in all our schools, hence our motto for this year, which we
borrowed and slightly changed from your budget speech last year when you
posed the question, “Are we ready to excel?” Our motto for this year is:
Ready to excel. We hope we will live up to that.
The last area is learner transport ... [Time expired.] Thank you.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: I hope they’ll be glad to see me when I’m finished.
Chairperson, we are concerned, as you are, at the direction education is
taking in our country. When we consider the trauma suffered by schools
during the apartheid years of 1976, 1980 and 1985, simply because the then
education department wanted to enforce an inferior gutter education on the
masses, we cannot go back on the hard-fought gains we have attained.

We are now confronted with a new education curriculum called outcomes-based
education. Countries around the world that have had this system for a
number of years, including the USA, New Zealand and Australia, have in
various ways either abandoned the system or amended it drastically.

Teaching time has been shortened as teachers are forced to prepare and mark
assessment portfolio work. Principals and teachers across the country are
asking: When will the madness stop? Those are not my words. Once again, as
in 1985, principals have become the target for not delivering. We must
guard against that and not shoot the messenger.

We must seriously ask our dear Ministry that the OBE system be reviewed.
All educational role-players should come together with the Ministry and
look at a strategic review of the system. I am not saying that it must be
jettisoned, but we need to take the good part and throw away the bones.
Other countries have done that. Why should we wait dozen years down the
line and then find that it really does not work?

I am happy because I heard the Deputy Minister say that nothing is cast in
stone and that we should talk about anything as a government. So, any
planning and any review should be possible, and I think we should be big
enough to look at that.

The serious nature of violent crime and murders involving pupil-on-pupil
attacks have made school grounds the new killing fields in South Africa.
Whatever intersectoral strategy we have to combat school violence has
proved ineffectual to date. What steps, Minister, are you taking to
implement drastic action? The limp response of the department to school
ground killings does not instil confidence in the department to stem the
violence at schools.

Infrastructure development relating to additional classrooms being built
needs to be done quickly. We have the annual problem at the start of the
school year when textbooks do not arrive on time. Now we’ve heard excuses
on that. If there are bottlenecks with distribution, we ask that other
service providers must be provided, so that we can cut out this nonsense at
the beginning of the year when children don’t have books for months.

Further education and training colleges play an important linkage role in
preparing high school leavers to gain some formative skills ... [Time
expired.] Thank you, Ma’am.

Mr A MOTSWALEDI (Limpopo): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,
colleagues and the House, seeing that 90% of the speech of Mr Thetjeng of
the DA was in support of Limpopo, presumably because he is from there, I
assume that the questions he asked about quintiles must be emerging from
Limpopo.

I am quite aware that the Minister is going to be telling you exactly how
it works, because she has instructed us. However, I also feel that I need
to respond to you. We had to find a method to allocate this money in terms
of quintiles, but they are not cast in stone, it is just a guiding measure
and the Minister has said this so many times. So, the fact that you may
find very poor schools in rich quintiles does not mean that those schools
cannot be helped. For instance, if you check in Limpopo, you will find that
farm schools are scattered all over the province. Some of them are in very
rich wards, but all the farm schools have been put in quintile 1, and so it
doesn’t go according to which ward they are in.

Boarding schools, which we regard as relatively better off, could be in
very poor wards, but would never be put in quintile 1. All over the
province principals know and they have been instructed that they need to
apply if they think that they have been placed inappropriately. The issue
of schools in the same ward falling within the same quintile will not
necessarily disadvantage them. I just wanted to clear that up, because that
is exactly what we are doing.

It might be possible that you quoted what happened last year. Yes, we know
that in Limpopo there were mistakes last year, because we were still
learning the system but, this year, we have corrected it so that the
situation is different from last year. For instance, the number of schools
which were in quintiles 1 and 2 are no longer the same as this year. We
have changed that and we have increased them and many more schools are
benefiting from that.

The other issue I want to deal with is that of personnel. Hon Tolo, I am
not quite sure what could have happened in my province. You mentioned that,
at least in the Eastern Cape they know what they are looking for and that
they know what their shortages are while all the other provinces don’t. I
am not sure what could have happened in my province, because 60% - if not
70% - of our time in Limpopo this year was spent on correcting exactly what
you said. Limpopo’s department of education is undeniably the most
understaffed department in the whole country, compared to all the other
government departments.

A country is as good as its human resources and we also recognise the fact
that education is a precondition for development, and that was the theme of
the budget speech in Limpopo. So we could not leave that situation
unattended. That is why we have completed the absorption of 8 651 teachers
who have been temporary teachers all this time; they are now permanent. We
have appointed permanently 3 800 HODs who have been in acting positions;
they are now permanent. We have appointed 450 deputy principals who have
been in acting positions; they are now permanent. We have appointed 600
principals also, who have been in acting positions; they are now permanent.
We are adding an extra 1 330 teachers in schools this year, 77 extra deputy
principals and 438 extra HODs.

We have completed the job of hiring 150 curriculum specialists or subject
advisers. Before the end of this year, within the next six months, we will
have appointed 147 chief education specialists, 88 deputy chief education
specialists, 50 managers and 134 deputy managers. All in all, 419 officials
will have been appointed. As Limpopo, we are also proud that in these
appointments three of our districts are headed by women for the first time.
This may seem very insignificant, but it’s a success for Limpopo, because
it has never happened since 1994.

On the issue of maths, science and technology, we have a legendary shortage
of maths and science teachers in the country. I want to believe, hon
Minister, that even Dr Verwoerd would not have wished this to happen to us,
because whatever he had planned, I don’t think he thought that it would
come to this. He would really regret what he has done to the country, if he
was still alive.

So, all we need to do, because he is gone, is to fight back and go into
battle. For this reason, in Limpopo we have established this year a new
directorate specifically to deal with maths, science and technology, headed
by a senior manager with chief education specialists and deputy education
specialists, specifically to focus every day of their lives on maths,
science and technology.

Mr Thetjeng, I know you were a teacher there and that you used to complain
every day, but it is my pleasure to announce to you that in January we are
reopening Mastec – the maths, science and technology education college -
for in-service training. Plans are already advanced in terms of renovation.
We believe we will be ready to reopen it in January, and we will remove
some of our teachers from school to go for in-service training in Mastec.

We are also putting up five pilot circuit offices which are all equipped
with computer laboratories, science laboratories, biology laboratories,
libraries, tour libraries and media centres. These would be used for
retraining of those teachers who would not be going to in-service training
centres. We have provided 52 schools with mobile classrooms, computers and
all the other basic facilities that are missing in some of our rural
schools.

Apart from the Fundza Lushaka bursary scheme, which has been launched by
the Minister, Limpopo has also designed its own degree with the University
of Witwatersrand, a degree whereby teachers major in maths, science,
technology and African languages. We already have the first 37 students
starting this degree at the university.

Minister, you mentioned this issue of rewarding schools. I want to assure
you that Limpopo is in total support of that. In fact, if you check Limpopo
results, it is the poor rural schools that have excelled in Limpopo. Out of
the top 40 schools, less than 17 are former model C schools, and all the
others are farm rural schools which have no laboratories, no libraries etc.
Those are the ones who are excelling.

You are well aware, Minister, of the schools that are always in the top
three in Limpopo: Mbilwi, Glen Cowie and Harry Oppenheimer are all rural
schools with no facilities at all. In fact, for your information, because
people know Mbilwi, this school got laboratories for the first time this
year when laboratories were donated by Angloplat. All the time they have
been obtaining first position in maths and science in the whole country,
without any laboratories. So, rewarding them will do no harm, Minister.

One of the ladies you gave a prize to in the National Teacher Awards, Ms
Mabusela, for the best leadership in secondary education, travels 130 km
every morning from Mahwelereng to Tlou-Nare in Sekhukhune and travels back
again in the evening. She found a completely unknown school there in
Sekhukhune, which is a presidential nodal point. She started getting 100%.
Last year she and her school were in the top 40 schools of the province.
And that school has no library, no laboratory - nothing. So, if we were to
reward them, I don’t think there would be anything wrong with that. We in
Limpopo will wholeheartedly support you. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M A TSOPO (Free State): Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister,
hon NCOP members, colleagues in education, ladies and gentlemen, I stand
here to support the Budget Vote speech of the Minister, Mrs Naledi Pandor.
I will only highlight some of the national agreed priorities, not all of
them, owing to the time allocated to me.

In the Free State we have a human resource development plan which we have
developed in a way that supports the direction of skills development, which
is also in line with equity targets of the department. An amount of R32,9
million was used for the payment of about 897 part-time bursaries for
educators, 209 part-time bursaries for public servants, and payment for
accredited courses for educators, public servants and learnerships.

The department will launch a literacy strategy this year, and we have since
appointed 100 qualified teacher assistants for the foundation phase as a
pilot in the Thabo Mofutsanyana district. Twenty-one teacher assistants for
special schools have been appointed. The department is also appointing
support staff to strengthen our disadvantaged schools in the Free State.

In order to achieve more efficiency and effectiveness in the district, the
department is appointing more personnel. I am not going to read the figures
due to time constraints. We are decentralising a lot of powers and
functions to our districts in the province.

Educator development and support have been identified and singled out as
key and central to the improvement of education. For the current budget,
educator development has been targeted in a much more improved way. From
2002 to date, the Free State department of education has allocated 1 127
bursaries to underqualified educators and 726 bursaries to unqualified
educators. The aim is to ensure that in each and every school in the Free
State we have fully qualified educators, Minister, as you have requested us
to do. Five hundred bursaries will be allocated for 2008.

The strategy for learner attainment represents an intervention that
consists of a planned and sustained series of initiatives and activities
with short-term and long-term objectives of improved learner attainment in
all schools in the province. The focus of the sustainable matric
intervention strategy is on improving the performance of all
underperforming secondary schools, in all educational aspects, providing
better quality and ensuring fair opportunities for all learners in all
grades in the province.

The Quality Improvement, Development, Support and Upliftment Programme is
being implemented in the Thabo Mofutsanyana and Lejweleputswa districts,
and focuses on the provision of adequate resources for effective
implementation of the curriculum as well as improving leadership,
management and governance, with a view to improving learner performance.

Similarly, the partnership with the Kagiso Trust is also intended to
strengthen curriculum delivery, management and leadership in 10 of our
underperforming schools in Thabo Mofutsanyana. We will be spending R15,68
million over a period of three years.

The expanded Dinaledi initiative provides for focused learning in
mathematics and science in 35 selected secondary schools in the Free State.
Each of the 35 Dinaledi schools has been provided with an additional
teaching post for maths or science, as per the needs of each school.

In order to provide learners with a proper foundation in mathematics and
science education, the Free State has started with the initiative of
academies of learning in each district for specialised learning in
mathematics and science from Grade 7 to Grade 11. We currently have a
partnership between Absa and Grey College, and we will be extending the
project to our four remaining districts during this particular financial
year.

In order to support the delivery of the curriculum, the department has,
over the last three years, adopted an incremental approach to the
establishment of functioning libraries by supplying schools with library
resources. We have also appointed 100 technologists to make sure that our
libraries, our laboratories and our computer centres function effectively.

Minister, we support you fully with regard to rewards that are supposed to
be given to schools, because in our province, Free State, we have already
set up an incentive programme for primary and secondary schools to
recognise professional excellence by awarding a sum of R150 000 to each
deserving primary and secondary school, respectively. I must also further
indicate that, for schools to be able to get this money, they must be able
to provide us with a business plan for infrastructural development
purposes.

In relation to the no-fee schools, I would like to report that in the Free
State we consulted with all the education stakeholders for them to agree to
get the status of quintile 1 or quintile 2 as no-fee schools. We have a
cumulative percentage of 57,7% of all learners who are currently not paying
school fees in the Free State, and we are monitoring the situation fully so
that some of the principals cannot take a chance with our parents.

With regard to safety in schools, we have launched project Tiisa Thuto
Safer Schools, together with Business Against Crime and the department of
public safety, security and liaison. What I can also report in this House
is that our communities in the Free State are taking full responsibility
for our schools. So, there is no need for us really to appoint security
guards for them to be able to take care of our learners and our educators.

With regard to capital infrastructure, the Department of Education has made
strides in the elimination of infrastructure backlogs in the past few
years. Through the Expanded Public Works Programme and in partnership with
the school governing bodies, the Free State department of education has
upgraded, renovated and maintained 663 schools at a cost of R91,4 million.
The department will also be upgrading 305 schools this year.

We are currently building 12 new school halls for disadvantaged schools in
our province. We have completed 12 new schools and we are also finalising
the construction of 14 new schools this year. We will be building five new
schools in the 2007-08 financial year. All these schools have all the
facilities, with the exception of sports facilities. The construction of
additional facilities will also be taking place in 31 schools.

Furthermore, as the Free State department of education, we have a
partnership with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Dwaf, and
the department of local government and housing to provide basic facilities.
Dwaf, Minister, allocated R3,2 million after we engaged them to say we need
to speed up delivery regarding basic services to our learners in the
province.

This year, we will also be doing painting and paving at our various schools
in the Free State through the Letsema project. I must also inform this
House that our public-private partnership has been approved by the National
Treasury, through which we will be building 10 new schools and upgrading 24
schools and a reform school.

In regard to learner support, the Department of Education is currently
feeding 413 546 learners in all qualifying primary schools according to the
agreed national days. We are also providing transport to rural learners. We
are not targeting urban children but we are targeting farm children. We
started with a project where we are transporting 1 434 children. To date,
we were transporting 9 804 children and we envisage transporting 12 820
children by the end of the 2007-08 financial year.

In order to improve our rural education, we have closed all nonviable farm
school projects. We have a clear programme around how best we are going to
close nonviable farm schools in the Free State, for us to be able to
accommodate and give quality education to rural learners too, in our
province. We are currently operating 11 hostels with 1 373 learners.

Minister, we have also provided uniforms to our vulnerable and orphaned
children in the Free State, in partnership with the private sector and
municipalities. Twenty thousand children have already been covered and we
will also be covering a further 10 000 children this month, through a
donation which was made by the private sector. [Applause.]

In closing, this is a mammoth and daunting task that we are faced with.
However, we recommit ourselves, as the Free State department of education,
to living up to our vision of improving the quality of life of all Free
State citizens by providing quality life-long education and training. I
therefore support the budget speech of the hon Minister of Education, Mrs
Naledi Pandor. [Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, it is always a pleasure to be part and parcel
of this Budget Vote debate in this august House. But, allow me, once more,
just to give a special welcome to the Minister and the Deputy Minister by
saying: Welcome home! We would like to see more of you in this august
House.

Allow me to quote one of our great leaders:


   Let me invite Africa to cast her eyes beyond the past and to come enter
   the present with their woes and tribulations, trials and failures and
   some successes, and see herself an emerging continent, bursting to
   freedom through the shell of centuries of serfdom. This is Africa’s age.

This great son of South Africa was a leader of the ANC, a teacher, a
father, a traditional leader, a religious leader and a sports
administrator. He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1961. This year is
the 40th anniversary of the tragic death of Chief Albert Luthuli. Long live
the spirit of Chief Albert Luthuli!

It is indeed a pleasure for me to say that the education reform in
postapartheid South Africa has been driven by two imperatives. Firstly, the
ANC-led government had to overcome the devastation of years of apartheid
education and to provide a system of education that builds democracy, human
dignity, equality and social justice for all the people of South Africa.

Secondly, the ANC had to establish a system of lifelong learning to enable
the country to respond to the enormous economic and social challenges of
the 21st century, while also overcoming the enormous burden of illiteracy
that was systematically and legislatively extended to the majority of the
poorest of the poor in South Africa.

Allow me to elaborate on our school nutrition programme. I must say that I
think the Northern Cape has one of the better managed and more effective
school nutrition programmes in the Republic of South Africa, which is used
as a model for many other provinces. This programme provides employment to
over 300 volunteers as food handlers. However, I need to point out that we
are experiencing some problems in some of our provinces.

Chairperson, hon Minister, the question that we need to ask ourselves is:
Is it not time for us to extend this programme to our secondary schools? I
think we need to give this request some serious consideration.

Agb Voorsitter, Minister, die vervoer van leerders is van kardinale belang
in Suid-Afrika, maar ons ondervind nog by ons agtergeblewe gemeenskappe in
ons landelike gebiede dat leerders nog in baie gevalle lang afstande moet
aflê om by hulle skole te kom. Daar is van ons provinsies wat net nie die
nodige ag slaan op skoolvervoer nie. Ek dink die tyd het aangebreek dat die
departement met ’n nasionale beleid vorendag moet kom om eenvormigheid oor
hierdie aspek te kry. Ek hoop dat u in u repliek op hierdie debat vir ons
sal sê of dit wel ’n goeie idee is, al dan nie. Indien nodig sal ons u
wetgewing steun om dit moontlik te maak.

Aangaande leerderondersteuningsmateriaal, oor ’n tydperk het ons uitgevind
dat die probleem nie noodwendig lê by die provinsies wat nie hulle
bestellings betyds indien nie, maar dit is eerder ’n geval van waar
verskaffers wat die boeke aan ons moet voorsien dit nie betyds aflewer nie.
Dit wil vir my voorkom dat in provinsies soos in die Noord-Kaap waar ons
nie groot bestellings plaas nie, hierdie verskaffers eerder kyk na
provinsies soos Gauteng waar hulle gou geld kan maak, dan voorsien hulle
daardie provinsies met hierdie leerderondersteuningsmateriaal en skeep die
ander provinsies af. Ek wil ’n beroep op u doen dat u en u span met hierdie
verskaffers sal ontmoet ten einde hierdie euwel uit die weg te ruim.

Dit bring my by die kwessie van infrastruktuur. Die agb Minister het ook
daarvan melding gemaak. Klaskamers word aangebring om sodoende klasruimte
te skep in ons skole. Ons wil graag van die agb Minister weet: sal dit nie
’n goeie idee wees as ons nasionale norme en standaarde daarstel wanneer
ons nuwe skole bou nie? Dan kan daar doelgerigte voorsiening gemaak word
ten einde laboratoriums en biblioteke en administrasieblokke te bou.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, Minister, the transporting of learners is of the utmost
importance in South Africa, but in our previously disadvantaged communities
in our rural areas we still find that in many instances learners still have
to travel long distances to get to their schools. There are some of our
provinces that simply do not give the necessary attention to school
transport. I think the time has come for the department to come up with a
national policy to have uniformity in this regard. I hope that in your
reply to this debate you will tell us whether or not this is a good idea.
If need be, we will support your legislation to make this possible.

Regarding learner support material, we have discovered over a period of
time that the problem does not necessarily lie with the provinces for not
placing their orders in good time, but it is more a case of the suppliers
who have to supply us with the books not delivering in time. It seems to me
that provinces such as the Northern Cape, where we do not place large
orders, are neglected. These suppliers rather look at provinces such as
Gauteng where they can make money quickly, and then they supply those
provinces with learner support material and neglect the other provinces. I
want to appeal to you that you and your team meet with these suppliers in
order to eliminate this unjust practice.

This brings me to the question of infrastructure; the hon Minister also
mentioned it. Classrooms are being built in order to create more classroom
space in our schools. We would like to know from the hon Minister: Would it
not be a good idea to establish national norms and standards when we build
new schools? Then purposeful provision can be made in order to build
laboratories and libraries and administration blocks.]

Hon Minister, we, as a select committee, visit some of our schools when we
do our oversight work. I remember visiting a school in the Eastern Cape -
yes, it was a school catering for learners with special needs. There was an
outcry from the teachers there trying to cope with the circumstances at
that particular school. These schools cater for learners with special needs
and have to be visited by doctors, nurses, psychiatrists etc, but this is
not happening. I think what we need to do, perhaps, is to get the
Departments of Health and Social Development to assist us in these
particular areas.

During this House’s provincial week, from 14 May to 18 May, we as the
Northern Cape delegation visited the Kgalagadi and Frances Baard districts,
including Pampierstad, and I know the Minister knows Pampierstad very well.
These areas were under the North West province, but are now, after the new
demarcation process, under the Northern Cape. I would like to mention some
of the challenges raised during that particular visit.
Our province has calculated the cost of incorporating 194 schools and
58 970 learners at an amount of R30 million. The rural nature of the
Kgalagadi area compared with the rest of the Northern Cape has led to 79%
of the learners being placed in national quintiles 1 and 2, thereby
allowing 41 657 learners to benefit from the no-fee schools programme. The
application of the norms across the Northern Cape will see learners in the
Kgalagadi area receiving significantly more per capita in 2007 than in
previous years while they were still under North West.

Currently, the North West department of education provides an educator-
learner ratio of 1:40. The Northern Cape has maintained an average standard
of 1:33 over the past five years. Schools in the Kgalagadi area are in need
of 329 educators. To ensure teaching and learning for such grades, posts
have to be filled. And, should funding become available, keep in mind that
there could be a need to employ temporary educators.

The reason why I am raising these matters is that I’ve listened to the
Minister’s speech. Education is a concurrent function, but there are quite
a number of disjunctures where one province applies a certain principle and
another province does something else. I think we need to get some
uniformity. Minister, we welcome the idea of you making a review of the
whole system and then saying what will be the best model for us, at the end
of the day.

We have also made an analysis of the situation in Kgalagadi and estimate we
will have to provide access for 40 478 learnersregarding the school
transport programme. Annually, the Northern Cape spends about R2 681 per
learner, which translates into about R108 million for learner transport,
which could not be fully funded due to limited resources.

Infrastructure maintenance and repairs backlogs in Kgalagadi are a matter
of concern, and one that could be addressed over a period of three or four
years, depending, again, on budget availability. Some of these schools were
built by tribal leaders and the communities themselves and some of them
were built out of mud. Our province would like to upgrade at least 20 of
these schools in the meantime, but it will cost us about R500 000 to
upgrade those schools. Our request to the hon Minister is to make some
special interventions so that we can address these inequalities in those
particular areas.

It is regrettable that our children are not in school today due to the
strike. We would like to express our hope that this problem will be sorted
out as quickly as possible so that teaching and learning in our classes can
return to normal. We want to make use of this opportunity, hon Minister, to
thank you and your department for the co-operation that we receive from
you. We also want to thank the director-general and his team. They never
refuse to come and see us, and we wish them well in the future. Thank you
very much. Ke a leboga.
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, my thanks go to all hon members and
the MECs, particularly, for their contributions to the debate this
afternoon.

I’d just like to briefly refer to the matter of the strike that the hon
Sulliman spoke about a moment ago. I have received reports of children who
want to be in the classroom, tutoring themselves and continuing with their
schoolwork. There are allegations that children have been intimidated by
certain persons. We’re not sure whether that was done by members who are
participating in the strike or other individuals. We’ve had instances in
which children were pulled out of schoolyards or school gates were closed.
We have also had instances at some centres in which learners were to write
part-time exams in adult education where some individuals are alleged to
have come forward, grabbed the exam papers, torn them up, and refused to
allow those candidates to write.

Now, we understand a strike process as being the withdrawal of your labour,
but that does not allow for intimidation of others, in exercising your
rights. We must reject such intimidation with the contempt and harshest
words that it deserves. [Applause.]

My apologies, Chairperson. I have a cold which I caught during my travel
and hard work. I think what hon members have been saying is that, in
education, what we should do is what needs to be done to succeed. We all
know what it is: hard work - as I said - commitment, dedication, and
attention to our tasks.

I would like to join those hon members, such as MEC Cronje from KwaZulu-
Natal, in thanking our foreign and local donors who assist us in education.
There are many, particularly several embassies that have representatives in
South Africa, as well as the private sector, who give us invaluable
assistance in addressing our challenges in education.

Three core areas have been raised in the debate. The first one could be
classified as matters of values and social cohesion - the issues around
teenage pregnancy, violence in our schools, the increasing prevalence of
drugs in many of our schools, and the impact of an HIV-positive status on
children in our schools.

I think, on this matter of values, that while there is much that education
is and can be doing, there are roles that we as community members, that you
as public representatives, and that we as parents should be playing. I find
it quite amazing that it is very easy for us as adults to want to argue for
the rights of young mothers to return to school, and yet play no role in
teaching them how to stop themselves from becoming pregnant.

I think that, as adults, we need to play our full role. We should be
talking to children about staying away from early sexual activity; we
should be talking both to boys and girls; we should be ensuring that our
young people understand that having a child far too early is negative both
for the young mother as well as for the young child who, obviously, will be
deserted by the mother and left in the hands of another family member and
not the person who is their biological parent.

Clearly, as the member of the ID suggested, the father has a role as well.
The problem is we can’t always identify them. In our measures, we have
indicated that both the father and the mother should play a role in caring
for their child for at least two years. The notion that it is all right to
have a baby, and two days later dump it on somebody and off you go to
school is one that we should question as a society. This is what our
measures try to address. But, of course, we won’t compel them to stay at
home. We are trying to set in place a value framework, which our society
has the choice to accept and utilise or to reject, for some other system
that they prefer. All we can do is provide indicators.

On the matter of violence, we have acted; we have provided greater
resources to schools to create safe and caring schools. We know that we
must do more about conflict resolution. In Eerste River, for example, you
had a young person being bullied to the extent, it is suggested, that they
acted in the way they did. The action was absolutely intolerable. But, as
adults, we should have addressed the conflict issues among young people in
order to teach them new attitudes and new ways of living together in
diversity.

For the first time, our communities are mixing in many areas. Lots of
conflict arises. We need to teach young people respect for each other and
to help them learn how to resolve a problem without resorting to a knife or
a gun. At every point, every morning, at every gate, we should be standing
with a box with envelopes and say, “Hand in anything dangerous. Put it
here. If we catch you with it in the classroom, you will likely face
arrest.” We should do that every day to create the atmosphere which says:
nothing which is unacceptable on school grounds will be allowed into
school.

On the issue of drugs, again, we must educate young people about the
dangers. Let them visit one or two rehabilitation centres. Let them go to a
hospital ward; let them see what drugs do to your brain. It might be nice,
that first experience, but after that, you are destroying yourself. Once
addicted, it is extremely difficult to get out of addiction, and each one
of us has a role in this. This is not my responsibility alone; it is the
responsibility of all of us. The fact that I am a Minister does not absolve
you, or the community, or parents, or brothers, or sisters from advising
each other and working together to build positive values and attitudes.

A second aspect that was dealt with is the matter of development needs.
Clearly, infrastructure – as we have indicated – is an area we are acting
upon. Improving the remuneration of teachers, ensuring that there are
performance agreements and rewards associated with performance, form part
of another development we are working on.

Regarding school feeding, clearly we are improving in this area and are
also exploring how we can expand. On the matter of no-fee schools, I
indicated that there had been difficulties with the initial implementation,
as there always will be difficulties when you start something new.

A lot of people who like talking have never had the challenge of building a
democracy; have never had the challenge of working in government. It’s very
nice to talk, but if you knew the mess that we are dealing with, then you
would know exactly how tough it is to make the change. And, if you believe
educational change is a five-year thing, you do not understand education.
So, study education history and learn to see that what we are doing is
going to lead to the kind of outcomes that I am referring to.

On the matter of academic performance, clearly I agree with hon members. We
do need to address the issue and place of mother-tongue-based education in
our system. We cannot introduce a foreign language into the schooling of
our children early, but it is possible to use mother tongue and to have our
children learn at least one other language well, if not two more. But the
base, the foundation – utilising the mother tongue - is important and is
something that we are pursuing in our education system.

I believe we must do more to develop the indigenous languages of South
Africa. I am glad that many of our universities have begun to develop
programmes that do exactly this. I am working on a funding formula to
support those universities that are committed to multilingualism, because
it is a policy we want to encourage and to actively develop.

On the matter of academic performance, clearly, if there are no teachers in
our schools, we can’t expect a better maths performance. So, I hope, hon
members, in the next few days when you do your motions, you will support us
in our plan to recruit foreign teachers to teach scarce-skills subjects. We
don’t intend to displace any South African teacher, but it is our intention
that if there is a South African teacher who is not qualified to teach that
subject, we will offer them a bursary to acquire a degree, and we will have
the foreign teacher in place on contract.

Our intention is to develop our local skills, not to throw out our
teachers, but we can’t wait for our teachers to develop the skills, and let
our children keep failing each year. So I hope you will support us in that
regard, and explain it clearly in the media, because it appears to be
absolutely misunderstood.

Of course, if hon members are aware of qualified mathematics and science
teachers – qualified, not those who did these subjects in matric, but
qualified to teach in high school - please bring those names to me and we
will fill the vacancies that exist. I doubt that you have 6 000 names,
because that is the size of the need in some places. If you do though, you
are very welcome to give me those indicators.

We also need to work much harder to encourage young people to work. You
cannot succeed by osmosis. You cannot succeed by imagining that if you
forward a solution, you absorb it and it sinks into your mind. You have to
put in the effort to learn. There is no mystery about learning.

So, young people who think they can run around in the streets, be in the
local shebeen, do all the wrong things and somehow they will pass matric,
are fooling themselves. Teachers who believe they need not be in class,
that they can wander around, who don’t teach the full week, and who don’t
teach the full number of hours and days in the year, are not going to have
success. There is no mystery about success. Hard work pays off. Dedication
to task pays off.

We can improve the performance in maths and science with qualified
teachers, with real effort. We can improve our performance at senior
certificate level with hard work, with dedication, with good teaching, and
with performance.
We can also, as hon members – each of us – adopt a school. Just go into a
community and find a school that is not performing as well as it should.
Say to them: “I will spend time finding out what your challenges are. I
will try to assist you. If it is the government that is not supporting you,
as an MP, I will go to the Minister and find out why you are not getting
the support that you should.” Why don’t you adopt a school? Let’s see what
90 members can do to change our situation. Let us use public-private
partnerships much more positively than we might be doing at the moment.

I must say that I am terribly disappointed by the remarks of Mr Hendrickse.
I am not sure how he can assume that the very exciting curriculum change
we’ve had in South Africa can be compared to gutter education. We had to
change the curriculum in this country. The manner of doing it may have
posed massive difficulties, but the fact of it having to be done is
unquestionable. So, all we should be saying is: “It’s great that we had a
curriculum change, but let us make it far more efficient, effective, and
let it have meaning for teachers.”

A lot of teachers don’t want the curriculum because it is demanding. They
have to think in order to teach it. There is nothing that you’re given
which you will give to the children and say “memorise; regurgitate”. To say
we should revise the curriculum ... we’ve done so and we had a whole
revision process. In fact, the curriculum was called the “revised national
curriculum”. Now that we have rewritten all of it, redeveloped all the
material, finally, for Grades 1 to 12, we have a National Curriculum
Statement for South Africa.

So there has been change. Interestingly enough, in fact, we have changed it
tremendously, in a far better way than has been done by colleagues in the
countries that you mentioned. Many of them are now looking at the revisions
that we have done. So, hon member, rather than listening to many of the
dismal persons who criticise without a true, informed look at what is
happening, I would suggest that what you do is get to know our curriculum
better, and see some of the exciting things and possibilities that it
offers for our young people and help us to get it right, to get it better.
But change had to come; change will stay. All we will do is improve what
must be done.

Finally, I agree that transformation in higher education is an aspect that
we must look at. The fact of no-go areas, of separate residences, of very
negative right-wing practices, are things that we must address on our
campuses. And we will be working with our vice chancellors to ensure that
all our universities are truly South African universities. Thank you very
much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you very much, hon Minister.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, hon Minister, the
Deputy Minister, the MECs and special delegates who attended this
informative debate. I do believe that provinces and members will be able to
assist and that after they have done their oversight visits they will also
inform the Minister about what is happening on the ground. Thank you very
much.

                      HEALTH PROFESSIONS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms J M MASILO: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo wa Khansele ya Bosetšhaba ya
Diporofense, Tona ya Lefapha la Thuto le Motlatsa-Tona wa Lefapha la Thuto,
baeti ba rona ba ba tswang kwa diporofenseng ... [Hon Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, Minister of Education and Deputy Minister of
Education, our guests from the provinces ...]

... hon members and colleagues, the Health Professions Amendment Bill of
2006 can be regarded as the continuation of a process initiated in 1994 to
transform the South African health sector, including all statutory
councils, with the aim of improving their accountability, defining their
roles and relationship with the Department of Health, and facilitating
transformation.

In 1999 the Minister of Health accelerated the transformation process by
appointing a task team on the transformation of statutory councils in order
to investigate the issue of transformation of the statutory councils.

The task team concluded, amongst other things, that the primary purpose of
the professional councils is to protect the public interest, including the
delivery of quality care. In addition, it is also recommended that there is
a need for smaller, but more productive, professional councils, viz a
process of streamlining councils.

The Health Professions Amendment Bill seeks to incorporate the
recommendations made by the task team, as well as to bring the principal
Act, Act 56 of 1974, in line with a number of changes introduced in the
South African public sector after 1994.

The amendment of the Health Professions Act is informed by the following:
the need to transform professional boards in terms of racial demography - a
shift away from boards that are racially skewed to more representative
bodies; the need to include provisions on co-operative governance as the
Health Professions Council of SA is listed as a scheduled public entity in
the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999; the need to ensure a more
streamlined HPCSA by reducing the number of council members; the need to
address the shortcomings in the principal Act, which fails to make
provision for the appointment of the president and registrar of the
council; regulating the conduct of professionals and the evaluation and
accreditation of teaching institutions; and the need to ensure that the
current Act is more aligned with the relevant provisions of the National
Health Act, Act 61 of 2003, which serves as the overarching framework for
the health sector in South Africa.

Whilst the Health Professions Amendment Bill outlines a number of
objectives, its primary aim is to continue with the broader process of
transformation of the health sector, including the provision of essential
services to our communities.

There were two typographical errors in the Bill we passed as a committee:
“or” instead of “of”, and “issuing” instead of “issued”. However, these
errors were corrected in the ATC before printing. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon member. That
concludes the debate. I shall now put the question. The question is that
the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65
of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads
are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all
delegation heads present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): In accordance with Rule 71, I
shall first allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of
vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I
shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must
please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour, against, or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Oos-Kaap ondersteun. [Eastern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?
Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat ondersteun. [Free State supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyawusekela. [We support it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re a e thekga. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J TOLO: Mpumalanga sopport.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke wa rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): All provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
    QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND DISABLED PERSONS -
   CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES AND ITS OPTIONAL
                                  PROTOCOL

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chairperson, thanks for this
opportunity because it has been a very long sitting today. I’m going to
move on the premise and assumption that this protocol was printed in the
Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, and that hon members have
gone through the protocol.

Those who are part of the committee were part and parcel of the
deliberations on the protocol and the optional protocol. On that basis, we
also voted for this protocol unanimously at committee level. To outline
this, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its
Optional Protocol were adopted by acclamation in terms of United Nations
General Assembly Resolution 61/106 on 13 December 2006. The convention and
optional protocol were opened for signature by all states at the United
Nations headquarters in New York as of 30 March 2007.

This convention reaffirms the universal commitment to the rights and
dignity of all people, without discrimination. The convention obliges state
parties to, inter alia, guarantee that persons with disabilities enjoy all
human rights on an equal basis with others, including their inherent right
to life; equal rights and advancement of women and girls with disabilities;
equal rights to own and inherit property; access to justice on an equal
basis; the right to liberty and security; and freedom from torture, cruel,
inhumane and degrading treatment.

The optional protocol to the convention provides for an individual
complaints mechanism in which a state party to the protocol recognises the
competence of the committee on the rights of persons with disabilities to
receive and consider communications from or on behalf of individuals or a
group of individuals who claim to be victims of violation by that state
party of the provisions of the convention subject to its jurisdictions.

I must conclude by mentioning that Dr Essop Goolam Pahad - Minister in the
Presidency - signed the convention on behalf of South Africa on 7 March
2007. I beg this august House to accept this convention. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order! I shall now put the
question in respect of the Third Order. The question is that the report be
adopted. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation
heads present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): In accordance with Rule 71 I shall
first allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if
they so wish. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall
do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please
indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour, against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [We support it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ke ya rona. [We support it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J TOLO: Mpumalanga e a e seketela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): All provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 17:10.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             MONDAY, 4 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Security
    and Constitutional Affairs:

    (a)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of Saint Lucia on the
         Contribution of the South African Police Service to the
         International Police Component for the ICC Cricket World Cup West
         Indies 2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


    (b)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of Barbados on the
         Contribution of the South African Police Service to the
         International Police Component for the ICC Cricket World Cup West
         Indies 2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


    (c)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of Grenada on the
         Contribution of the South African Police Service to the
         International Police Component for the ICC Cricket World Cup West
         Indies 2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The President of the Republic

    (a)    Strategic Plan for the Presidency for 2007/08 to 2009/10.

2.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)    Booklet containing the Department of Transport’s Parliamentary
          Questions and Answers for 2006.

3.    The Minister of Housing

    (a)    Strategic and Performance Plans for the Department of Housing
    for 2007 to 2010.


4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)    Strategic Plan for the Department of Arts and Culture for April
2007 to March 2010.


                            TUESDAY, 5 JUNE 2007


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

      (a)   Strategic Plan for the Department of Local Government for 2007
to 2012.

