---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 20 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2007-09-20
---

THURSDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS OF JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 11:02.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                    WELCOMING OF DELEGATION FROM THE DRC

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to recognise the Minister of Justice from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and his delegation, who are on an
official visit to South Africa. [Applause.] You and your delegation are
welcome.

                WELCOMING TAMBO, SISULU AND SOBUKWE FAMILIES

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I also wish to recognise our guests from the
families of the icons who comprise the content of the books that are going
to be launched tonight; and, of course, the Tambo family representative,
because this joint sitting will also pay tribute to our leader, O R Tambo.
Welcome to the families: the Tambos, the Sisulus, the Sobukwes and, of
course, the representative from the Mandela Foundation, for the Mandela
family. [Applause.]

Hon members, we will recall that on 1 April 2006 the President gave an
inaugural lecture on the perspective on and of Africa. The President, in
his speech, pointed out the need to revisit, record and know our history in
order to inform the work that we do; in moving forward.

He asked the question: What past and present information is available on
Africa? Who gathers and disseminates such information, and who interprets
events in and of Africa? It is for this reason, amongst others, that the
presiding officers took a decision at the last meeting of the advisory
board of the Parliamentary Millennium Project to initiate a history project
and use the President’s speech as a basis for the PMP work, until the end
of our tenure.

The history project will consist of different elements. An important
element which forms the basis for this joint sitting and the tributes that
will be paid is a legacy project on O R Tambo. This exercise is aimed at
pulling together a collection on O R Tambo for the parliamentary library.
There is a lot that the late Dr O R Tambo said at international forums,
including the UN and the OAU, which needs to be brought back home. A lot
has been said about him at different times and in different places.

We will be sending some parliamentary officials to visit London later this
year to look at these issues, and we will also bring on board the
University of Fort Hare, which will assist in this regard. The culmination
of this work will entail the adoption by Parliament of a network of
libraries in underdeveloped and underprivileged areas in the country, with
a view to sharing this information with South Africans.

Hon members, you will also be aware that from Monday, 17 September 2007, to
Wednesday, 19 September 2007, we had a People’s Assembly at Mbizana, the
birthplace of O R Tambo. This exercise gave us an opportunity to honour
this towering son of the soil.
During that time, I paid a courtesy visit to the Tambo family where I met
his only surviving sister uMama Gertrude Tambo. I was shown the rondavel
that O R Tambo slept in just before he left for exile. A plaque in honour
of O R was unveiled at Nkantolo, affixed to the original home that he was
born in before the family moved to the present home. The inscription on the
plaque reads as follows:


   Thambo ‘dala kade bemkhwahlaza! Siyabulela isizwe ngokusikhokelela
   enkululekweni; father, statesman, leader, gentle giant, dwala lethu.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

 [You, the veteran of our struggle! The nation is grateful to you for
 leading it to freedom; father, statesman, leader, gentle giant, our
 armour.]

We used the opportunity to plant trees, to raise awareness about the need
to preserve the environment, which is something that was also close to our
leader’s heart.

Hon members, I just thought that, as we commemorate our Heritage Day today,
you will find the background I have just given useful. We will approach the
hon former President Mandela to do a foreword for the book that we will put
together from the speeches that were made in Nkantolo and today’s tributes.
We will also ask our President, Thabo Mbeki, to write an introduction.
Before I call on the first speaker, I would like also to recognise someone
who worked very closely with the late O R Tambo, and that is the former
Speaker, Dr Ginwala. [Applause.]

       COMMEMORATING HERITAGE DAY WITH A SPECIAL TRIBUTE TO O R TAMBO

                                  (Debate)

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, heritage is one of the primary sources of identity imparting to
communities a sense of belonging. That South Africa is culturally diverse
is readily recognised, and less evident is the role that heritage can play
in nurturing our national identity, social cohesion, conflict prevention,
and promoting human security.

A group of independent experts set up by the Director-General of Unesco
defines cultural diversity as, and I quote:


 ... the manifold ways in which the cultures of social groups and societies
 find expression.

This suggests that rather than dividing us, cultural diversity is our
collective strength, which could benefit the entire world. In this sense,
it should be recognised and affirmed as the common heritage of all South
Africans. Our South African heritage draws on three continents and we on
this side of the House have always accepted this as the outcome of history.

Humanism that affirms the dignity and the worth of all people, based on our
human capacity to reason, is the connecting thread amongst these
traditions. Its African spirit is best expressed as: Umntu ngumntu
ngabantu. One’s humanity is affirmed in recognition of the humanity of
others. One finds the same notion highlighted in the writings of a social
and political philosopher who is considered as one of the most influential
thinkers of the second millennium AD, and I quote:
 To be radical is to grasp the root of the matter. But for humanity the
 root is humanity itself, hence the categorical imperative to overthrow all
 relations in which humans are debased, enslaved, forsaken, despicable
 beings.

Madam Speaker, the man whose life’s work we are commemorating was born on
27 October 1917, in the Mbizana district of the Eastern Mpondoland area
called eQawukeni. After serving the usual rural apprenticeship as herd boy,
he enrolled at an Anglican school before going to St Peter’s Secondary
School in Johannesburg. He was awarded a scholarship by the Transkei bhunga
[administrative council], which took him to the University College of Fort
Hare, where he attained a degree in science, qualifying to become a teacher
of mathematics and science. From 1943 until 1947 he taught these subjects
at his alma mater, St Peter’s, in Johannesburg.

He gave up teaching to study the law in 1948 and established the first
African legal partnership with Nelson Mandela in December 1952. The
repressive hand of the apartheid regime pre-empted a second career change
in December 1956, two days before the Most Reverend Archbishop Ambrose
Reeves was due to prepare him for ordination as a priest. Oliver Tambo was
arrested with 155 others on charges of high treason on 6 December 1956.

Oliver Tambo chose his path when he joined the ANC after completing his
studies at Fort Hare. From 1947 until his death in 1993, Oliver Tambo was
among the leading figures of the ANC, and he left an indelible mark on
South African politics. When Walter Sisulu was forbidden from taking active
part in ANC affairs in 1954, Tambo became secretary-general of the ANC. By
1957 he had been elected deputy president to Chief Albert Luthuli. He
became acting president when Chief Luthuli died in 1967, and assumed the
ANC presidency at the Morogoro conference in 1969.

Though the ANC-led campaigns were militant, they were scrupulously
nonviolent. The response of the white minority government, however, was not
as restrained. It unleashed a wave of repression. Armed police, sometimes
assisted by army units, shot peaceful demonstrators. Police wielding Billy
clubs, batons and pickaxe handles administered brutal beatings to those who
were not fleet-footed enough to get away.

Entire villages of people in the rural areas were deported to distant areas
and the pre-dawn security police raid became a regular feature of South
African life. Commencing with the passage of the Suppression of Communism
Act in 1950, in incremental steps, the apartheid government turned the law
into a formidable instrument of repression.

These repressions culminated in the events at Sharpeville in March 1960,
when 69 peaceful demonstrators - the majority shot in the back - were
massacred by police as they protested against the pass laws. A few days
prior to 30 March that year, Oliver Tambo was instructed to travel abroad
to establish an external mission for the ANC in order to mobilise
international support and co-ordinate activities for the anticipated years
of underground struggle.

In July 1963 police swooped on a farm, Liliesleaf, in Rivonia, the upshot
of which was that 10 leaders of the ANC, including Nelson Mandela, were put
on trial on charges of planning acts of sabotage and conspiring to
overthrow the government. Their trial, known as the Rivonia Trial, ended
with Mandela and seven of his colleagues being sentenced to life
imprisonment in 1964.
Rivonia and the repression which followed thrust upon the very ample
shoulders of O R Tambo the responsibility of leading the ANC in exile as
well as at home, a task he assumed with quiet determination and immense
dignity. By the time he took over the helm of the ANC Oliver Tambo was a
seasoned political leader with two decades of political engagement under
his belt. He understood his task as being twofold: To rebuild the ANC as a
movement inside South Africa while enhancing its capacity to lead an armed
insurgent movement from outside South Africa’s borders.

In celebrating Oliver Tambo’s life we are honouring an important dimension
of our South African heritage, the heritage of struggle against colonial
domination and racial oppression. Oliver Tambo pursued the goal of
liberation and created a democratic South Africa with an unrelenting
energy, a quiet tenacity and steadfast perseverance. By the end of his
life, the object of his dreams was within reach. His singular contribution
was his insistence that the movement never compromised its humanity.

At the ceremony marking the ANC’s adherence to the Geneva Protocols on the
Conduct of War, among other things, he said, and I quote:
    We, in the ANC, solemnly undertake to respect the Geneva Conventions
    and the additional Protocol 1, insofar as they are applicable to the
    struggle waged on behalf of the African National Congress by its
    combatants, Umkhonto we Sizwe. This convention is one of the
    cornerstones of humanitarian international law.

By that action, Tambo demonstrated that even though the liberation movement
had taken up arms and engaged in acts of violence, which sometimes resulted
in deaths, there was no moral equivalence between it and the oppressive
apartheid regime. Historians have often warned that it is not nations that
generate nationalism; it is nationalism that produces nations. Definitions
of who is included and who is excluded are not pre-ordained but take a
count of differing historical circumstances.

South Africa, like many other states in the world, is a heterogeneous
melting pot of different races, ethnic groups and languages. Our
Constitution defines South African citizens in terms of our national
territory, allegiance to our national institutions and the people of our
country. This conception of the nation has won near universal acceptance
among South Africans today but that was not always the case. At the time of
the founding of the ANC, all the white political parties espoused an
undisguised white supremacy.

From 1913, when General Hertzog founded the National Party, it strove to
exclude all blacks from South Africa’s body politic, such that by the time
Verwoerd assumed leadership of that party in 1957 Africans, Coloureds and
Indians had all been disenfranchised. The National Party, thus, became the
party of the pre-1994 status quo, deeply racist, depressive and backward-
looking.

Addressing the nation on Radio Freedom on 8 January 1979, Oliver Tambo
reiterated that vision dating back to 1912, when he said, and I quote
again:


    Let us, in South Africa, learn to stop being Bantus, Coloureds, Indians
    and whites. Let us be what we are – Africans in Africa. Let those who
    are committed racists, who came to this continent determined to keep
    Africans in chains, to be perpetual white masters over blacks, let them
    persist in their role as foreigners on African soil.

This profoundly antiracist and nonracial ethos was rooted as much in his
politics as in his deeply held Christian beliefs. However, he never allowed
these to impair the movement’s capacity to wage an armed struggle. Drawing
the sharp distinction between the institutionalised violence of the
oppressive system and the violence of resistance, Oliver Tambo argued that
an unconditional adherence to nonviolence, on principle, would help sustain
the institutionalised violence of apartheid.

Oliver Tambo was a very tough task master because he insisted on the
quality of the movement he led. He repeatedly underscored the quality of
its leadership as he did the quality of its actions, but he was a leader
who led from the front. While he was demanding on those who worked under
him, he was himself a tireless worker, very often undertaking far too many
tasks and, consequently, overextending himself. In the end, it was the
demands he placed on himself that subsequently led to his ill health and
probably hastened his death.

It was these qualities that made Oliver Tambo a truly great leader of the
African National Congress and a great leader of the South African
liberation movement. It was these qualities, too, that endeared him to all
in the ANC’s ranks, from its leadership down to its youngest cadre. It was
these qualities that made him a great South African. In honouring him, we
honour the best in ourselves. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon members, including the
distinguished guests, this is a tribute to O R Tambo and I give it this
caption, “the liberation relay race runner at best”. Much will be said and
already has been said about this magnificent son of our land. He was,
indeed, a colossal giant in our country’s struggle and the undying quest of
a people for freedom and profound liberation. Like a prism, he could be
seen, read and understood from various facets. In short, he made sense to
many and inspired many at all levels of society.

Tlou e jalo bagaetsho. [The elephant is like that.] Indlovu ingaluhlobo,
mawethu. [The elephant is like that, fellow countrymen.]

The elephant is like that to those who seek to understand. O R, as he was
respectfully and lovingly known, stood as the liberation race runner par
excellence. Such rare leaders run with a torch of freedom very far and as
far and as long as possible, then they hand it over gracefully to the next
appropriate runner without malice or envy due to their gift and
understanding the meaning of the total vision and destiny of a people; such
was O R.

I believe that Oliver Reginald Tambo rose to prominence as a leader not
because of the lust for power, pomp and office avarice so rampant today,
but because of the rare inherent gift of deep commitment to a just cause
and the love and passion for all that enhanced human dignity and the
advancement of human welfare for the common good of all. For his, that is O
R’s, beginnings, I want to thank all those who parented him ... bagolo ba
rona [our elders.] ... and nurtured him through his various stages of
growth, but also never forgetting the community that insisted that the
young and growing O R was going to be raised according to their time-tested
norms and values of their society.

Into being a teacher, a lawyer and liberator he grew, driven by those same
norms, values and ethics of his beginning and upbringing. He never looked
down upon those things. Through many of his students and political
proteges, he touched our society far and wide. One of his products, late
Duma Nokwe, can be remembered vividly by those who attended Mansiville
Junior High School in Krugersdorp.

O R, through Duma Nokwe, conscientised the whole of the West Rand. Remember
the mock protest marches that he conducted within the precincts of
Mansiville High School possibly preparing the students for things to come,
so to say, and also arousing the consciousness of the community at large
about their socio-political conditions. The liberation relay race runners
loomed large and shone brightly on all corners of our land and O R was one
of them.

If you go to the Lady Selborne of yesteryear, you are sure to feel the
impact of Dr William Nkomo; go to Bhongweni Robinson, and you will feel the
impact of pastor Majombozi’s sermon that carried that quest for freedom and
determination to run the race of liberation; go to Madubulaville in
Randfontein, you will meet Dr Molema, carrying the same torch that O R
carried; you run further on lower down, and you would meet Dr Moroka,
carrying the same spirit, the same message, the same passion and the same
norms and values that united our people.
O R’s contemporaries and peer group generously dished out the umrhabulo
[newsletter] free of charge, but they selflessly paid the price of self-
denial, consistency and a great dose of persecution from the erstwhile
regimes. O R never eclipsed his peers but he transmitted light, passion and
inspiration to them. Such is the mettle of great leaders and Oliver Tambo
was one.

Montsamaisa bosigo re moleboga bosele, rre Tambo. Bosele, le fa mareledi a
sa le kwa pele. [Honour and praise is due to the one who helps during hard
times. We have overcome, even though obstacles are forever present.]

Your shining contribution should rouse us and awake us from complacency,
egocentric abuse of power and crying forever without stopping by the rivers
of Babylon.

Re tsamaise ka mowa wa gago o ntse o le kwa o leng teng. Ke a leboga.
[Legofi.] [Guide us with your spirit from where you are.] [Thank you.]
[Applause.]]

Muf T J TSHIVHASE: Ndi matsheloni a vhuḓi. Mulangadzulo, na nne ndi khou
ḓadzisa khali ye ya vha i songo ḓala nga zwe muṱahabvu kana mualuwa washu
vha ri tonda ngazwo. U shela mulenzhe ha Vho O R Tambo kha u shandukiswa
kha vhuvhusi hashu u ya kha demokirasi, ndi zwa ndeme vhukuma. U bva nga
1994, vhufa ha Afurika Tshipembe vhu katela vhathu vhashu vhoṱhe.

Muvhuso wo rangiwaho phanḓa nga ANC u tikedza u ṱuṱuwedza maitele oṱhe a
mvelele ane a pembelela vhuḓi na mvelele zwo fhambananaho. Ndeme ya u fhaṱa
lushaka, u vhuelelana na mveledziso ya vhuvha ha lushaka nga huswa, zwi
sumbedziswa nga demokirasi yashu. Tshitenwa tsha vhufumi tsha Mulayotewa
tshi tikedza maitele aya. Tshi amba uri muṅwe na muṅwe u pfufhiwa nga
khuliso na pfanelo dza uri vhuvha hawe vhu ṱhonifhiwe na u tsireledzwa.
(Translation of Tshivenda paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Good morning, Madam Speaker; I am also contributing to
this celebration of what the late O R our elder, has done for us. The
contribution made by O R Tambo in the transition of government into
democracy is of great importance. Since 1994, the South African heritage
has included all our people.

The ANC-led government supports and encourages all cultural practices that
celebrate the goodness in the diversity of cultures. The importance of
nation-building, reconciliation and development of the character of the
nation are made evident by our democracy. Section 10 of our Constitution
supports this process. It provides that everyone has inherent dignity and
the right to have their dignity respected and protected.]

Heritage is what we received from the past. It sharpens our present
identity and provides insight for our future. Heritage is a range of
factors and it includes objectives, ideas, places and traditions. The
majority of the oppressed people of South Africa were denied their rightful
heritage by the apartheid government policies. It is in this norm that
every year the month of September is celebrated as Heritage Month. This
means that South Africans, from all the different cultural backgrounds come
out and embrace; and celebrate their heritage in various forms. This year
the theme of this celebration is Commemorating Heritage Day: Special
Tribute to Oliver Reginald Tambo.

Naṅwaha nyambedzano dzashu dzo sedza kha u shela mulenzhe ho itwaho nga Vho
Oliver Tambo kha u shandukisela muvhuso wa Afurika Tshipembe kha
demokirasi. Muthu a nga mangala uri ndi ngani hu tshi elelwa Vho Oliver
Reginald Tambo kha uno ṅwedzi wa Vhufa. Phindulo dzo anda, ngauri vhufa ho
ḓisendeka nga zwe ra wana tshifhingani tsho fhiraho nga u ṱanganedza u
shela mulenzhe ho itwaho nga murafho wa vharangaphanḓa vho fhiraho. Zwi a
pfesesea u ṱanganedza u shela mulenzhe ho itwaho nga Vho O R Tambo kha u
ḓsa tshanduko ya vhuvhusi ha demokirasi. (Translation of Tshivenda
paragraph follows.)

[This year our speeches are focusing on the contribution made by O R Tambo
in the transition of South African government into democracy. One can
wonder why we are remembering Mr Oliver Reginald Tambo in this Heritage
Month. There are many answers. Because heritage is based on what we
received from the past and we are acknowledging the contributions made by
our predecessors. It is understandable that the contribution made by Mr O R
Tambo in bringing democratic government is acknowledged.]

Oliver Reginald Tambo was born in a rural area in the Eastern Cape, a place
called Mbizana, as the Minister has already indicated. Mbizana is known for
its legacy from the 1960s, especially the Pondoland Uprising, which became
known as the Pondoland Revolts. Oliver Tambo is regarded as a pioneer,
nation-builder, liberation movement leader, not only to South Africans, but
within Africa.

Vho vha vhe munwe wa miraḓo yo thomaho dzangano ḽa vhaswa vha ANC nga 1944.
Vho ḓ vha Phuresidennde wa ANC nga 1969 nga murahu ha u lovha ha Khosi Vho
Albert Luthuli, nahone vho ḓo dovha vha nangwa hafhu kha Kabwe Consultative
Conference nga 1985. Vho vha muṅwe wa vhathu vhe vha vha vha tshi
ṱhonifhiwa nga maanḓa kha dzhango ḽa Afurika, Europe, Asia na America. Musi
vhe murangaphanḓa wa ANC, Vho Oliver Tambo vho ḓo takulela vhuimo ha
dzangano nṱha, musi ho vhambedziwa na muvhuso wa Pretoria. (Translation of
Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[He was one of the founder members of the ANC Youth League in 1944. He
became president of the ANC in 1969 after the death of Chief Albert
Luthuli, and he was also re-elected in the Kabwe Consultative Conference in
1985. He was one of the most highly respected people in Africa, Europe,
Asia and America. When he was still the leader of the ANC, Mr Oliver Tambo
raised the standards of ANC tremendously compared to the Pretoria
government.]

Amongst other things, he will be remembered for his involvement in the
leadership amongst the generation of African nationalist leaders who
emerged after the Second World War, who were instrumental in the
transformation of the ANC from a liberal organisation into a radical
national liberation movement, for his reception in many parts of the world,
with the protocol reserved for the heads of state; upholder of the dignity
of men and women of every colour, race and creed; an inveterate fighter for
liberty; and a symbol for black people’s hope that the rights of men will
be recognised everywhere.

Vho Oliver Tambo vho dovha hafhu vha shela mulenzhe kha u bveledza na u
alusa ANC na pholisi dzayo. Musi vha tshi amba nga tshifhinga tsha Ninth
Extra-ordinary session ya Khantsele ya dzi Minisiṱa ya Dzangano ḽa Vhuthihi
ha Afurika – AOU - ngei Dares Salaam nga Lambamai 1975, vho bvisela bono
ḽavho khagala ḽa uri naho vhathu vhashu vha nga vhaisiwa lungafhanani nga
muvhuso wa tshiṱalula, nḓila ya maitele a demokirasi i kha sia ḽashu rine
sa ANC.

Vho Oliver Tambo vha ḓo elelwa nga vhathu vhanzhi vha Afurika Tshipembe na
ḽifhasi nga vhuphara, nga u vha na mikhwa, ṱhuṱhuwedzo, luvhonela na
vhuṱali kha u swikelela maitele a mulalo ḽifhasini ḽoṱhe. Nga dzi 29
Khubvumedzi 2006, Phuresidennde Vho Thabo Mbeki, vho ḓo dalela Mbizana u
sumbedzisa ṱhompho kha O R Tambo’s Garden of Rememberance na u ṱola
nḓisedzo ya tshumelo kha vhupo uho.

Madalo ayo o ḓa nga tshifhinga tshithihi na maṅwe maitele a re kha
tshivhalo tsha shango, o ḓisendeka kha u elelwa Vho O R Tambo, hu tshi
katelwa na u riniwa hafhu ha Johannesburg International Airport ya vho pfi
O R Tambo International Airport. (Translation of Tshivenda paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr Oliver Tambo also contributed to the development and growth of the ANC
and its policies. When he spoke during the 9th Extraordinary Session of the
Council of Ministers of the Organisation of African Unity, the OAU, in Dar
es Salaam in April 1975, he made his vision clear that no matter how hurt
our people were by the apartheid government, the ANC would still adhere to
the democratic process.

Mr Oliver Tambo will be remembered by all the people of South Africa and
the whole world for being disciplined, for his encouragement, foresight and
wisdom to bring peace in the whole world. On 29 September 2006, President
Thabo Mbeki visited Mbizana to show respect for O R Tambo’s garden of
remembrance as well as to check service delivery in that area.

The visit took place at the same time as many other activities that were
aimed at remembering O R Tambo were taking place throughout the country,
including renaming Johannesburg International Airport O R Tambo
International Airport.]

Since the visit of the President there has been progress in a number of
areas. These include the following: The construction of a garden of
remembrance at Nkantolo has been completed; a cultural village has been
constructed in Mbizana, in partnership with the Ekurhuleni Metropolitan
Municipality; local economic development within Nkantolo village will be
encouraged and its products will be showcased at the cultural village.

The South African Biodiversity Institute, through its programme of greening
the nation, is currently establishing a nursery in the support of a fully
functioning and sustainable O R Tambo cultural village. The road leading to
Nkantolo is being upgraded as part of efforts to make it a tourist
destination. The Tambo family home will be reconstructed, and a preliminary
design has been done, including the appointment of quantity surveyors. The
site of the Tambo home has been demarcated just next to the cultural
village. That is showcasing. Dali Tambo, you know. A decision on declaring
this home a national monument will also have to be taken.

In partnership with the National Heritage Council, the Eastern Cape
provincial government is dealing with deliberating a heritage route, which
connects the places of birth of all the liberation stalwarts born in the
province. Nkantolo, alongside Qunu, Quthubeni, Ginsberg and other places
will future prominently in these plans. A detailed concept paper on all
heritage issues in this regard was developed. Furthermore, following the
executive committee’s visit to Ekurhuleni, the understanding is that the
Gauteng and the Eastern Cape provincial governments will form a
partnership.

As I have already indicated, there has been progress in a number of areas.

Vhushaka ha mivhuso yo ṱanganelaho na tsumbedzo ya zwiimiswazwapo;
mbekanyamushumo ya mveledziso yapo ya ikonomi – LED, mveledziso ya Wild
Coast na zwa vhuendelamashango; na mafhungo a zwa vhufa na vhukonani vhu
fanaho, na zwone zwo dzhielwa nṱha. Guvhangano ḽa vhathu – People’s
Assembly, sa zwe Minisiṱa vha amba, ḽe ḽa fariwa maḓuvhani a si gathi o
fhiraho ngei Mbizana, u bva nga dzi 15 u swika dzi 17 Khubvumedzi 2007, ndi
maṅwe a maga a ndeme a ḓivhazwakale ya vhupo uho ha Afurika Tshipembe.
(Translation of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[The relationship between integrated governments and the presence of local
infrastructures, and the Local Economic Development, LED, the development
of the Wild Coast and tourism, heritage and common friendship were also
taken into consideration. The People’s Assembly, as the Minister mentioned,
was held a few days ago in Mbizana, from 15 to 17 September 2007, is one of
the most important historical steps taken in that part of South Africa.]

Today the Department of Social ... I am sorry, it is because I was in
Social Development ... [Laughter.] Today the Department of Arts and Culture
recognises and salutes the role Oliver Tambo played in fighting
wholeheartedly for South Africans to be liberated from many forms of
apartheid and colonialism, which have robbed the masses of the right to the
franchise and equality before everything. The provincial government for the
Eastern Cape has been engaged in this project that supports the aspirations
of the Mbizana community, as raised during the presidential imbizo.

Zwinzhi zwi nga ambiwa nga ha u shela mulenzhe ha munnawavhane Vho Oliver
Reginald Tambo kha u shandukisa vhuvhusi ha Afurika Tshipembe ha
demokirasi. Bono ḽavho ḽa Afurika Tshipembe ḽa khwine, ḽo ḓisendekaho nga
maitele a ḽifhasi ḽo vhofholowaho ḽi ḓo ḓi elelwa nga murafho u ḓaho wa
Afurika Tshipembe. A thi ḓivhi zwauri vhone vha ḓo sia zwifhio musi vha
tshi ṱuwa fhano shangoni.

Matshaina vha ri: Muri u tshe wo tou ima, a u vhonali vhulapfu hawo, musi
wo no lala fhasi, ndi hone u tshi kona u vhonala zwauri wo lapfa – ndi dzi
khilomitha na dzi mithara nngana. Hezwo zwi khou sumbedza uri vhuṱala he
Vho Oliver Tambo vha tshimbila khaho, na rine ri ḓo sala ri tshi vha elelwa
ngaho. Ri ḓo kanda henefhala – rine na vhaḓuhulu vhashu. Ndi a livhuwa. Vha
lale nga muya wa vhuḓi na muṱa wavho. [U vhanda zwanḓa.] (Translation of
Tshivenda paragraphs follows.)

[A lot can be said about the contribution made by the late Mr Oliver
Reginald Tambo in the democratisation of South Africa. His vision of a
better South Africa, based on the process of the free world, will be
remembered by the coming generations in South Africa. I don’t know what
legacy you will leave behind when you depart this world.

The Chinese say that: It is not easy to speak about the contribution of a
person while he or she is still alive; it is when the person is deceased
that people speak about the good that the person has done. This shows that
the trail that Mr Oliver Tambo walked, we shall also remember him by. We
shall follow in his footsteps together with our grandchildren. I thank you.
Rest in peace with your family. [Applause.]]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers, hon
members and distinguished guests, I feel honoured and privileged to be
amongst those hon members and colleagues requested to pay tribute to one of
the greatest and most gallant sons of Africa, Mr Oliver Reginald Tambo.
My party’s appreciation also goes to the Office of the Speaker of the
National Assembly and of the Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces for creating the opportunity for Members of Parliament to see and
experience live; to hear political lamentations, songs and poetry at first
hand, in Beyond the Engeli Mountains, which is the birthplace of Mr Oliver
Reginald Tambo.

Plato believed that the rationale or reason, the spirit or emotions and the
appetitive or needs are fundamental to the ideal form of state, human
institution and organisation and that only a philosopher’s ruler and a man
of virtue would be best suited to care, nurture and fulfil the idealism of
the dreams and aspirations of his people.

Pre-liberation, the philosopher, politician and statesman Oliver Reginald
Tambo became the ideal caretaker of the ANC’s mission in exile and
therefore an embodiment of the dreams and aspirations of the oppressed
black majority in South Africa. He performed this majestic task in the
counsel of some of his comrades-in-arms, President Thabo Mbeki and Mr Jacob
Zuma, amongst others.

This is how more than three decades ago, and through the eyes and
acquaintances of Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the young and old, but
prominent leader of the then IFP, came to know and respect Mr Oliver
Reginald Tambo. We know that on Monday, 17 September 2007, at Mbizana, he
described him this way:

   A towering figure of modern history, who lived a life of supreme
   compassion, courage and generosity of spirit in the most difficult of
   circumstances, whose warmth, humility, consummate political judgment and
   unwavering commitment to the cause never failed to inspire him.

Mr Tambo’s charisma, his erudite international diplomacy, enabled him to
move the often Machiavellian-inclined politics of the Western and Eastern
powers to a point where the UN had to declare apartheid a crime against
humanity. Addressing the plenary meeting at the General Assembly of the UN
on 26 October 1976, he said:


   This august body advanced the ideals and objectives enshrined in its
   Charter when it declared the system of apartheid a crime against humanity
   and adopted a convention for its suppression and punishment. It was a
   fault of the times that in 1945 representatives of the colonial system in
   South Africa were admitted into this organisation of the world’s people.
   It is a gross travesty of justice and an evil tribute to the arrogant
   power of international imperialism that today these representatives are
   still allowed to walk freely into this forum and pose as spokesmen of our
   people.

Hon members, if we were to appear before a heavenly convocation of past
heroes and heroines of the African struggle for freedom, presided over by
Oliver Tambo, would we, with a measure of certainty say we have attained
for the people their full political, economic, cultural, linguistic and
psychological emancipation? Have we won or are we winning the war against
poverty, hunger, underdevelopment and social deprivation? Would we say that
to him?

The material and ideal dream of Oliver Tambo should continue to be the ties
that bind and weave us in a singular strand of hope and victory over the
adversity that is facing the poorest of the poor today.

In the words of a young African woman poet, Lebo Mashile – I must say to us
and the distinguished guests, parents and friends of O R Tambo - ``You and
I, we have become the keepers of the dream.” Today, I say, we are the
keepers of the dream of Oliver Reginald Tambo.

Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J BICI: Hon Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Deputy President, hon
Ministers, hon members and distinguished guests, every nation prides itself
on its heritage and the richness of its culture and history. In South
Africa we are the sons and daughters of so many different rich traditions.
Nor need we fear contradiction when we say that we have been blessed among
our ancestors with a multitude of great thinkers and remarkable leaders.

For us in South Africa, the question of leadership and heritage has
therefore always been intertwined. Thus, there were leaders who rose among
many different groups to resist colonialism in its various forms.
Throughout every generation South Africa was blessed with the emergence of
a new set of leaders. Thus, O R Tambo stands among such names as the
Sisulus, the Mandelas and the Sobukwes in the pantheon of South African
leaders, but in the generation prior to him and the generation that
followed there are also leaders of historic importance.

O R Tambo travelled the world, negotiated African footholds for the ANC and
even addressed international forums such as the UN in the campaign against
apartheid. Not only did he achieve these remarkable things, but he also
played a pivotal role in reshaping and redirecting the pre-World War II ANC
into a mass liberation movement. Amandla! [Power!] [Laughter.]

It is one of the saddest twists of fate that O R Tambo did not live to see
the first democratic elections of 1994. We must pay tribute to O R Tambo
for bequeathing us this unified cultural treasure trove.

What a coincidence, because while we talk about celebrations and things
like that, I am sure some of us are aware and know that the UDM was born in
this month of celebration and remembrance. [Laughter.] On 29 September, we
will therefore be celebrating at Gallagher Estate, in Midrand. We invite
members and the Speaker to attend as well. We did go to Mbizana.
Truly, when we look upon our combined heritage, we must celebrate, because
we are a nation rich beyond measure. Thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO: Deputy Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members and guests, September is a month in which we, as a nation,
celebrate our heritage. It is a month in which we pause and take stock of
our diverse, rich culture and traditions, as inherited from generation to
generation. We do so because it is only when we know where we come from
that we can know where we are going. We also do so because it is our
considered view that the country that does not value its culture and
heritage is a country that has lost its proverbial soul and therefore does
not deserve its future.

It is our view that cultural heritage, properly harnessed, can and will
contribute in a meaningful way to the development of our nation. World
experience has shown that preservation of cultural heritage, when properly
marketed, can have very important economic spin-offs.

An important heritage or history that is not properly documented in our
country is the history for the struggle for national liberation. If this is
documented in any way, then it is done so in a fragmented way. We need
comprehensive documentation of this and it should be placed in our national
archives so that future generations can know where this country comes from
so that they can be in a position to value this country.

It is often said, and we agree, that history is made by the masses. But it
cannot be denied that there are individuals who make immense contributions
in the making of history, so much so that that history would not be
complete without their inputs.

The history of this country would not be complete without the contribution
of Comrade O R Tambo. It is therefore befitting, hon Chairperson, that in
this Heritage Month we pay tribute to and celebrate the life of Comrade O R
Tambo, as he was affectionately known.

The President of the ANC and of the country, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, says in
the preface of the book Beyond the Engeli Mountains:
   It was Oliver Tambo who kept our movement together through his skilled
   and sensitive leadership of the ANC during its 30 years of illegality and
   exile. It was during these trying times of struggle and sacrifice that
   Comrade O R Tambo became exemplary, both to those in exile and to the
   millions of members and grassroots supporters at home, including
   political prisoners.

Chair, the above statement summarises in the most profound way who Tambo
was – a leader of rare qualities.

I have not interacted with Comrade Oliver Tambo many times, but the few
times that I did interact with him, he touched my life in very special
ways. I never saw him angry, but for one occasion in 1984, after the
signing of the Nkomati Accord. He went from camp to camp in Angola briefing
the MK soldiers about the accord. He angrily said on that occasion: ``Sis,
this looks like the burial ceremony of the ANC. But the ANC will not be in
that coffin.” Indeed, our presence here today means we refused to be in
that coffin, as Comrade O R said.

Comrade O R was very passionate about educational development of his
soldiers. As commander-in-chief, every time he went to the camps he
enquired about educational programmes over and above the military
programmes. While he called upon the young lions of our country to swell
the ranks of MK, he also encouraged those who were very young to pursue
formal education in exile.

Although he was the president of the ANC and commander-in-chief of the
army, he did not live in an ivory tower. He would reprimand commanders who
attempted to stop ordinary subordinates who wanted to bring their personal
problems to him. After his visiting any camp, everybody’s morale would be
high; convinced that one day we will be victors, as we are today.

International mobilisation was one of the pillars of the struggle for
liberation in South Africa. Thanks to the leadership of O R that as a
liberation movement we acquitted ourselves very well on that front.
Although it was during the time of the Cold War, Comrade O R Tambo could
speak to both the East and the West.

Governments and heads of state of both sides of the battle lines respected
him. He was treated like a head of state in many countries, both East and
West. This should tell a story of the quality of the man we are talking
about today - a man with rare leadership qualities.

Chairperson, the man whose life we are celebrating today in this Heritage
Month is almost the only man today who has been present at every turn of
events in the liberation struggle since the 1940s up to his passing on. He
helped to develop the ANC into a nonracial democratic organisation.

The Tripartite Alliance was close to his heart for he understood better
than anyone else that the need for unity of all progressive and democratic
forces is a prerequisite to defeat apartheid. Unity remains a condition
today to realise the objectives of the national democratic revolution. It
is only an enemy of the national democratic revolution who can say today
that the unity that Comrade O R Tambo, Comrade Mabhida and Yusuf Dadoo
built is no longer relevant.

When he closed the Kabwe Conference in 1985, Comrade O R Tambo said among
other things: “My remaining life will be spent in struggle.” True, he never
gave up, even at the time when his health failed him; he soldiered on up to
the last day. Indeed, he spent his remaining life in struggle.
Heritage is a memory of any nation. Comrade O R must not be the national
memory of the ANC alone – he is a national asset to all who call themselves
South Africans and patriots.

Basil February, one of the campaigners, once said that a revolutionary
never dies but lives forever in the minds of those who love him. Comrade
Oliver Tambo will live forever in our minds and his name and legacy will
remain a national heritage for the future generations. He will always be
remembered by the masses of our country and the world for selflessness as
opposed to selfishness, for valour and commitment in advancing the ideals
of the national democratic revolution. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, today we pay a special tribute to O R Tambo
whose contribution, along with those other great leaders of our soil like
Robert Sobukwe, Steve Bantu Biko and Nelson Mandela, has given us the gift
of freedom, democracy and the restoration of our common humanity.

As a young leader in our democratic Parliament, I feel enormously humbled
by the immense sacrifices that have been made by leaders like these that
allow all of us to now participate in this nonracial, nonsexist democracy.

This Heritage Day is also about celebrating South Africa’s poetry and it
must be borne in mind that the art of creating through using the inventive
and suggestive virtues of language is natural to Africans. The flow of
proverbs, sayings and exclamations of our indigenous languages is poetic.

Poetry in itself is an invaluable tradition at promoting and preserving our
cultural diversity and, together with folktales, proverbs, songs, riddles
and figures of speech, is vital in the passing on of wisdom, experience and
heritage from one generation to the next.

Today, I also pay tribute to Lebogang Mashile, Tatamkhulu Afrika, Jeremy
Cronin, Wally Serote and those who have taken it upon themselves to enrich
our society with the spoken and written word.

The roots of African poetry are as deep as African heritage and this is why
the preserving of one depends on the other. As mandated by the
Constitution, we have the responsibility to develop African culture and
part of this means nurturing our indigenous languages and supporting South
African literature.

We also need to invest in the teaching of African languages by investing in
teachers of the subject and encouraging the study of African literature. In
the past certain languages were imposed on African people at the expense of
indigenous languages and not enough has been done to redress the matter.

Language has played a major role in the history of our country. As Sobukwe
once said: “We dare not compromise, nor dare we use moderated language in
the cause of freedom.” Yet today we are living in a society where even
language is a barrier for cohesion and we seem to have adopted a passive
approach. Not enough urban schools have indigenous languages as subjects,
yet African learners bend over backwards to pass English so that they can
access tertiary education.

We are a diverse society but we are also a divided society and language is
unfortunately one of the dividing factors. It would therefore not be an
unfair practice to make it a compulsory measure that all schools teach the
indigenous language or languages most prevalent in their province. In
recent history we have also seen a significant growth in the hip-hop and
poetry culture among our youth but there is also an element of
Americanisation of this scene. And to curb that we must arouse a sense of
pride and identity in South African youth so that they too can carry the
torch into the future. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Chair, the ACDP acknowledges that among South African
leaders Oliver Tambo was probably one of the most highly respected in the
world. The ACDP salutes Oliver Tambo for his dedication to the needs of
ordinary people. He chose to stand for poor people rather than to represent
the rich and the well-known.

We see how he worked to bring the everyday people of South Africa into the
political arena, leaving a legacy of caring about those who are so often
overlooked: the poor, the unemployed, widows and orphans, in line with
biblical principles.

As a man who spent his life trying to enfranchise the black people of South
Africa, we imagine O R would have been a passionate opponent to our modern-
day scourge of floor-crossing.

He sacrificed his honours degree for leading a boycott for democracy at
Fort Hare University. Imagine the dismay he would feel at the antics
displayed today, where the dignity of the people’s opinion and their hard-
won vote has been totally disregarded through floor-crossing, and this is
legal.

I believe if O R were alive today he would also probably not be fighting
citizens’ groups protesting against druglords. He would more likely
wholeheartedly support those taking a stand against the devastating
influence of drugs that’s shattering people’s lives in South Africa today.
I doubt also, that he would approve the muzzling of state employees;
watching those who speak out on inefficiency and bad management in order to
improve service delivery being fired or demoted would not have been the
legacy O R Tambo would have had in mind.

The ACDP pays tribute to the memory of O R Tambo. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Chairperson
of the NCOP, hon Deputy President, hon members, let me begin by greeting
the guests of the Justice department, the Minister of Justice, Booker and
his entourage. [Applause.] In the gallery I also recognise Comrade Frene
Ginwala and the family, of course, of O R Tambo.

Today’s debate is dedicated to the memory of a great South African.

Oliver Tambo was a founding father of our democracy and the new
constitutional order. Many may still be asking who O R Tambo is. Oliver
Tambo was a man of great courage, a visionary and indeed an outstanding
leader. President Mbeki once described him as a man with no trace of
selfishness or arrogance. He saw himself as an ordinary foot soldier, the
unsung infantryman in the army of ordinary working people of our country.

His son Dali Tambo, who is with us here today, described his father as a
practitioner of law and a political leader. These many and interwoven
strengths that characterised him were brought together, culminating in a
low-key leadership style that ensured that the many disparate elements that
made up the ANC would weave together into a cohesive organism.

I am going to pay tribute to O R as the architect of our democracy. The
period 1985-1990 is an important time in our history and a defining moment
for O R Tambo as leader of the ANC. This was a time of intensive repression
and also a time of a determined struggle against apartheid. Indeed the
struggle was intensified on all fronts inside and outside South Africa.
Combatants gave no quarter to the enemy.

Internationalists waved high the flag for the liberation of South Africa.
We enjoyed solidarity from all corners of the globe. It was also a time
when hope for the resolution of the conflict in South Africa was
flickering. It was around this period that we had begun to conceptualise
post-apartheid policies, beginning with the Harare Declaration of 1989.
This was a period of extraordinary courage by thousands of our people in
resisting the total onslaught by apartheid South Africa within and outside
our borders.

The gallant O R Tambo led on all fronts. He led those in combat and those
who were laying the foundation for negotiations. He led those
conceptualising post-apartheid policy. All these strings came together
under his able leadership. Many of those close to him believe that he
applied himself so intensely to the drafting of the Harare Declaration that
it cost him his health. Many of the principles contained in the Harare
Declaration were carried into the negotiation process. O R played a pivotal
role in preparing the ANC for negotiations with apartheid South Africa and
for a democratic South Africa. After the ANC conference in Kabwe in 1985,
he personally took charge of establishing the ANC’s legal and
constitutional affairs department, which, of course, came to be led by Zola
Skweyiya.

This department was to be the core group of the ANC’s legal team at
negotiations. Those working on the policies for a future South Africa will
remember the intense activities between 1989 and 1992, when numerous forums
were established within and outside South Africa, discussing various
elements of policy, the economy, health, education, housing - you name it -
local government, justice and the constitution itself. No area of policy
was left untouched.

We recall that he instructed the constitutional committee of the ANC that
the Freedom Charter shall be the basis for the new constitution of South
Africa. We recall also that he instructed those negotiating that children’s
and women’s rights should be uppermost. Comrades will recall the
resolutions of the 1987 International Children’s Conference held in Harare,
which got carried into policy eventually, that is national policy.

A fact of importance which we may forget is the fact that in 1990, it was O
R who had laid the foundation for the entry of UNICEF as the first UN
agency to operate in South Africa in preparation for a post-apartheid
dispensation.

Many women in South Africa will recall the Malibongwe Conference, which
also laid the basis for current gender policies. Comrades and friends, I
just want to say that we shouldn’t forget that in fact it was O R who, at
the Women’s Section Conference in Luanda in 1981, advocated for women‘s
rights in the struggle for gender equality.

Let me quote what he said then:

    The struggle to conquer oppression in our country is the weaker for the
    traditionalist, conservative and primitive restraints imposed on women
    by men-dominated structures within our movement, as also because of
    equally traditionalist attitudes.


He then went on to say:


    Black women of South Africa who are more oppressed and exploited should
    lead in the struggle for their emancipation.

We dare not forget Oliver Tambo, one of the great architects of our
democracy. In memory of this great man, we should continue to work for
change by defending the values enshrined in our Constitution, by
strengthening our constitutional democracy. [Interjections.] I am sure you
didn’t mean to howl.

South Africa needs leaders of the calibre of O R Tambo. He was selfless,
principled and resolute, and I think that proper tribute has already been
paid by speakers from the ANC, in particular Commander Tolo.

On occasions like this, representatives of the people like yourselves, hon
members, should commit to upholding the values of our Constitution. We
should build a nonracial, nonsexist society. Ours is a march forward,
creating a caring society, fighting ignorance, poverty and disease, and
establishing enduring institutions of democracy and good governance.

To the young South Africans - I see we have many in the gallery - black and
white: Yours is a bright future, thanks to the courage of inspirational
leaders such as O R. Seize the opportunities you have. Study to be better
people. Let us all cherish the legacy left by leaders like O R Tambo by
fighting all ills that are associated with backwardness, falsehood and
corruption. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Voorsitter ... [Chairperson ...] Sekela Mongameli
obekekileyo ... [Hon Deputy President ...] - I see the Deputy has left, but
I’m greeting her in her absence - and colleagues ...

... oor bietjie minder as ‘n maand vier ons die 90ste herdenking van Oliver
Tambo se geboortedag. Dit is gepas dat ons vandag dan hierdie geleentheid
gegee word om te reflekteer op die belangrike erflating van hierdie waarlik
groot Suid-Afrikaner aan sy landgenote.

O R, soos hy alombekend was, was ’n man van vele gawes en goeie kwaliteite;
’n man wat die soeke na kennis en wysheid terdeë geniet het. Toe die
President van die Reserwebank, Tito Mboweni, onlangs gepleit het dat ons
moet waak daarteen dat onkunde die basis vir leierskap begin word in Suid-
Afrika, kon hy ons net sowel gemaan het om Oliver Tambo se nalatenskap te
respekteer.

Terwyl dit nie vir my beskore is om te weet wat Oliver Tambo se gedagtes
was omtrent wat geleerdheid is en nie is nie, en dit aan u uit te lê nie,
kan ek dit wel onomwonde stel dat hy geleerdheid as ’n baie belangrike en
baie eg persoonlike verantwoordelikheid gesien het. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In little more than a month we celebrate the 90th anniversary of Oliver
Tambo’s birthday. It is therefore fitting that we are given this day to
reflect on the important legacy that this truly great South African left
his fellow countrymen.

O R, as he was widely known, was a man of many gifts and good qualities; a
man who thoroughly enjoyed the pursuit of knowledge and wisdom. When the
Governor of the Reserve Bank, Tito Mboweni, recently pleaded that we must
guard againt ignorance becoming the basis for leadership in South Africa,
he might as well have urged us to respect Oliver Tambo’s legacy.

While it is not my fortune to know what Oliver Tambo’s thoughts were on
what is learning and what not, and to expound on it, I can unequivocally
state that he regarded learning as a very important and truly personal
responsibility.]

His willingness to learn, even when learning did not happen in particularly
ideal circumstances, is no better signified than by the inspiration he drew
from the colonial era poster depicting the twisting trail of so-called
native education up a “mountain of knowledge”.

This depiction was the epitome of the manner in which young black men and
women were patronised into a life of subservience, yet Oliver turned it
into a positive force and a metaphor for good that lasted him the rest of
his life. That is: The closer one comes to summit the mountain of
knowledge, the more you are enabled to live out the noble ideas by which
you are inspired.

Had the colonial authorities realised that Oliver Tambo and many others of
his ilk would never let the government of the day determine on their behalf
what ideas they should or should not regard as noble, the mountain of
knowledge poster would, in all probability, have been censored. Thankfully
for us they did not.

In striving for a society where choices are plentiful and free, a society
where access to opportunities are as close to equal as possible, where
success is the responsibility of the individual and where the only
determinant of success is the willingness of the individual to prove him or
herself, the DA remembers Oliver Tambo fondly for outlining his vision for
South Africa as one “in which black and white shall live and work together
as equals in conditions of peace and prosperity”.

We remember him for saying that it is “our responsibility to break down the
barriers of division”. If we as law-makers would like to see this legacy
respected, then it follows that we should cease making laws that encourage
division. Let us now recommit ourselves to live as this great patriot
suggested, “as just South Africans, free and united in diversity”.

Ndiyabulela. [I thank you.]

Thank you.

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Chairman, a few years ago the new statue of King
Makhado of the Venda in Louis Trichardt was damaged by some people. The FF
Plus condemned the damaging of the Makhado statue as strongly as we
condemned the insensitive removal of Louis Trichardt’s bust in the same
town. King Makhado was a hero to the Venda, as Louis Trichardt was a hero
to Afrikaners. The removal of Louis Trichardt’s bust, or recently the
Standerton monument, is as unacceptable and insults people as much as the
vandalism of the Makhado statue.

A lack of sensitivity for the emotions involved in communities’ histories
and their heroes has led to this unacceptable situation. We must find
sensible solutions which will halt these actions and reactions, and there
is only one answer, by respecting each other’s culture and by respecting
each other’s heritage.

Oliver Tambo het ’n groot rol gespeel in die geskiedenis van die ANC en van
Suid-Afrika. Ek dink dis gepas dat hy erkenning kry en dat hy vernoem word.
Genl Jan Smuts het ’n groot rol in die geskiedenis van die ou Verenigde
Party van Suid-Afrika gespeel. Smuts is nie een van my helde nie, maar ek
dink dit is gepas dat hy erkenning kry en vernoem word. Hoewel hy die
hoofopponent van die vorige Nasionale Party-regering in 1948 was, is die
Johannesburgse lughawe steeds na hom vernoem.

Ek wil dan verskil van die benadering waar Jan Smuts tans moet plek maak
vir Tambo, waar Louis Trichardt moet plek maak vir Makhado. In verskeie
Afrikastate is hierdie benadering gevolg waar byvoorbeeld strate wat na
vorige leiers soos Chiluba of Lumumba vernoem is, weer opnuut na die nuwe
leiers benoem is toe hulle aan bewind gekom het.

Hierdie benadering los nie probleme op nie, maar veroorsaak nuwes. Ek dink
dit is slim om die pad na die lughawe na mev Albertina Sisulu te vernoem,
aangesien die pad tot nou toe nog nie vernoem is nie en ek dink dit is die
antwoord. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Oliver Tambo played a major role in the history of the ANC and that of
South Africa. I think it is fitting that he be given recognition and be
named. Gen Jan Smuts played a major role in the history of the old United
Party of South Africa. Smuts is not one of my heroes, however, I think it
is fitting that he be given recognition and be named. Although he was the
chief opponent of the old National Party government in 1948, the
Johannesburg Airport was nevertheless named after him.

I would therefore like to differ with the approach that the present Jan
Smuts has to make way for Tambo, that Louis Trichardt has to make way for
Makhado. In several African states this approach has been followed, where,
for example, roads that had been named after previous leaders, such as
Chiluba or Lumumba, were renamed once again after the new leaders came to
power.

This approach does not solve problems, but rather creates new ones. I think
it was a clever move to have named the road to the airport after Mrs
Albertina Sisulu, as the road has thus far not been named and I think that
that is the answer.]

In the previous century, British culture, as the so-called superior
culture, was forced down the throats of everyone. It did not succeed and
caused friction and violence. No culture is superior to any other.

I said there is only one answer. Let us respect each other’s culture. Let
us respect each other’s heritage and let us allow room for acknowledging
everyone’s heritage and heroes. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP and hon members, when one
thinks about O R Tambo, this larger than life character, one feels that the
question, “What good has ever come from Nazareth?” is quite apt to describe
this giant from the little-known Kantolo, a village that has not seen the
light of day on maps and atlases in South Africa. What good has come from
Kantolo? Surely it is the legend called O R Tambo.

Tambo delighted in challenges. He decided to study science when most black
students at the time went for the easier option of studying the arts. O R
was a successful teacher of this rare discipline. His success as a teacher
would leave the modern-day teachers green with envy as they find it
difficult to impress their students. O R taught men of substance like hon
Andrew Mlangeni, Joe Matthews, Henry Makgothi and my leader, the man with a
mind of his own, Kgosi Lucas Mangope. [Laughter.]

I have a nagging feeling that if O R were to visit the ANC these days, he
would find an intolerant organisation, whose members keep on screaming as
they are, even on this day, against people who hold a different view.

As a statesman, O R was characterised by humility. He never saw himself as
the leader of the ANC. He always sought the mandate from those who were
incarcerated on Robben Island before major decisions would be taken. He was
consultative. His simplicity made him the glue that held the movement
together when there were tensions – once a teacher, always a teacher.

O R Tambo showed his mettle and concern for young people when he raised
funds from the international community to give shelter and education to the
young exiles in the wake of the 1976 riots. To him liberty without learning
would be in peril and learning without liberty would be in vain. One
wonders to what extent learned people would enjoy the fruits of liberty 13
years on. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson, hon Speaker, hon Deputy Speaker, hon
Ministers and families of our great heroes. On 19 February 1993, our
beloved Oliver Tambo wisely remarked in his opening speech at the
International Solidarity Conference:


   The challenge confronting all of us is to turn South Africa round - to
   make of her the opposite of what she has been. Where she has been the
   examplar of racism and national antagonisms, we must turn her into the
   examplar of nonracism and national harmony.

Almost 14 years into the democracy, we strive to deliver upon this vision
of a great comrade who strove for the freedom and liberation of the South
African people. Honourable Nelson Mandela correctly summed this up in his
eulogy at O R Tambo’s funeral and said:


   Oliver lived not because he could breathe.
  He lived not because blood flowed through his veins.
  Oliver lived not because he did all the things that all of us as ordinary
  men and women do. Oliver lived because he had surrendered his very being
  to the people.


O R Tambo was exiled from his home, South Africa, for 30 years, and he also
toured internationally, seeking assistance to end the apartheid regime. His
pleas were heard when the United Nations declared South Africa’s apartheid
regime a crime against humanity in 1973.

We sadly remember his death in 1993, at the dawn of apartheid and the birth
of democracy. Oliver Tambo has been described as the glue that held the
anti-apartheid movement together. He envisioned a South Africa with no
racial division; no matter what our roots are, we just became South
Africans through our diversity.

We salute the beloved Oliver Tambo and recognise him as a symbol of all
comrades who devoted their lives to the liberation of South Africa, the
freedom or our people. Equality and democracy shall live as it has grown
since its birth in 1994.
Oliver Tambo played a symbolic role in our heritage and left the legacy of
freedom and democracy, which came through what he sacrificed, and the
sacrifices of many others. We celebrate our victory now and for centuries
to come. Long live the great memory of our great hero, O R, long live! I
thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, we salute O R Tambo for his role in our
national struggle, also for his pioneering role in education, as well as in
law. He was amongst some of the first persons in the African community to
practice law. He was a remarkable leader; he was a great achiever.

In paying tribute to O R, I want to emphasise that as a nation we should
honour all our heroes from past wars of national resistance to today.

Among these I want to mention King Hintsa ... inkunzi abayikhuz’ukuhlaba,
ingekahlabi [a man who is well known for bravery] ... King Cetshwayo, the
architect of the Battle of Isandlwana, in which the African Spear triumphed
over the military might of British imperialism; Makana, or “the left-
handed”, who was amongst the first political prisoners to be sent to Robben
Island; Jafta Masemola, a PAC leader who invented a key on Robben Island
which could open any prison door. He was in prison there for 28 years; and
Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe, the only political leader in this country for
whom there was a special law called the “Sobukwe Clause”.

As we pay tribute to Oliver Tambo today, let us remember all who made
themselves the sacrifice for the liberation of our country. In their honour
let us not forget that land repossession in our country was a primary
contradiction of our struggle. It was the trophy over which our wars of
national liberation were fought. Therefore, no land should be sold to and
owned by foreigners while our people live in unhealthy squatter camps that
are unsuitable for human habitation.

Ha re hopoleng Makwanyane, molaodi wa sesole sa Moshweshwe ha are: “Tshwara
thebe e tiye wa rasenate, wa bona lefatshe la heno le a ya”. [Let’s
remember Makwanyane, the Commander of Moshweshwe’s troops, who said: “Hold
your shield tight, son of Rasenate, because the land of your elders is
being taken away”.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, when we commemorate and pay tribute to
Comrade O R Tambo, we are at the same time celebrating the life of a
struggle icon who dedicated his whole life to the liberation of his land
and people. This celebration of Tambo’s life evokes in us the conditions
under which black people lived during the time of apartheid, oppression and
exploitation.

To O R Tambo the freedom of his people was paramount. It is important
therefore to note that Tambo and all those who fought for freedom were
deeply aware of the many years of cultural oppression and denial of black
people’s cultural values and norms in the South African context.

Ahmed Sékou Toure put it differently as follows:

   In any part of space, in any sequence of time, culture expresses the
   standard of intellectual, technical and technological development of the
   people who created it and continually enliven it and consummate it in
   order to steadily enrich it.

O R Tambo, a son who grew up in Mbizana village, was nurtured by the
cultural values of his people, including the material circumstances under
which they lived. All members who spoke before me have indeed expressed in
unison what a great leader O R Tambo was. He was indeed a leader whose
vision will remain with us for a very long time.

As we celebrate his life and his contribution to the struggle as well as
our victory over evil, we must also take note of those amongst us who, if
given a chance, would like us to return to the past. It is therefore
important, in honour of O R Tambo, to continue with our revolutionary task
to make sure that the vision he left behind should be achieved.

His leadership during the times of struggle, commitment and sacrifices
should remain an example to all of us. This indeed is a story of a man who
lived his life for the people.

Nga maÿwe maipfi, zwoÿhe zwe a zwi ita, o zwi itela lushaka. Ndi a livhuwa.
Nnda! [U vhanda zwanÿa.] [In other words, everything that he did was for
the benefit of the nation. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, in commemorating Heritage Day the FD joins
many other political parties today to pay tribute to our great national
leaders like the late O R Tambo, Walter Sisulu, Robert Sobukwe and our
former president, Nelson Mandela.

One of the key characteristics of Oliver Tambo is that he was a reconciler.
In its pre-government days he would hold the ANC together by reminding the
movement of its vision to realise South Africa’s democratic freedom. Oliver
Tambo envisaged a people free from illegitimate state control,
authoritarian government free from ideological constraints and
institutional conformity. He was of the belief that government is for the
people and not to stand over and above the will and interest of the people.


O R Tambo was a committed Christian leader. In fact, before his arrest he
was to be ordained as a full-time priest, but God had in mind a more urgent
role for O R to play - the liberation of his nation.

One further attribute of Oliver Tambo was his unselfishness in promoting
the qualities and standing of others. Unlike the power struggles within
political organisations today, he was not a leader who wanted to hold on to
any power within his organisation. In fact, his leadership helped to shape
the ANC’s institutional principles on democratically elected leadership,
rather than centralised or indefinite leadership.

O R Tambo was a key figure in the negotiating process between the previous
government and the ANC. The legacy of O R Tambo is to be seen in the
conviction that the ideals of democracy, justice and a people’s government
must be transferred from generation to generation.

The FD joins the nation today to salute and to honour the memory of Oliver
Reginald Tambo. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, colleagues, the National Alliance believes
that it is an uncontested fact that the late O R Tambo was a giant amongst
many in South African history and will so remain. Given the challenges of
poverty that South Africa faces, we have a grand example in O R Tambo of
what a champion of the poor should encapsulate.

It was O R Tambo, when he was a member of the ANC Youth League, who
spearheaded the change of the ANC from an organisation addressing the
African elite to a movement of struggle for all oppressed people. Madam
Speaker should allow the ANC to have serious introspection with regard to
its current modus operandi.

Despite not being a head of state, the late O R Tambo was one of the most
highly respected African leaders throughout the world. The late O R Tambo’s
stewardship of the ANC elevated the organisation’s international profile.
The NA believes that the late O R Tambo left a heritage of true
statesmanship, which should be used by current-day leaders as a benchmark.

In conclusion, the late O R Tambo was not only prepared to sacrifice his
family for what he believed in, but he also laid down his life. What more
can a native of this country sacrifice? The NA points out that this is a
heritage left not only to be honoured in words, but with actions. I thank
you.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, hon Deputy President, hon Leader
of the Official Opposition ... molweni nonke Malungu ePalamente kunye
neendwendwe zethu. Ndinibulisa nonke ngegama le-DA. [Kwahlekwa.] Sihlalo,
siqale le veki ngokuthatha iPalamente siyise ebantwini phaya eMaMpondweni
eMbizana. Ndithe xa bendiye kuvela kwikhaya likatata uOliver Reginald Tambo
phaya eNkantolo ndakhumbula ngexesha ndandisakhula eMbenyane ngaphesheya
kweentaba zoNgeli sisalusa iinkomo zootata bethu neentanga zam.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... greetings to all the Members of Parliament and guests. I greet you all
in the name of the DA. [Laughter.] Chairperson, we began this week by
taking Parliament to the people in Mbizana in Pondoland. When I visited the
home of Mr Oliver Reginald Tambo at Nkantolo, I remembered my early
childhood years when I and my friends looked after our fathers’ cattle in
Mbenyane over the Ngeli Mountains.]

I said, hon members, that when we started this week by bringing Parliament
to the land of the amaMpondo and a visit to the home of the late Oliver
Tambo, I was reminded of my own childhood in the Mbenyane on the far side
of the Engeli Mountains - a childhood where I too spent many days with my
young friends herding the cattle of our fathers as equals. It had then
never really occurred to me that the equality stopped when we went home to
our very different families at night – different homes, different food, and
different comforts. The reality of this inequality was only really brought
home to me in later years.

So, whilst the visit in Bizana was in a way a trip down memory lane, the
stark evidence of the hardships still suffered by so many people reinforced
in me the need for us as parliamentarians to work even harder for the
betterment of the lives of our people. But whilst doing so, we must always
pause to honour those like O R Tambo who dedicated their lives to this
ideal. Research with regard to this giant of a man who rose from a humble
childhood in the small amaMpondo village of Kantolo to become a world
figure recognised as a statesman even whilst in exile, showed how
insignificant man can be when compared to those who emerge from generations
of suffering to become the heroes of an entire nation. Once such man was
Oliver Tambo - a man among many other great leaders of his time; a man who
walked ahead and faced the onslaughts and overcame many disappointments to
achieve what we have here today – a free and democratic South Africa.

Oliver Tambo was not destined to be part of the new democratic dispensation
that he worked so hard for. I therefore cannot help but wonder what his
impact on a free South Africa and on this very democratic Parliament would
have been.

’n Reus het gaan rus, maar ons mag hom nooit vergeet nie. [A giant has gone
to his rest but we may never forget him.]

Kunjalo bahlekazi, indoda enkulu kakhulu iphumle ngoku. Ze sincede
singamlibali. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [It is has happened, honourable ones. A great
man has gone to his rest. We must please not forget him. [Applause.]]

Prof A K ASMAL: Madam Speaker, the Tambo family and comrades, hon Members
of Parliament, we are enjoined in a very famous book to praise famous men.

We in South Africa enjoy the fruits of freedom because of the sacrifices of
thousands of women also. So, on Heritage Day we recall the work of the
midwives of our freedom, men and women. For me there is a special resonance
in the celebration because in a few week’s time, on 27 October, we will
mark the 90th anniversary of Oliver Tambo’s birth. There will be special
celebrations, which the family will be joining, in London. This therefore
will be a personal tribute to a great man who deserves Parliament’s
acknowledgement. We can name all the streets and the airports after him,
but this is the repository of the triumphal legitimacy of the South African
people. It’s appropriate that we should do so.

So, from a personal perspective, this is not some form of hero worship,
because his life also sets challenges to us. One of them is to disprove
Rusty’s famous eulogy to O R, as we knew him, and his generation of the
Mbekis and the Mandelas. Rusty Bernstein wrote:

  They had a quality of leadership that South Africa has produced which I
  am certain after that generation we will never have again.

We must disprove him. With all the legacies to build on the extraordinary
contribution of this generation that has made our freedom possible, let us
prove Rusty Bernstein wrong.

My first contact with O R, as we affectionately knew him in exile, was
indirect and from a distance. As a school teacher, I was discreetly
politically active living in the small country town of Stanger - now
renamed as kwaDukuza - on the North Coast of Natal.
My political hero was Chief Albert Luthuli, the then President of the ANC,
who was then banished to the magisterial area of Tugela. The Chief used to
travel to Stanger every now and then from his home in Groutville, an
isolated and impoverished location. In 1955, in one of our encounters, he
informed me that the ANC had recently elected a Johannesburg lawyer called
Oliver Reginald Tambo as its secretary-general. Albert Luthuli was a large
man with an extraordinary voice. When he laughed, his whole body shook and
his face was suffused with smiles. He broke into laughter when he told me
that Nelson Mandela’s law partner was a quiet and modest man, but a man of
steel, he said, who would galvanise the ANC. So, he was right on this
because Oliver Tambo again and again said that Chief Luthuli was his mentor
and his teacher. So, I could learn little more of O R till the early
morning of the arrests of the 156 treason trialists. In 1956, all of us
were involved and followed this.

But during the middle of the trial, Albert Luthuli lent me a book which had
a profound effect on me. This was Pilgrim’s Progress by John Bunyan. And I
have been rereading this book for the tribute that many of us have made to
him. Luthuli’s words were to me: “Read this book as it reflects a life of
struggle.” “We will face similar struggles”, he said, “to those of the
hero, Christian, before we win our freedom.” At that time, to me as a
rationalist and a secularist, this book was a revelation. Even today, it
provides enormous insights.

Both Luthuli and Tambo were profoundly religious, as we know. They neither
allowed their beliefs to intrude on personal relations nor political
strategies. They both travelled along Christian’s allegorical roads, the
Slough of Despond, the Hill of Difficulty, the Valley of Humiliation, and
neither reached the celestial city of freedom. They were both strong men.
And though they must at times have felt like despairing, we who knew them
mostly from a distance were never aware of it.

Tambo lived his life by the injunctions given to Christians not to
surrender to the forces of evil; not to be deflected from the path of
righteousness. Life was not given to him, as somebody wrote in the later
edition of Bunyan’s book: “... merely for ease and pleasure, but for the
realisation of the ideals of high endeavour and noble service”. So, indeed
O R sacrificed his life, as we know, for our freedom, as his life reflected
the high ideals of high endeavour and noble service.

I can identify two phases in the relationship we have had with the law. The
first period was 1960 to 1964, when he mobilised people to break the walls
of ignorance about apartheid South Africa. As, of course, the Minister for
Arts and Culture has already pointed out, he was designed to go overseas
and do this. And he led the campaign for sanctions, culminating in his
extraordinary performance at the first ever International Conference on
Sanctions in 1964. It covered too the campaign on behalf of the release of
political prisoners, which saved the lives of Nelson Mandela and the
Rivonia trialists and then, most important of all, arranged for certain
forms of military and other assistance to the ANC.

He was, externally, the face of the ANC. Barred from entry into the United
States, even the Secretary of State, Schultz, succumbed to the
extraordinary political position and insights of Oliver Tambo. At that
time, of course, everything was weighed in the calculations of the Cold
War, including opposition to and support of apartheid, as we know,
particularly the Reagan administration’s relationship with the South
African regime. But he showed us it was possible to arouse consciousness
about the evils of apartheid by reaching out to ordinary people. He worked
with civil society in all its manifestations, including political parties,
and pressurised governments. So, though he walked with captains and kings,
he never lost the common touch.

He introduced many of us to the bourgeoning anti-apartheid solidarity
movements in Europe and elsewhere in the world. He showed us by example the
necessity to remove all political and sectarian approaches in our
solidarity work. His humility drew us to him and strengthened our own
understanding as to how we should work towards a nonracial South Africa, in
exile.

He was truly, as many of you have said - but many of you didn’t know him -
a modest man. For years he insisted that he was only the Acting President
of the ANC and nothing was to detract from Nelson Mandela’s pre-eminent
role. He said that again and again. A lesser man might have abandoned what
must have seemed a hopeless task after the incarceration, the imprisonment
of so many of the experienced leaders in the 60s and the suppression of
resistance activities. So, Bunyan’s Hill of Difficulty proved long and
steep. It was O R’s steadfastness that helped us to believe that it was not
insurmountable.

The ANC has always emphasised that it was opposed to the white domination
of South Africa and not to individual whites. It was this nonracial
approach, persistently put before us by O R, which has brought together
large parts of humanity in an unparalleled act of solidarity with the
people of South Africa. It can rightly be said that the struggle against
apartheid, more than any other issue I know, created a unified
international platform for humanity, as the Minister of Foreign Affairs
will attest to. So, the boycott movement, the isolation of South Africa,
the solidarity with the people of South Africa, and all its dimensions have
spread to communities and countries around the world, the pressure on
governments to impose sanctions against the apartheid regime met with
increasing success. And no one can doubt that, in fact, it was the primary
role of Oliver Tambo that enabled us to have this remarkable unparalleled
success because no other international issue, including a nuclear war and
Vietnam, ever reached that extraordinary amount of unity throughout the
world.
And, of course, after the setting up of the UDF and the extraordinary
resistance inside South Africa, we were under great pressure to create an
alternative vision of South Africa through the constitution of South
Africa. Oliver Tambo led us by setting up, as the Minister of Justice has
said, the Constitutional Committee. He led the Constitutional Committee all
the time by accepting that it was the prerogative of the South African
people to write their own constitution and not people in exile sitting in
the comforts of exile. It was he who said: “Create the principles under
which we can go.” And we created the principles in 1988 – the principles
that guided the negotiation but which made it possible for the apartheid
regime to say: “We should negotiate with them.” The fundamental issue of
that principle was to build on the ANC’s tradition.

This is very important because we mustn’t rewrite history. It has been said
in a recent autobiography that the issue of the Bill of Rights only came up
during the negotiations. That is not true because in fact the ANC’s Bill of
Rights of 1944, the principles of the Constitution, led to acceptance by
all parties of the need to have a basic document which will bind the
government and other sources. So, it is a great credit to Oliver Tambo that
the principles of the Constitution were adopted, including the far-reaching
provisions of the 1991 version of the Constitution. These are very far-
reaching provisions, if you look at the 1991 version which is reflected in
some of the most controversial aspects of our present Constitution. So, let
us say therefore that we can say with hindsight, reaching out to all the
communities in South Africa, that this makes him one of the principal
architects of reconciliation.

Reaching out, he took great care to maintain and strengthen the ANC’s
tradition of nonracialism. It took a view of our struggle which relied on
inclusiveness for his success.

He was the first leader of the liberation movement who emphasised the need
for women’s liberation and particularly referred to the extraordinary
document of 1954, the Women’s Charter.

So, my brothers and sisters, my comrades, Oliver Tambo’s abiding quality
was the trust he placed in those who worked with him. He evoked deep
respect and may I say even love for this highly principled leader - an
extraordinary man, a man who built around him the community that he wished
to see in exile.

So, we end by saying, and I quote Seamus Heaney, who is Ireland’s foremost
contemporary poet, who wrote: “... that justice can rise up, and hope and
history rhyme”. This was in response to Nelson Mandela’s release in 1990.
There can be no doubt that Oliver Tambo’s extraordinary determination to
uphold the values of inclusiveness, nonracialism, nonsexism and justice,
and his capacity to imbue others with the same values made an incalculable
contribution to that rhyme.

He never reached the Promised Land. He is a true hero of our struggle but
he helped us to reach the celestial city of Bunyan’s parable - a free and
democratic South Africa.

Every day in South Africa we are grateful for this remarkable gift of
Oliver Tambo. Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, that brings us to the end of the speakers’ list
of this important Heritage Day debate, with a special tribute to O R Tambo.
I must say, before I adjourn the House, that we received apologies from the
Office of the President that the President will be unable to attend for the
simple reason that he had responsibilities that he could not reschedule.

Secondly, I must recognise the executive mayor of the O R Tambo District of
the Eastern Cape who joined us this afternoon. [Applause.]

Lastly, I received, graciously, a couple of notes indicating corrections we
must make to the inscription on the plaque that was unveiled, which I had
read to you.

Debate concluded.

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces adjourned the Joint
Sitting at 13:03.


