---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 21 August 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-08-21
---

TUESDAY, 21 AUGUST 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:06.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                      WELCOMING OF VISITORS FROM LONDON

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, ladies and gentlemen, just before
we start, I want to acknowledge, on the gallery, visitors from London who
are visiting an hon member of this House, Mr Watson. I would request them
to stand up so that we can see them. Thank you very much. [Applause.] You
are welcome in our beautiful country, South Africa and in the second House
- not the Upper House - the National Council of Provinces. Welcome to South
Africa. Thank you very much.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I have been informed that there will be no
notices of motion today, and that we will go straight to the questions, as
this day is dedicated to questions to the Ministers. Thank you all
Ministers and Deputy Ministers who are here today.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  Cluster 1

MINISTERS:

                         Control of crime situation

63.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:



      (1)   Whether crime is under control; if not, why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details;


      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?
      CO14E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson
and good afternoon to all members of this House. I haven’t seen you for
quite some time.
I want to preface my answer to the question asked by Kgoshi Mokoena by
reiterating what I have said on numerous occasions in the past that crime
levels in South Africa are unacceptably high. However, having said that, I
do want to indicate that if anyone has been following the crime trends in
this country over the past five years, it will be seen that there has been
a steady decrease in most types of crime in South Africa. And this has to
do with the fact that there are a number of new elements that we have
brought into the fighting of crime. In fact, we want to change policing so
that at the end we would be able to deal effectively with crime.

One of the things that we are busy with at this time as part and parcel of
our ethos of policing is community policing. It is where we are mobilising
communities so that they can participate in crime prevention and combating
through the supply of information on a regular basis to the law enforcement
agencies, particularly members of the SA Police Service.

Thank you very much.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me thank the Minister for the reply.
Arising from that, and based on the reports and briefing that the select
committee received from our provincial commissioners that out of 100% cases
reported in all our police stations, our police officers are now able to
trace and arrest all those unwanted elements, is there any reason for any
person to panic that South Africa is not worth visiting? Thank you,
Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, hon member. You know that
crime is an international problem. It is not only South Africa that is
experiencing crime. There is crime all over the world. This is a
consequence of, among other things, globalisation and of course
development, because these criminals follow development and where resources
are available, they conduct their criminal activities.

But there is no reason why people would want to stay away from South Africa
on the basis that there is crime in South Africa. We have been talking to
quite a number of people engaging in these various issues. There is a lot
of improvement in respect to what the police are doing. There is a change
in our policing ethos also and we are relying, to a very large extent, in
our criminal investigations, on high technology, which has helped us to
make various kinds of breakthroughs.

The best element that we have brought in, as I have said in my initial
response, is the fact there is a lot of co-operation between us and the
people as we investigate these crimes. In fact, in all the areas where
there is a solid partnership between the communities and the police, crime
levels have gone down. This could be seen, among other places, in areas for
instance like Jabavu, Alexandra in Johannesburg, Sebokeng, Maitland here in
the Western Cape and the variety of other places where there is this
partnership between the communities and the police. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, well, I want to add my voice in thanking the
Minister for his eloquent response. However, I want to raise three issues.
The first one is that in the latest statistics, we have seen that there is
a decline in quite a range of categories of crime. However, we have seen
the increase in the violent nature of crime, particularly when we talk
about car-hijacking and aggravated robbery - housebreaking and so on -
which has been very violent. Has the department done any study to check
what are the reasons for this crime to be so violent now, and why there is
this increase in the nature of the violence of this crime?

The second thing linked to this - and what the Minister has talked about –
is intelligence. In terms of resources around budgeting, are you putting
more resources into intelligence-driven policies so that we are able to
prevent it before it happens?

The last point: Across the country, is there any follow-up or are people
following the example of Gauteng where there is a high mobilisation of
communities in terms of patrolling and other activities so that the
community sees that it is not only government that must deal with crime but
also the people themselves must stand up and be counted in dealing with
crime? Is that being replicated across the country in other areas? Thank
you very much, Chairperson.
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Indeed, what characterises South
African crime is a very high degree of violence. We have appointed a
private entity to do a study for us to try to explain why that is the case.
An initial report has already been submitted to us. The final report is
going to be available by the end of this year and we will approach the
Cabinet at the beginning of next year. We, in Cabinet, will decide how then
we could get our population as a whole to participate in the discussion of
that report.

Of course, there are two elements to the issue of violent crime in South
Africa. The first one is the sorts of crimes the hon member has referred
to. Violence is evident in cases of armed robbery including cash-in-transit
heists, burglaries where firearms are used, and so on.

But, the second element is social crime where crimes happen behind closed
doors between people who know one another at home in respect of domestic
violence, and in areas where people come together to enjoy themselves. That
type of violent crime constitutes 80% of this violent crime that the hon
member is talking about. Hopefully, on the basis of the study that is being
done, we will know what the reasons are with regard to these matters and
find answers as to how, therefore, we will deal with them.

Of course, we do deploy intelligence on many of the investigations that we
do. In fact, it is intelligence that warns us beforehand when there will be
problems. It is that intelligence in fact that has saved South Africans on
a number of occasions with respect to what could have easily been a
bloodbath, and some of those matters include, for instance, many armed
robberies. We have acted in accordance with the intelligence that we have
received - armed robberies of various kinds, including cash-in-transit
heists. We have been able to arrest people before they actually commit
those sorts of crimes.

But, apart from that, our intelligence structures in South Africa are
highly regarded internationally because of the work that we have been able
to do with regard to getting information and forewarning law enforcement
agencies of some of the threats that we have to face as a country.

I have already indicated, hon member, that there are quite a number of
areas in South Africa where the example that you have referred to, in
Gauteng, is being emulated in terms of people working together with the
police to ensure that, indeed, we deal with crime. One of them is a very
small place in Mpumalanga. People who come from Mpumalanga will tell you
about Badplaas. They know about it. It is a small community.

In Badplaas, people are working together with the police and they have
reduced crime quite drastically. It is not the only place. It is just that
I do not have the exhaustive list in front of me at this time. But, it is
those various partnerships between the police and the communities that have
been responsible for some of the drastic reductions in crime in South
Africa. Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, over the weekend I drove up Kloof Road to take my
visitors up Signal Hill to view the beautiful sight of Cape Town that can
only be seen from the mountain in Cape Town. To my horror, I found the
police barrier stopping the traffic going up to Signal Hill. I then said
that it was no problem and so we turned around and went up the cable way.
We found that the road to the cable way, right at the circle, was also
closed and there was a policeman there; and I asked him as to why there
were these barrier walls and why they were working on the roads. He said
that they closed off the roads every night because of the crime that
happened on the mountains.

And just yesterday, I read about people who were walking on the mountain
over the weekend. They were actually confronted by muggers and robbed. Some
of them even got hurt. I know prevention of crime is one of the most
important ways to combat crime, but if we are preventing and stopping
people from visiting the heritage sites in our country, we can also wave
tourism goodbye.

Are we really avoiding crime when we put up barriers for tourists not to
get into the areas where crime is at a peak during certain times? I hope
you can enlighten me.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, as you correctly say, one of the
things we do to deal with crime is preventing crime from happening. I don’t
know what would have caused the situation where actually tourists were
prevented from visiting a tourist spot. I am unable to respond with respect
to that.

But the fact of the matter is that crime prevention will also entail a
number of measures that we use in order for us to prevent crime. But it
can’t be measures which actually interfere with free movement by law-
abiding citizens of the country. I don’t know, as I say, what could have
caused that particular type of deployment.

What I can guess which might be the reason is that - and the police will
not tell you this - at times there is someone that they are looking for who
is dangerous at that time, and when that happens, there will be roadblocks
that are put up. There will be the kinds of barricades you are talking
about. But I am simply speculating because I don’t know what may have
caused this. Thank you very much.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chair, I just want to raise two issues to the Minister as
to whether an analysis has been done in respect of the crime that we are
talking about. Firstly, is this as a result of social improvement broadly
in the country or social decline? Secondly, is this as a result of the
success of our reforms that we see in the country? Victims are becoming
much more aware of their rights and, therefore, are reporting criminal
activities. But then, on the other hand, you have got issues that relate to
the negative agenda of the media. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: There are two things that usually
happen with respect to crime. The first one is the fact that, in a
situation like ours where you have democracy and, therefore, a population
that is in transition, you will have people who exploit new democratic
spaces that arise to do all manner of wrong things, including crime.

We have become liberalised on a number of fronts, which therefore allows
people to travel wherever they want in South Africa, and since people have
that freedom of movement, freedom of association, you cannot be stopping
people and asking them what they are doing anywhere at any time.

Countries in transition like ours unfortunately do also create those kinds
of spaces for criminals to exploit. But secondly, there comes a time when
people who are affected by any kind of negative elements do respond. And I
am happy that South Africans, at least a large number of South Africans,
are responding to the issue of crime not simply by always criticising law
enforcement officers or criticising the system that is in place. They have
decided to participate in crime prevention and combating, as I have already
said before. When that happens, there must be change, and a change for the
better. Fortunately we have this new system of policing; firstly, in terms
of the training we give to people. We create expectations with respect to
the individual and police persons, that, even management at the level of
the police is changing, to follow the new trends that are emerging with
respect to crime prevention and combating.

And the totality of all of those matters has indeed impacted positively on
what we are trying to do to create conditions for safety and security for
everyone in South Africa. Thank you.

               Growth in, and regulation of security industry

64.   Mr J W le Roux (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:



      (1)   To what factors can the enormous growth in the security industry
           be attributed;


      (2)   whether the Government will further regulate the security
           industry; if not, why not; if so, (a) to what degree and (b) how
           will such regulation affect the industry’s further growth and
           effectiveness?                                     CO253E
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The favourable economic growth in the
country has created space for a growing list of companies that are starting
new businesses. The economic climate has influenced expansion that has seen
the emergence of new businesses and industries. The private security
industry has taken advantage of that climate.

The department is indeed in a process of reviewing the Private Security
Industry Regulation Act of 2002, inter alia to provide for minimum
standards in respect of cash or valuables in transit and regulations for
recruitment, training and deployment of security service providers outside
the borders of the Republic. The industry will gain tremendously from the
contemplated legislative streamlining. Given that, there will be a better
system of recruitment that will enable the service providers a better
chance of assessing new recruits and where maximum attention will be given
to training. Thank you.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, thank you, Mr Minister, for your comprehensive
reply. It did strike me, however, Mr Minister, that you did not mention the
fact that the public might not have enough faith in the Police Service and
therefore they turn to other ways of protecting themselves. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am very guarded in what I say and I
am careful not to want to appropriate to my sentiments things that relate
to certain people and say it is the public because the South African public
is more than 40 million people. That’s our public. And therefore, we cannot
say that those more than 40 million people have lost faith in the police
because they actually rely on the police for the provision of safety and
security.

What is happening is that there are people who have the necessary
wherewithal to engage private security companies and they have a right to
do that. The police is also being deployed even in areas where the private
security industry is operational. In other words it does not mean that
where, for instance, they work, let’s say in Sandton, there is no policing
there. A lot of policing is happening there.

Apart from this, there is also a relationship which is now emerging between
the South African Police Service and the private security industry so that
we can align our tasks properly to give even further protection to our
people. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I would like to ask the Minister whether any
private security firms are still protecting police stations as well as the
magistrate courts and what is the reason for that? Thanks, Chair.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes, there are many police stations
that are protected by the private security industry and the reason for this
is the fact that the police that we do have, are not security guards. They
are police and their responsibility is to guard the lives of our people.
And that being so, we do not deploy members who are trained as the police
to simply stand and guard our buildings.

That kind of work is being done by the private security industry and if the
question then arises whether we are not, therefore, using a lot of
resources for this, the answer is simple. Even with the resources that we
are using it is better to get people who come from the private security
industry to look after our buildings, while we go into the streets and
confront crime and criminals. Thank you.

 Constitutional amendment to increase number of permanent delegates in NCOP

65.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      Whether the Government will consider introducing amendments to the
      Constitution to increase the number of permanent delegates in the
      National Council of Provinces; if not, why not; if so, when?
                                                               C0323E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Thank you, hon member, for the question. My department has not received any
request from any person or institution to amend the Constitution to
increase the number of permanent delegates in the NCOP. Any suggested
amendments to the Constitution together with the necessary motivation, if
it were to be submitted to our Ministry, would be considered and dealt with
in accordance with the usual procedures and provisions in the Constitution.
I am also not aware anyway in government itself that the matter is being
raised and discussed. So, the answer to your question is one big: “No”.
[Laughter.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, Chairperson. Let me thank the ever-ready and
dynamic Deputy Minister for the response. Chair, based on the sentiments
echoed by our President when addressing our summit, this House is unique
and wonderful. This was supported by the Minister of Defence who said that
this House is magnificent. To put the cherry on top, it was echoed by the
Minister of Finance who said that he wondered what the situation would be
if this House had at least 90 members. He also said that it was about time
for this institution to consider increasing the number of permanent
delegates, based on the calculated and magnificent work done by this House,
I submit.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
May I add to the illustrious list that you have already mentioned and say
what a magnificent institution this is, with most dynamic members that it
has, with an excellent work programme and with particularly good
performance results. [Laughter.] I echo all of them and if at any stage
such proposal were to be put forward, you would probably find me in front
of the queue supporting the further capacity-building and possibilities of
doing better and most stupendous work by this institution. Thank you very
much. [Laughter.]

   Meetings held by China and France with African countries; and mediation
                   mission by South Africa to Ivory Coast

66.   Mr J M Sibiya (ANC) asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs:



      (1)   Of what advantage to Africa are  the  meetings  that  China  and
           France have held with African countries;


      (2)   whether, with reference to the request to South Africa, through
           the President, at the previous summit of the African Union (AU)
           at Addis Ababa to return to the Ivory Coast on a mediation
           mission, South Africa is likely to return there; if not, why
           not; if so, what implications will this have on our role as a
           nonpermanent member of the UN Security Council?
                                  C0324E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr A G H PAHAD): Thank you,
Chairperson. The two meetings referred to form part of our strategic
objective to consolidate South-South relations and not only south
relations. The Forum on China-Africa Co-operation – Focac - Summit in
Beijing was very important and successful. China and Africa adopted a
sector-specific Beijing Platform for Action which, amongst other decisions,
committed China to double development assistance to Africa, to provide
preferential credit of US $5 billion to Africa from the USA Development
Fund, to open up a Chinese market to products from Africa by removing
tariffs, to assist with the training of African professionals through
scholarships and the building of schools and technology centres in Africa
and to assist with the fight against infectious diseases as well as the
development of African health infrastructure.

It is important to note that our relations with the People’s Republic of
China will be based in the context of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development – Nepad - programme. This is significant because it will mean
that our relation to China will not be determined by the resources put into
any country, but will be determined by our programmes that we as Africans
have identified.

The Africa-France Forum is a structure that initially brought together
France and Francophone African countries. This was later extended to
include non-French speaking African countries. It is a forum to discuss
political, economic and social issues. African countries have used this
forum to raise issues such as underdevelopment, migration, the failure to
successfully conclude the Doha round of the WTO talks, African conflicts
and postconflict reconstruction.

The last forum meeting adopted a policy declaration aimed at ensuring the
implementation of innovative financing mechanisms to raise funds for
development, as well as mechanisms to assist African countries achieve our
Millennium Development Goals.

The challenge for Africa is to ensure that the decisions taken at the
Africa-France Forum are generously implemented. We are experiencing the
situation in which many developed countries, including the G8, continue to
make commitments, but do not show the political will to implement these
commitments when it comes to the practical reality.

With regard to the third part of the question, Burkina Faso is a current
mediator as mandated by the Economic Community of West African States –
Ecowas - which was endorsed by the African Union and the United Nations.

Therefore, there is no need for South Africa to return to the mediation.
However, South Africa will continue to support the efforts of the present
mediator. Bilaterally, South Africa is continuing to build stronger
relations with the government and the people of Côte d’Ivoire.

The previous mediation role of President Mbeki has been expressly
acknowledged by the United Nations. President Laurent Gbagbo and Prime
Minister Soro and President Mbeki were invited to attend the Peace Flame
ceremony in Bouake, in Côte d’Ivoire on 30 July 2007. During the ceremony
attended by both President Gbagbo and Prime Minister Soro, weapons were
destroyed, marking the symbolic start of disarmament and opening up the
processes for a political solution. A brigade of the DRC’s new army, the 37
Battalion, was named after President Mbeki.

I will not be part of the mediation. That will not have any implications on
our role as a nonpermanent member of the UN Security Council. South Africa
will continue to use its role as a nonpermanent member of the UN Security
Council to promote lasting peace stability and prosperity in Côte d’Ivoire.

Mr M J SIBIYA: Thank you very much, Comrade Chairperson. I would like to
express a high sense of gratitude for the answer given by the Deputy
Foreign Minister. I still have two little questions. The first one is
concerning the first answer. Can the answer given also be the same in the
case of the last talks Africa had with South Korea; in other words can we
give more or less the same background explanation to those talks or are
they a little bit different?
Secondly, as we all know that Africa is artificially zoned into the so-
called Anglophone, Lusophone, Francophone and other areas, how able are we
as Africans to put up a united front in such meetings so that we are able
to extract as much as possible from the advantages created by that
platform? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr A G H Pahad): As I have
indicated, the two meetings where the question was asked were part of a
much broader strategic objective. There is a new Africa - Asia Strategic
Partnership; there is a Japanese Ticad programme; there is the Indian Ocean
Rim; there is the Zone of Peace and  Co-operation of the South Atlantic;
and there is our own relationship as a special partnership with the
European Union. These are all part of the broader processes. Most
significantly, there is the India-Brazil-South Africa grouping that
attempts to achieve what I have said is our strategic objectives of
developing South-South relations on the basis of which we will attempt to
get better relations with the North.

What I must say is that our relations with the North have gone through a
good period and a bad period, but the reality is that our relations with
the North in terms of generality has not been one way - it is mutually
beneficial and it has been in terms that have not been in the interest at
all times of the South. I believe that we are are getting to a situation
were we can achieve this.

I think the artificial division of Africa is a reality we have to live
with. I think Africa, through the establishment of the African Union and
all its relevant institutions, including the Pan-African Parliament, is
increasingly beginning to deal with the rest of the world in a way that is
united and indeed in a way that is driven by agendas that we, as Africans,
have adopted. I do believe that the times of the past have changed and for
the first time in history Africa is able to interact with powerful forces
both in the North and, indeed, in the South on the basis of an African
agenda in the interests of Africa.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, on the basis of the good response of the Deputy
Minister, particularly around the area of unequal results of engagement and
discussions between the North and the South, can he then tell us whether
there are any benefits that have been visible, that have been seen to be
working in relation to the South–South relationship, particularly Brazil
and India? Can we say, then, that it is bringing positive outcomes in
ensuring that we have a balanced world and also that the outcomes of
engagement are actually beneficial to the developing countries? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Yes, I do believe that countries of
the South are now reaching a situation where many countries are no longer
underdeveloped and countries like India and Brazil are predicted to become
the strongest economic players by the year 2020. I also believe that our
interaction with countries of the South, whether it is politically through
the Non-Aligned Movement to the G77, plus China economic grouping, is
beneficial for South Africa generally. We are now able to use these
interactions to increase our economic relations in all its facets: trade,
investment, tourism, and exchange of technological expertise.

In this respect the Ibsa – the India Brazil South Africa grouping is the
most significant, because these are three of the most powerful countries on
three continents who are known to be the powerhouses in our three
continents. Brazil and India, as I said, will be the top economic players
by 2020. I think South Africa will be the strongest economic power in
Africa.

Both India and Brazil have advantages that South Africa do not have, and on
the other hand, South Africa has advantages in other fields. I believe the
India-Brazil–South Africa relationship - and the summit that will be held
in South Africa this year - has opened up tremendous possibilities on
exchange of technology increasing our trade relations, investments in each
other’s countries and I believe South Africa is gaining tremendously from
our interaction with India and Brazil to learn from their experiences and
utilise their relatively higher development in the interest of South Africa
and Africa.

   Prosecution of certain persons who did not apply for or receive amnesty
                  from Truth and Reconciliation Commission
67.   Mr M A Mzizi (IFP) asked the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
      Development:



      (1)   In light of  the  Government’s  decision  to  prosecute  certain
            persons who did not apply for or receive amnesty from the Truth
            and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), what kind of evidence will
            be led in criminal proceedings against such persons in a  court
            of law;




      (2)   whether the state will use new evidence; if not, why not;


        3) whether any new witnesses will be called to testify; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details?

      C01675E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: May I thank
the hon member for the question. Just two preliminary points: Firstly, I
imagine your question has been somewhat overtaken by events in court
recently where certain people pleaded guilty and, secondly, that the
specifics of the question obviously is not of such a nature that one can
come here and give the information to Parliament.

This refers to questions such as: What kind of evidence would be led in
these criminal proceedings? Will it be new evidence? Will there be new
witnesses? That information of course is the preserve of the prosecuting
authority and one would not be able to make that information available to
Parliament. But I have taken the question in its general sense and tried to
answer it more generally, and I do so as follows: The decision to prosecute
certain members who did not apply for or receive amnesty from the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission has been made by the National Directorate of
Public Prosecutions.

As the hon member knows, the National Prosecuting Authority, NPA, is
constitutionally enjoined to conduct such prosecutions as part of its
prosecutorial role. To this end the prosecution policy was developed and
tabled in Parliament and it includes guidelines on how to deal with matters
arising from the conflicts of the past. The prosecutorial policy deals in
detail with the evidence required in order to decide whether or not to
prosecute. I would advise the hon member to familiarise himself once again
with this policy, which had been previously served before Parliament and
before this House. It is important for the hon member to be aware that in
all prosecutions the evidence that is required is the one that establishes
the commission of an offence beyond reasonable doubt. There is therefore no
distinction between the evidence required for ordinary matters and for
those arising from the conflicts of the past.

Secondly, I am advised that the NPA will use all relevant evidence as
required in terms of the normal standards in the courts. This also includes
the requirement that evidence be relevant and credible.

Thirdly, the evidence referred to in the second point above will, if
available, be obtained from any witness in possession thereof. Thank you.

Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson and thank you, Deputy Minister.
Unfortunately, Deputy Minister, the proceedings that had recently taken
place in court was just probably a bonus to me, because I had already
prefaced the question long before that. Deputy Minister, yes, you are
correct in saying that, but my dilemma was that all these cases that refer
to the past atrocities are as a result of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission hearings, and therefore there were no formal complaints that
were put forward that these were the things that happened to me by any
individual, except that certain people had done these or certain officials
had done these. Now the dilemma is that in the absence of plea-bargaining,
what then would be the procedure, because in most cases in court if there
are no witnesses, those cases become a fruitless exercise? It would not go
on. If there are no plea-bargainings it would mean that even if those
people are brought to court there would be no evidence probably to link
them. It would be hearsay evidence. That is the dilemma that one seeks
advice on. What would be the procedure if there is no plea-bargaining?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, plea-
bargaining only takes place, of course as you are aware, when there is
sufficient evidence to actually bring a case. There should be a reason for
plea-bargain.

I think we must remember that the TRC had numerous tasks. One of the tasks
it had was to look at every person that applied for amnesty before it and
it, could grant amnesty, and once it had done that, it removed all criminal
liability from such a person.

The Act also went further and said that in those cases where people have
not applied or where they have been refused amnesty, that information had
to be passed on to the authorities.

You must also remember - and I see that newspapers get this wrong all the
time – that the TRC Act was very specific, and that is: All information and
evidence that was placed before the TRC may not be used later in a court of
law. So, if you want to prosecute someone from an event that arose or
because they didn’t get amnesty in the TRC you have to do it on the basis
of completely separate evidence that you have gained in terms of putting
that person on trail. And I imagine this is what happened in the present
trial. I am not privy to what happened in the present trial, but I imagine
there was a case where there was a complaint, where there were people that
said well we are prepared to plead guilty on this matter and then they
dealt with the issue accordingly.
In all other matters, as in such a case, you would have to find evidence
that was given independently of the information that was given to the TRC,
because that may not be used in a court of law. That evidence must at least
prove a prima facie case against that person before the prosecuting
authorities were to institute proceedings. That is very clear in the
prosecuting policy, that you would not proceed with any case if there isn’t
that prima facie evidence and so on. So, it is difficult to give you
specific answers because one would have to look at the separate situations.
But as I am aware of it at this stage, only one matter has arisen from
those events of the past and that is the one that took place in court
recently. Thank you.

 Plans to build proper structures for Bedwang and Cyferskuil police stations

68.   Mr A L Moseki (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (1)   Whether his department has a plan in place to build proper
           structures for the (a) Bedwang and (b) Cyferskuil police
           stations in the North West during this Medium-term Expenditure
           Framework cycle; if so, when is construction work likely to
           commence; if not,

        2) whether the building of two police stations will be included in
           the infrastructure plan; if not, why not?

            CO1795E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I hope I am going to get
the pronunciation of this particular station right.

Ek is van Cradock afkomstig en ons praat daar Afrikaans. [I come from
Cradock where we do speak Afrikaans.]

And to me this looks like an Afrikaans name: Bedwang. Am I right? Bedwang
police station and living quarters are priority number two on the planned
maintenance list which contains the repair and renovation list for the
North West province and will be addressed during the 2008-09 book year.
Cyferskuil police station is currently in the planning phase for total
repair and renovation. The actual work will of course commence in the near
future. Neither of the two stations were prioritised for capital works,
therefore no new infrastructure will be provided. Thank you.

    Threat posed by illegal immigrants, in light of 2010 World Cup Soccer
                                 tournament

69.   Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:



      (1)   Whether, in light of the 2010 World Cup Soccer  tournament,  the
           large  number  of  illegal  immigrants  entering  South   Africa
           constitutes a threat (a) to  safety  and  security  and  (b)  of
           international terrorist attacks; if not, why not; if so,


      (2)   whether he has put any measures in place to deal with these
           threats; if not, why not; if so, what measures in each case?
                                                              CO1677E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, there are no known
threats to the safety and security of the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup or
fear of international terrorist attacks. However, operational plans are in
place to deal with any emerging threat. Thank you very much.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I would like to ask the Minister as a follow-up
to that: To counter any possible threat to safety and security, some
farmers near the borders are arresting illegal immigrants and handing them
over to the police. Does the Minister consider that these farmers are
assisting the state to uphold safety and security and what is their legal
position?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That has got nothing to do with the current
question, Mr Worth. That is something very different, but I normally don’t
want to bar Ministers if they want to respond and share information with
the people. Follow-up questions should arise from questions asked on the
Order Paper. Mr Minister, it is up to you whether you want to share
information on that, but you are not forced to answer that.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the only thing I can say
is that he should listen tomorrow as I would be answering that question in
the National Assembly.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I just want to make a follow-up on this
question that we have observed, particularly those of us who come from
Limpopo, that the Beit Bridge border gate is very porous, and we have been
physically there. In relation to 2010 and with that route being used as a
smuggling point, I want to ask whether there will be plans in place to
ensure that that border gate does not really become a route into the
country between now and even during 2010. Some of us are concerned that
during that period people can smuggle things that are illegal into our
country, and criminals coming from elsewhere will use that border gate to
come into the country.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, part of the strategic
security plan for 2010 relates to co-operation between South African law-
enforcement agencies as well as law-enforcement agencies in the SADC
region.

There has been established in SADC what is called the Southern African
Regional Police Co-operation Chiefs Co-operation Organisation. That
organisation’s work relates to crime as it happens in SADC. But, in recent
times, as the police chiefs have been discussing matters that relate to
crime combating and prevention in the region, there is a regular item that
deals with security questions that relate to 2010. Part of that has to do
with preventing certain people, who may want to enter South Africa
illegally, principally to cause problems for our country, from doing so.

That matter, as I have indicated, is part and parcel of our planning for
the provision of a proper security plan to deal with 2010. Thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, arising from the answer of the Minister, SADC is
looking at the possibility of having, by next year, one economic zone,
which means that there will be free movement of people and goods between
countries – if that is realisable.

From the SA Police Service’s point of view, are you looking at that,
because the implications are that by 2010 people will be moving freely in
these countries without any requirement of measures that are taken at this
point in time because the conditions would have changed. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, in terms of policing, of
course, there has been a quite exhaustive discussion between the various
role-players relating to that question; even the economic issues that arise
as a consequence of opening up borders.

In fact, the issue of opening up borders is an international matter now.
Already the Department of Home Affairs has signed an agreement with Lesotho
that relates to that question. But it does not mean that there is going to
be such free movement to even allow criminals to take advantage of that
space.

We are using many measures. I indicated earlier on how we also use high
technology to deal with some of these matters. Therefore, those with
criminal intent, who would like to exploit the new arrangements, are not
going to succeed, because we are going to pick them up and deal with them.
Thank you.

    Complaints and/or disciplinary action iro drunken driving harassment,
                           following media article

70.   Ms D Robinson (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:



      (1)   Whether,  with  reference  to  a  certain  media  article  (copy
           furnished) about complaints on  drunken  driving  harassment  by
           Table View police, any complaints of harassment have  been  laid
           by residents against any officer at the  above-mentioned  police
           station; if so, how many;

      (2)   whether any disciplinary action has been taken against any
           police officer as a result of these complaints; if not, why not;
           if so, what are the relevant details?        CO1678E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, my response to hon
Robinson is that we have not received any formal complaints about the
referred media article.

But there is a case that came to our attention on 18 May that we are
looking into. Therefore, there are no disciplinary steps that have been
taken against anyone at the moment. We don’t know what will happen in
future.

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for his response. I just
want to know whether there are any measures in place to assist policemen to
deal with their own stress levels just in case this sort of unnecessary
harassment arises from their own stress levels.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes, we have an entire section – a
division actually – that deals with those matters. It is called the
Employee Assistance Services. They deal will all manner of traumas and
stresses that arise not only from the work that members of Saps do, but
also with respect to domestic problems that they may be confronting where
they live. Therefore, that programme does exist.

I must admit that it is not always the case that members make use of the
programmes we have, and that obviously has to do with the fact that it is
not easy on the part of some of the people who are actually undergoing
stress to talk about that to people they consider to be their peers,
particularly around the workplace. But, generally, we see a tendency for
many of them now to be coming out and talking about those problems.

But there is a regulation where, when a person has been exposed to trauma,
they necessarily have to undergo counselling.

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I would just like to know, since it is a
problem for people to speak to their peers about problems - they might feel
they lose face or whatever – is there any opportunity for volunteers and
independent people to assist our police, because I do think that they
definitely need it?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You are now expanding and expanding on your
question. [Laughter.] That is a clever way of doing it, but I am listening
carefully. Minister, would you like to take that one?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, perhaps what would help
in these circumstances would be for us to have tea upstairs and I can
explain some of these things. But what she is raising is important because,
indeed, there are many people who are helping us.

The other day we opened a police station at Hout Bay. I met with a number
of people who are doing voluntary work there by assisting particularly in
our trauma section. Therefore, many of our people have actually made use of
private counsellors for trauma counselling. Thank you.

         Availability of breathalyser machines in SA Police Service

71.   Ms D Robinson (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether, with reference to a certain media report (copy furnished) on
      a 62-year old woman of Table View receiving counselling as a result of
      rough treatment by the police, the SA Police Service has its own
      breathalyser machines; if not, (a) why not and (b) when will the Table
      View police station be supplied with a breathalyser machine; if so,
      what are the reasons for the police having to drive to Bonteheuwel
      police station in order to use a breathalyser machine?
      CO1679E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the police actually don’t
use breathalysers. Breathalysers are used by metro police; in other words,
the traffic police are the people who use them. Here in the Peninsula,
there are only two of those, one at headquarters in their office at
Bonteheuwel, and the other one is used on patrol. The police do not use
breathalysers. Thank you.

Ms D ROBINSON: Minister, I would like to know that if police are going to
apprehend people who appear to be drunk, surely it is necessary for them to
have breathalysers. Isn’t it something that we need to investigate that can
be available closer at hand?

I also know of cases where people have had to go to hospitals to have tests
done and the service there has been so slow that people have been put into
cells overnight, waiting for the results of the blood tests, and this seems
to be delaying justice.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am sure that there is no regulation
that would stop the police from having breathalysers.  I don’t know. I am
thinking on my feet here. I do not know if there is a particular reason why
they do not have them because you are correct in what you are saying. For
instance, we do stop people for drunk driving, and indeed the first thing
that we do in a situation like that is that blood is taken for testing.
But, I don’t know if there would be an impediment that would stop the
police from using breathalysers. We don’t have them, and I suppose it has
been tradition that traffic officers use them.

 Resolution of cases of sexual exploitation and/or sexual violence involving
                      SA National Defence Force troops

72.   Ms J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Minister of Defence:
      (1)   With reference to his reply to Question 410 on 1 June 2006,  how
           many (a) of the 18 reported cases have been  finalised  and  (b)
           incidents  of  sexual  exploitation   and/or   sexual   violence
           involving troops of the SA National Defence  Force  deployed  in
           peacekeeping operations in Africa have been reported since 2006;


      (2)   whether his department has taken any steps to ensure the speedy
           resolution of these cases; if not, why not; if so, what steps?
                                                                    CO1680E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Comrade Chairperson, I thank Ms Terblanche
for the question. The answer is that of the 18 reported cases, nine have
been finalised, and since 2006 several cases have been reported. The
Director of Military Prosecutions has issued instructions that the
finalisation of sexual misconduct cases is a priority. The status of the
cases as mentioned and written feedback is provided to the Chief Director
of Legal Support every fortnight.

Military police officials were sent to areas of external deployment with
the exclusive task of tracing the complainants and witnesses from the local
population to ensure their availability to testify in court. Thank you.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Thank you for the answer, Deputy Minister. You said that
there were incidents of sexual exploitation that were reported since 2006;
do you have the numbers of these cases? How many of these were reported?
Please?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Comrade Chairperson, I thought that this
was a follow-up question. At the last reply we reported that 18 cases were
reported and the question was: What happened to those 18 cases? We say that
out of those 18 cases, nine have been finalised. But if you are now putting
a new question as to how many cases up to now, we would not be able to
provide that answer, unless we came here prepared. This is a new question
and it is not in line with the one on the Question Paper. You must realise
that this one is a follow-up from the question that was asked by the hon
member on the question of the numbers of cases that were reported - that is
18 cases.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I am sorry but it is actually a follow-up
to section (b). The question was whether incidents were reported and
Minister answered, yes. Now I am only asking how many.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: He says that he does not have the numbers.
That is an answer.

    Investigation by Scorpions into alleged offences, and steps taken by
            National Prosecuting Authority to bring case to court
73.   Ms J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:


      (1)   Whether investigations into alleged offences by a certain person
           (name furnished) have been completed by the Scorpions;  if  not,
           (a) why not and (b) when is it expected to be completed; if so,




      (2)   whether the National Prosecuting Authority has taken  any  steps
           to bring the case to court; if not, why not; if so, what steps;


      (3)   whether the State will pay the said person’s legal fees if he is
           charged; if not, why not; if so, why?              CO1681E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I thank the
hon member for the question. I have been advised by the National
Prosecuting Authority that the investigation into alleged offences, by the
person that the hon member is referring to, has not yet been completed due
to complexities in this matter. These include, amongst others, the legal
challenges, which were brought by the alleged co-accused and the said
person, which is further delaying the investigation. It is anticipated that
the investigation will be completed by the end of October 2007, according
to the NPA.

Question 2, falls away. As to question 3, the state has not received an
application to pay the legal fees of any person in this matter. In this
light therefore, I am unable to say, at this stage, how the state will
respond to such an application, which does not yet exist.

  Findings of task team appointed to investigate corruption at Qalakabusha
                             Correctional Centre

74.   Mr O M Thetjeng (DA) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:



      (1)   What have been the findings of the task team appointed by him to
           investigate corruption at the Qalakabusha Correctional Centre;


      (2)   whether any disciplinary action has been taken as a result of
           these findings; if not, why not; if so, (a) what action and (b)
           against whom?                                            CO1682E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much Chair. The
investigations into allegations of corruption, collusion, unethical
behaviour in Empangeni at Qalakabusha Correctional Centre - Qalakabusha
means “place of new beginnings” - are currently at a very advanced stage.
The task team is in the process of finalising the investigation and will
report to me quite soon.
As to the second part, at this stage, no disciplinary steps have been taken
against any official or person; however, 17 officials have been suspended
pending the outcome of the investigative report. It is worth mentioning,
also, that there is a parallel investigation that is being conducted by the
South African Police Service regarding the alleged aiding and abetting of
the escape. Thank you.

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Minister, for the response. I just want to
check with the Minister whether the task team that has been appointed in
Qalakabusha will follow the same procedures that applied in other cases
where such incidences have occurred, so that we come to the bottom of these
problems that we have in the department? Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Surely, Mr Thetjeng, you would
understand that it won’t be the same task teams for the different
occurrences that happen in other centres, depending on that, but in terms
of the fact that the task team includes SAPS, the National Intelligence
Agency, and all the security institutions, we’ve taken from them. But, we
also make sure that if it’s something happening in Qalakabusha we get
people from outside of KwaZulu-Natal to do the investigation, so as to make
sure that there is no collusion at all amongst those, because we want to
get to the bottom of this, and then deal with the officials that are
creating this kind of problem.

      Implementation of e-scheduler systems in magistrates’ courts; and
      interruption of court proceedings due to lost and stolen dockets

75.   Mr A Watson (DA) asked the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
      Development:



      (1)   Whether the e-scheduler system rolled out by her department  has
           been implemented in all magistrates’ courts as scheduled by  the
           end of June 2007; if not, (a) why not, (b) how many magistrates’
           courts still require this system  and  (c)  by  when  will  this
           system be implemented at these courts; if so, what measures  has
           her department put in place to train staff to use this system;


        2) whether the number of cases of court proceedings being
           interrupted due to lost and stolen dockets has decreased; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
           CO1683E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I want to
sneeze and it does not want to come.

I thank the hon Watson for the question. I would like to refer the hon
member to the Minister’s reply to Question 189, which was submitted to the
National Assembly.

In this reply, the Minister advised that 455 courts have the e-scheduler
installed and operational. Since then an additional four courts have had
the e-scheduler installed. There are still 13 courts remaining that do not
have the e-scheduler installed. The reason for that is that six courts are
still under construction; two courts do not have Telkom infrastructure, and
that is being installed, and the remaining five courts will be connected to
the e-scheduler on 1 September 2007.

I have some facts and figures here, but I won’t go into that. As far as
training is concerned, the principle of “train-the-trainer” is being
followed to adhere to the training demands. Users within each
administrative cluster have been identified and trained to assist and
support the users. Since 1 October 2006, 334 users’ functional trainers
representing the various administrative clusters have been trained at
national office to be able to do the training on these issues.

As to question 2, specific statistics regarding the impact of lost and
stolen dockets are not readily available. It may be mentioned in court that
a case cannot proceed because a docket is not at court, for whatever
reason, and the presiding officer may reflect that on the case record. This
is, unfortunately, not currently captured in the general statistics of the
National Prosecuting Authority or the department, as the current
information systems do not capture the reasons for specific court
interruption such as lost or stolen dockets.

The field and the e-scheduler are currently being revisited and a field to
capture such information will be considered. It can be mentioned, however,
that, on average, the number of cases of court proceedings being
interrupted due to lost and stolen dockets had decreased, according to
information sources on the various cluster heads of the courts. This is
largely due to measures initiated to enforce stricter control over dockets,
such as the implementation of registers at prosecutorial level for docket
handover control and docket lock-up facilities at the South African Police
Service and court level, which didn’t exist previously.

Further measures receiving attention is the scanning solution currently
being tested and to be implemented at the end of this financial year. It
will be run as part and parcel of the e-scheduler management system, so
that the scheduling of cases and the required presence of dockets at courts
are aligned. So, we do not have a paper-based system, we have an e-based
system.

Another exciting development is the e-docket system that is currently being
piloted by the SAPS. This will ensure that a permanent electronic copy of
the content of the case docket will be available at all times, and to
reduce the time lost as a result of dockets not being available, for
whatever reason. This will be phased in during the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework period.

We are doing two things to try to move to an e-based system; either using
scanners so that, if ever a docket is again lost and so on, you will always
have the docket available or this whole project of the police to have all
their dockets as e-dockets, instead of having the paper-based system. So,
hopefully, that will take away, completely, the problem of lost and stolen
dockets, but its impact has decreased tremendously. There are only very few
such cases.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, hon Deputy Minister for
that comprehensive answer. I have a follow-up on the two subjects: There is
the one on the e-scheduler and now the mentioned e-dockets that you are
talking about. What would the effect be, because dockets, as I remember,
contain sworn affidavits and sworn statements and if it’s merely copies or
scanned copies, will the validity of those sworn affidavits or sworn
statements still have affirmation for that matter? Will they still remain
as valid as a written affirmation or statement?

In the case of the second follow-up, over the weekend we read about the
dockets of the six farmers that couldn’t go to trial because the dockets
were missing. I do not quite agree with the statement you made about it. It
shouldn’t delay the court proceedings against offenders if the dockets are
mislaid or stolen. Maybe you can explain why that has made such headlines
in the news over the weekend. Thanks, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: The first
question is a very valid one, obviously, because clearly, if you want to
put evidence before court, you have to have the original documentation;
but, you see, what the scanner and the e-docket do is to enable people to
work with those electronics and then lock up the written document.

You see, the problem now is that every person carries it around and if they
don’t have proper systems, one can for example, carry it and leave it while
at a pub or somewhere; walk away and leave the docket there, and it gets
lost, whereas now you can go and lock that with all the signatures away.
You don’t have to touch that docket again, unless someone challenges the
validity of the signature, then you have to haul out the docket. So, I
think that is the one.

I’m not aware of this issue - I don’t like reading newspapers on weekends,
they are terribly depressing and horrible - but if you give me the
information later, I’ll follow it up for you and give you an answer. I’m
not sure what has happened there; but in theory, the systems that we have
put in place are not yet foolproof, as the e-one will be, and I imagine
there are still things going wrong, but if you give me the information,
I’ll check it up for you.

I think this sounds like a case of “n boer maak ‘n plan”, but I’m not aware
of that.

Ms D ROBINSON: I am delighted to hear about the progress of going into
electronics; it certainly does ease the situation, but we often have the
problem of power failures and then all electronic services collapse. I
would just like to know whether you have adequate backup systems or
disaster-recovery systems to ensure that all these electronic copies are
safe? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I can’t
answer you now because the systems are still being set up, but now that you
have warned me, I’ll make sure that the backups are there. Look, I’m sure
any electronic system that is worth its salt will have to have such
systems, but it’s good that you reminded me now. I can check up when they
install it that it does have the backups. Thanks a lot.

  Measures to ensure transformation in middle management of SA Navy and SA
                                  Air Force

76.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      Whether his department is putting any measures in place to ensure that
      there is transformation in the middle management of the SA Navy and
      the SA Air Force; if not, why not; if so, (a) what measures and (b) by
      when will they have been put in place?

                  CO1777E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you very much, Comrade Chairperson
and Kgoshi. Yes, the department has transformation measures in place in
terms of the Department of Defence Human Resource Strategy 2010 and the
White Paper on Defence. These measures are aimed at transforming the human
resource component of the Department of Defence through rejuvenation and
ensuring representation of all groups.

Before I read the three measures to you, Kgoshi, I must say that you will
realise that the Department of Defence, especially the SANDF, is not like
other departments. You cannot bring people to Defence by merely advertising
for the post of colonel. If you want to be a colonel in the Department of
Defence, you will have to go through the ranks – lieutenant-colonel, major
and so on. So you cannot just be parachuted into any position.

The problem, as you are saying, is at the middle management. The middle
management at the moment, especially the colonels and the lieutenant-
colonels, is still not yet representative. For that to happen, certain
things must happen. The measures as I would list them are as follows:
Firstly, we have the fast-tracking programme. The SA National Defence Force
is continuously revising its measures for the fast-tracking programme. This
entails providing an accelerated training programme for identified high
potential members from previously designated groups. Fast-tracked members
are then identified for middle management positions with the various
Department of Defence divisions upon completion of the accelerated training
programme.

Secondly, there is the mobility exit mechanism, which is an employer-
initiated financial package, offered to members that would have been
identified to have reached a career plateau to make way for rejuvenation.
Like I am saying, if you have all these colonels, who are 96% White, you
cannot just wake up one morning and say: “I want a representative at the
colonel level,” and get rid of 20% Whites and replace them with Blacks;
and, as it is all male-dominated, say: “Get out, you 30% of men, I want to
put in females.” You have to wait until they exit and, of course, new
people will come in and take their positions.

And lastly, the recruitment is predominately focused on core mastering in
order to accelerate representation. This will also include women from the
black racial groupings.

To answer your second question, there are these measures that are already
in place and are also used to transform the middle management within the SA
Air Force and the SA Navy. You might have heard recently that the
promotions, especially in the positions of colonels and brigadier-generals
already indicate that these measures are in place and working. I thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me thank the Deputy Minister for this
exciting response, because it takes us somewhere. It shows that the
department is moving.

In terms of progression, hon Deputy Minister, how soon can we see this
happening - just to see the picture of that middle management reflecting
the demography of this country? I am just asking in terms of the
progression - when I look forward.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, Kgoshi Mokoena, like I said,
the plan is there. If you look at the numbers at lower levels, you can
already see that they reflect the demographics of this country. But, for
that to move forward, you need to firstly use these mechanisms. Regarding
these mechanisms such as the member exit mechanism, you cannot just say to
somebody that he must take it. It must be a voluntary thing. The more
people make use of the member exit mechanism, the more you will be able to
fill the position and be representative.

Also there were recent promotions to generals. They also took some people
who were there upwards, which also created space, again, for
representativity. Already, that is taking place.  At some stage it was 90%,
80% and so on, but you will realise that it has gone back down to 60%.
Probably next year, if you call us again and ask us that in terms of
representivity, how is our situation at colonel, lieutenant-colonel levels,
you might find that it has gone down, probably to 50% or less. As I am
saying, it is a process which we can only analyse when you have asked that
question.

      Building of more prisons as a potential solution to overcrowding

77.   Mr N J Mack (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:



      (1)   Whether the building of more prisons is regarded as  a  solution
           to the overcrowding  in  our  prisons;  if  not,  what  are  the
           possible remedies;


      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         CO1778E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Hon
Mack, internationally, there is consensus that the building of more and
more correctional centres as a single solution to overcrowding is not a
viable option. The Department of Correctional Services in South Africa
developed a multipronged strategy to alleviate overcrowding of correctional
centres.

What do we do? Firstly, we look at managing the levels of awaiting-trial
detainees through the Integrated Justice System Case Management Task Team,
and Intersectoral Committee on Child Justice. It is one of the tools that
we use.

Secondly, we manage levels of sentenced offenders through improving
effective and appropriate use of conversion of sentences to community
correctional supervision; and the release on parole and transfers between
correctional centres to attempt to establish some degree of evenness on
overcrowding. One centre has a lot of people, whereas the other one has a
small number. So we try to transfer them, so that there is a balance in
what we do.

Thirdly, we are ensuring progress with our own infrastructure with the
capital works programme to upgrade our facilities and to build new
correctional centres that are both cost-effective and rehabilitation
oriented. Most of the centres that we have, like Pollsmoor and others, and
the one next to your home in Beaufort West, are the old ones. They don’t
lend themselves to rehabilitation. So we are trying to build new ones, and
we call them the new generation centres. Qalakabusha is one of them. You
are able to do unit management in them.

Already, we are busy with Kimberley, Port Shepstone, East London, Allendale
and Klerksdorp. We would also like to encourage debate in South Africa
about reasons for incarceration as a sentence and encouraging an approach
to appropriate sentencing that is focused on the facilitating of
rehabilitation. We would also like enhance community correctional
supervision, so that it can be better utilised as an appropriate sentence
for less serious crimes.

I am happy that I am saying this in the presence of the Deputy Minister of
Justice. This morning we discussed that we wouldn’t have a situation where
a person who had just slapped somebody, not that anybody should slap
anybody, can end up in a correctional centre. It is really not on and not
necessary at all. But it doesn’t mean that Mr George can just slap anybody.
[Laughter.] You don’t do it.

We are also looking at improving correction and developing programmes
within our centres to ensure enhanced facilitation of rehabilitation – play
sports, agriculture, education and everything that goes with it, to make
sure that they really change. We would like to encourage improvement of
first and second levels of correction in families, social institutions, as
well as social and economic sector government departments respectively, to
decrease the rate of entry into the criminal justice system.

We would like to encourage community involvement in the social
reintegration of offenders back into their communities, so that when they
go back, communities don’t say that they don’t want them. Who wants them?
Communities have to be very amenable to that and accept them when we put
them back. They should help us in making sure that they are settled in,
into those communities, and to also reduce the levels of repeat offending.
Your second part asks whether I will make a statement on the matter. I have
made my statement.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I would like to
welcome the hon Deputy Minister of Correctional Services. And I would like
you to take a seat in front here, please. Are there any follow-up questions
to the Minister?

Mr N J MACK: Thank you, hon Minister, for a very good answer. With the new
generation facilities, we also see that many of our crimes are related to
drug and substance abuse. Just locking up a person with this type of
problem is not a solution. In the policy will this also incorporate the
treatment of these offenders when they are in the centres?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Hon
Mack, there are programmes that we have within the department. Most of
those programmes are specific to why the person was sentenced in the first
place. We make sure that if you come in with a drug-related problem, we
have staff members, as well as other people coming from outside to assist
you with the problem that you have.

So, there is a drug rehabilitation programme that we will put you in. We
will ask Social Development, as well, to come in and assist us and provide
social workers. If it is a social offence, again, we deal with it in that
kind of fashion. We have those programmes that are really trying to assist.
Again, I always put out this call to families when they go and visit, on
Tuesdays and Thursdays mostly, all over the country, it is awaiting-trial
detainees that get visited by their families. One of the best things is to
visit with those families, so that you can understand what they say to
those people that are inside – to assist them.

On Saturdays and Sundays, it is for offenders that are sentenced, all over
the country. Mluleki calls them criminals, and I call them offenders. Their
families visit them and again, we try and put them through programmes so
that they can assist them in the process and, try and make them understand
that being in a correctional centre is not the best of things. The best
thing is to try and give yourself a second chance.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me also thank the Minister for the
elaborative and educative response. Based on what we, as a cluster, have
seen as a detachment in all provinces, we need to look into alleviating
this overcrowding in our prisons. Hon Minister, if there is an improved
JCPS cluster in all the regions or areas, can that not also, as a way of
assisting, help with this overcrowding in our prisons? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, Kgoshi. One of
the quite good strategies I heard this morning came from the Deputy
Minister of Justice in the task team that they have. We need to replicate
the structures that we have at national level, to provincial levels, right
up to district level, so that work can then be done right where the centres
are. In this situation, those Justice Crime Prevention and Security
clusters are doing very well.

I would wish to see all of them working together, not only in the JCPS
cluster, but also in the community safety forums, because that is where,
again, you can do a lot of work, to convince also the judiciary and the
magistrates that those who have really done petty crimes should really be
diverted away from our centres, so that we are able to deal with those that
need proper rehabilitation. Those kinds of structures are helping quite a
lot. I must say that. I thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Hon Minister, don’t you think
it would be a proper thing that you should borrow from the indigenous law
in terms of a way of doing things that is more restorative? In that way you
will be able to come up with more ways of alternative sentencing than is
currently the case, with the retributive system that you are having, so
that you can reduce the level of overcrowding. Could you also suggest that
the Department of Justice look at those ways?

In indigenous law, the way of dealing with issues of crime and so on is
more building than destroying. Therefore, sentencing is not only
incarceration. Don’t you think you can actually raise that, or do some
research in that respect? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: There is work that is being done on
that. The issue of restorative justice is not only for us. We also have our
own unit of that restorative justice, where you can get the victim and the
attacker or offender families meeting and talking, so that you can find a
way of avoiding that any person goes to prison. But you cannot do it for
murder, of course. You can do it for other crimes, but for murder, rape and
so on, you have to go the route of going through the courts.

There is something like that that is happening. Parole boards as well,
within correctional services, do that all the time, to try and alleviate
the problem of overcrowding. I thank you.

  Incentives to SA National Defence Force members deployed in peace-keeping
                                 operations

78.   Mr A L Moseki (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      Whether any incentives are given to SA National Defence Force members
      deployed in some countries on the continent as part of a peacekeeping
      force; if not, why not; if so, (a) what incentives and (b) what are
      the budgetary implications?  CO1781E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: The answer is: Yes, the Department of
Defence does have incentive allowances for operational deployments. Members
deployed are eligible for deployment allowances that comprise of a danger
allowance, special danger allowance, and other needs to be declared as
such, standby allowance, deprivation allowance and international
obligations special daily allowance. The incentive allowance is about R9
742, 50 per member per month on average. Added to this is an IOSDA that
differs according to the country being served, as published by the Minister
for the Public Service and Administration. At present, it ranges from R3
572, 70 per annum if you are for example in the DRC. But if, for instance
you are soldiers in Nepad, it is R 1163, 70 per month. For the 2007-08
financial year this department has budgeted an amount of nearly R322
million for these operational allowances in respect of support to peace
missions. Thank you.

Mr N J MACK: Thank you, hon Minister, for a very educative response. What I
would like to know is whether there is any uniform standard rate for
different countries or whether everyone is allowed the same incentives in
rands and cents? How far do these incentives assure that we get the best
possible people to deploy out to operations? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you, Uncle Mack. I am not sure if you
asked if there is any uniformity. Well, it depends. If a deployment is
under the United Nations, surely it will have its own arrangements as per
United Nations’ arrangements. But if a deployment is conducted by the AU,
it will also have its own arrangements. But countries themselves also have
their own arrangements because you will realise that countries do not pay
their soldiers the same way. But all these arrangements must fit in. If a
deployment is under the United Nations, the arrangements must fit into the
United Nations’ programme; if it’s the AU, the arrangements must fit into
the AU’s programme.

But as to getting the best possible people to deploy out to operations -
when countries are looking for soldiers, for instance, they let you know
what it is that they want from you. If they want a battalion, they will ask
you for a battalion.  If the United Nations wants you, then they give you
their determined criteria. Even the AU works the same way. But there are
specific requirements for any soldiers deployed outside the country. They
must meet a certain criteria. This criteria, unfortunately, has nothing to
do with remuneration. This is a criterion that befits soldiers that are
going to be sent to a place of conflict and therefore all soldiers,
irrespective of the allowances, must meet a certain criteria.

Mr S SHICEKA: Well, the Deputy Minister has educated us on this issue. But
my interest is more on the deprivation allowance. What does this
deprivation allowance entail? What is being deprived? I would want to hear
about that, Deputy Minister. In addition to that, Deputy Minister, is the
inspiration of the soldiers ... I mean I have friends who are soldiers.
They love to go outside the country because they feel that they get more
money. But is it a widespread thing that soldiers are inspired to go and
serve the interest of the country in other countries? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Well, it is a fact that soldiers get
excited when they are deployed because of these incentives. This is because
when they come back from deployment, they come back better off because of
these allowances. One soldier was joking with me saying that with this
deployment to the DRC he bought a house in cash. He said that then if he
could get another deployment then he would buy a car in cash. So, these
incentives make people eager to go to the deployments.

This question of deprivation - well, I think these hon members here will at
least ... As a man of God, I don’t have to say all these things. But surely
you will realise what deprivations the people are going through.
[Laughter.] When you are placed in Burundi, you are deprived from seeing
your children. [Laughter.] I will not talk about the mother of the
children. [Laughter.] But there are these deprivations. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Let me thank the Deputy Minister for this wonderful
response. Chair, arising from the Deputy Minister’s response, other than
the monetary value and based on some of the conditions that prevail in
those countries where the sons and daughters of this country are deployed,
are there other things that go with this monetary value as incentives to
attract and motivate these combat-ready and dedicated troops of our
country? Through you, Chair, to the Deputy Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Well, Kgoshi, once you are deployed ... One
of the things you must also have is the picture of a soldier – any soldier
anywhere in the world. A soldier would like to fight a war or to get
experience or exposure. This is natural. This is like a good rugby player -
not like Jake White’s players. [Laughter.] They want to play rugby. They
don’t just practise. Soldiers are like that. You would even hear all
soldiers when they talk that they talk about how many wars they have
fought. Even if you are a soldier but didn’t fight any war, to them you are
not a good soldier. So, it’s an experience. Besides that, they learn a lot.
They get involved in situations where they learn how things are done. Our
soldiers, for instance, learned a lot in Burundi. In fact they did a very
good thing for that country. If you go to Burundi now and you just say that
you are from South Africa, the Burundians would want to give you something
or lift you up in the air. That’s how excited they become. So, I am saying
that besides the money that they get by being involved in deployments, they
also gain a lot of experience.

You must realise that before we got involved in these peacekeeping
operations, we had to arrange for quick training because training for
peacekeeping operations is different from training for a war. But, at the
moment, we can proudly say that we have done what we can to now be compared
with any other country in the world in terms of our training. So, they have
benefited a lot in terms of experience and understanding. Sometimes, of
course, some of those guys come back speaking French, especially those who
are in the DRC. So, there are those other benefits. Some of them when they
retire as generals, as happens in other countries, we will be able to send
then even for negotiating peace because we are also beginning to train them
on negotiating skills. Thank you.

            Implementation of recommendations of Jali Commission

79.   Mr N J Mack (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (a) How many recommendations by the Jali Commission have been
      implemented and (b) how is his department benefiting from them?

                  CO1784E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Let me declare this so that the
Deputy Minister of Defence knows that my blood is green. So when he says
that Jake White’s guys can’t play rugby, my blood is green.

My bloed is groen. [My blood is green.]

It is World Cup next month. That is now out of the way.

On the Jali Commission, hon Mack, in the process of the assessment of the
entire report of the Jali Commission - remember it spent quite some time,
from 2001 to 2005, which was a long time with the commission sitting and
unearthing all those things it had to unearth - it was found that the
report dealt with a number of issues which were categorised into
organisational systems and policies on the one hand, and misconduct and
disciplinary matters on the other.

There were 18 issues relating to organisational systems in that report.
Under each of these matters there were a number of recommendations. The
Department of Correctional Services has made considerable progress in
dealing with the recommendations made under these issues, and it should be
mentioned that through the initiatives that formed part of the department’s
transformation process, by the time the commission completed its work, the
department had already made some strides in addressing some of these
issues.

With regard to misconduct matters, the department has dealt with most of
the disciplinary cases that emanated from the Jali Commission’s report. As
a result of the disciplinary proceedings that have taken place, 45
officials were dismissed; 39 received written warnings; 5 received
counselling as per the commission’s recommendation; 10 were acquitted; 67
cases were withdrawn due to reasons mainly relating to lack of evidence; 36
officials resigned, and 13 passed away before the finalisation of the
disciplinary process. The department is currently dealing with the last
portion of the disciplinary cases involving 34 officials who are part of
that final report of the Jali Commission. We are busy dealing with that
now.

The benefit that the department got from the commission’s recommendations
relating to systems and policies is that such recommendations enhanced the
department’s confidence in the initiatives it has already undertaken during
that transformation process as part of aligning the department with the
country’s constitutional dispensation. The findings and recommendations
pertaining to misconduct have enabled us as a department to get rid of some
of the bad officials that we had in the department, people who are not fit
to be part of our correctional system, like the ones who were on Special
Assignment. We got rid of them immediately; we fired them. We don’t play
games in Correctional Services.

Secondly, we benefited quite a lot in terms of the values of integrity and
accountability that emanated from that process. At least people now know,
you do something wrong, you get punished for that. That’s what we got from
the whole Jali Commission’s report. Thank you.

Mr N J MACK: Thank you, Minister. The next logical question would be: Are
there any other recommendations that are still outstanding? Will there be a
timeframe set or how soon can that work be finished?
The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: The Deputy Minister of Defence says
I should not just get rid of them. I should make sure that they get
arrested. He is quite right. There are always criminal charges that go with
that; we fire you and still follow you up with criminal charges.

Hon Mack, I think we are now finalising those and I am hoping that by the
time we rise in the NCOP and National Assembly, we will have everything
tied up so that we can deal with the other cases that are there.

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson. Minister, I am very
excited about the way the department and you yourself respond to the issues
of corruption. It is very good because you demonstrate that you don’t
tolerate corruption and corruption has no place in your department. That
comes out positively, even if it is exposed by people. We encourage that
because, before, there was an impression created of saying that if you
expose corruption, you the whistle-blower are going to be punished. I am
saying that that has turned around. We appreciate that very much. Continue
with it; it is good work.

There are three things which I think came out prominently in that report.
It was around corruption. On corruption, are you taking proactive steps to
deal with corruption before it is exposed. I think you have talked about
the Special Assignment programme where people were taking money blatantly
without knowing that they are on camera and so on, including saying that
some boys are taken from the places where kids are to be given to adults
who abuse them.

The second area is gangsterism. Gangsterism is a stumbling block to
rehabilitation because people have their internal specialised gang
authority and orders that you must listen to. How are you going to deal
with this? Sometimes it is a reflection of the society. It is a microcosm
of society, particularly if you look at the Western Cape. It is quite a
rife thing even to someone who is outside the situation.

The last one is overcrowding, which I think you are taking steps to deal
with. Those three prominent areas, if dealt with, will go a long way in
dealing with the issues that are affecting Correctional Services. Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, hon Shiceka.
Thank you for the commendations that you did, and also the way that you
have noticed that we try and move as swiftly as possible to try and deal
with anything that is not of good and moral value within the department. We
try to be very swift and we try to deal with those cases without fear or
favour to anybody.

There was a time - you are quite right - during which, if you raised issues
or when you saw that certain wrong things were being done within the
department, they would use all kinds of threats. You would be the one who
gets threatened by the wrongdoers. That era is gone; people know exactly
where we stand. There is clarity on where we stand on issues. I am quite
happy that we have reached that stage.

On issues of corruption we have got the DIU. Each department has got its
investigating unit. We have got the departmental investigating unit which
is doing a lot of work, where things are reported when somebody feels that
there is something going on. We have got a hotline as well and we are
working very closely with the police and with the SIU in cleaning up the
department.

In terms of these young boys you were talking about, since we have got this
new system of working together with Social Development and with Justice,
there is no mixing of young offenders with adult offenders. We do our best
to ensure that they should not mix at all, so that there is nothing
untoward that could happen. The places of safety that we work with, with
Social Development, are really starting to benefit the whole process. It is
the Deputy Minister of Correctional Services’ forte to talk to the MECs of
social development in the provinces so that we can set these things up
correctly, and then send all these young children into those centres of
safety.

The issue of gangsterism is very difficult because nobody ever comes out
and says I am a 28 or a 26. They will not do that, but we have got a way of
fighting gangsterism within the prisons. Once we find it, immediately we
break that circle of gangsters and throw them all over the country, and
they can then start anew wherever they are. There are programmes to try and
warn them about the dangers of thinking that you have come to correctional
centres to form gangs instead of being here to be rehabilitated.

One of the incentives that we have given is that if at least you do four
programmes that are beneficial to you, the parole boards can look at your
case. I am not talking about the big cases; I am talking about the medium
ones. They can look at you and consider you for parole release so that you
can finish part of your sentence outside.

If you are going to be involved in gangsterism, you will not have a chance
to do all those things because you have given yourself that attitude that I
am here, I am a 28 or a 27 or a 26, and I have got my own group. You will
never be able to be rehabilitated. We are trying our best to break that
cycle totally within our centres. Thank you very much.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thanks, Chairperson. Let me also join the queue to
thank the department for the wonderful work that they are doing. We are
very proud of this department.
Based on this response from the Minister and on that note, is it not high
time, hon Minister, that when we employ these correctional officers, for us
to introduce a measure whereby all of them are going to be vetted to
eliminate these unwanted elements who are tarnishing the good image of this
department in dealing with corruption? It is just a thought, hon Minister,
about whether we can’t do that?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, we have two colleges,
Zonderwater and Kroonstad College, where our students go to, and they do a
year’s training, three months in the college and nine months at the centre.
It is very true that if we don’t catch them at that stage and vet them
properly, we will continue to have this type of wrong people within the
department.

However, I must assure you, normally it is not the new students who cause
this. It is the older ones and the new ones join in as well. We are trying
our best however to instil some sense of discipline within. In the
colleges, as well, we have asked that students be taken through some of the
modules that teach them what needs to be done when you get to a centre. The
environment that officials work in is a very difficult one. Correctional
centres are very difficult by nature because you are in with a number of
people who have different ideals about what life is all about. Those that
were caught on camera, for instance, it was an inmate who is awaiting trial
outside on bail who filmed them. He came out on bail and invited them to
McDonalds. Can you believe this? How does an awaiting-trial inmate on bail
invite you, being the official, to a McDonalds and you go? Why would you do
that?

So, these are some of the issues that are really worrying in this whole
thing, but we will make sure that that kind of vetting takes place. It
doesn’t mean we will totally eliminate all those things, but we have to try
our best to make sure that we protect the integrity of this department as
much as we can. Thank you very much.

                   Rehabilitation of correctional officers

80.   Ms F Nyanda (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      Whether correctional officers are also rehabilitated in line with the
      department’s policy; if not, what is the position in this regard; if
      so, what are the relevant details?           CO1785E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Hon Nyanda, the Employee Health and
Wellness Policy shall regulate and give direction to activities that are
related to physical activity, recreation, EAP, HIV/Aids, occupational
health and safety, organisational culture and spiritual care to ensure that
they support this broad view of employee health and wellness.

We have got a directorate which helps with that kind of thing for our staff
members. You can never have people who should be seen as rehabilitators not
being rehabilitated themselves. So, you need to make sure that you start
with them.

Two objectives of the employee health and wellness policy are, firstly, to
promote and enhance a multidisciplinary and holistic approach in the
provision of the health and wellness programme for the employees. Secondly,
to provide guidelines and to enhance the health and wellness of all
employees and to develop health and wellness programmes.

It’s quite a long list of things that I have here. I would table them for
you; but suffice it to say that we really try our best to take care of our
staff members and ensure that they participate in their own programmes as
well. A healthy staff would be a happy staff, so you need to be able to do
that. We did send a group of officials - not offenders - to Australia quite
recently to participate in the World Police and Fire Games, and they did
very well. They had competitions among themselves even in sports, arts and
culture to try and make them as healthy and happy as possible. Thank you.

            Use of retired judges in dealing with sensitive cases

81.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      Whether it is still desirable to make use of retired judges in dealing
      with sensitive cases; if so, under what circumstances?

                  CO1786E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I thank hon
Mokoena for the question. I am assuming the hon member does not refer to
retired judges in the true sense of the word, but to judges discharged from
active service in terms of section 3 of the Judges’ Remuneration and
Conditions of Employment Act of 1997.

It is quite important to make this distinction, because since 1989 in this
country once you are appointed as a judge you are a judge for life, and
retirement is something that does not really fit in the scheme. I can
explain that if people need some more information. Although this
information, in terms of section 7 of the Act, is compulsory for the judge,
in that a judge who has been discharged from active service in terms of
section 3 (1) shall, subject to subsection (2A), be available to perform
service until he or she attains the age of 75 years for a period or periods
which in the aggregate amount to three months a year, service on the bench
can only be performed a the request of the head of the court concerned,
after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission and with the
approval of the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development.
Obviously, it is very complicated and a lot of people have to buy into it
before they are appointed.

A request of this nature is considered on merit, taking into account
various factors such as the need for transformation of the judiciary,
investment in and grooming of new talent and the financial implications
thereof, because discharged judges, when they perform extra service, of
course, are entitled to a second salary. And that’s on the one hand, but
also the special kind of experience required for particular cases on the
other hand. A matter which comes to the mind is the huge backlog in
criminal appeals in some of the High Courts and backlogs which need to be
dealt with expeditiously, not only in the interest of their appearance, but
also in the interest of the administrational justices and the judicial
system.

I have already indicated that I wouldn’t principally be prepared to give my
approval to this, Chair – well, this is the task of the Minister of course
– namely, for these judges to perform service for this purpose. The
Judicial Service Commission has also indicated support in general for such
an exercise.

Let me, therefore, in conclusion, assure the hon member that discharged
judges are only utilised to perform service on the bench in cases where it
is really necessary, and especially also since they then get two salaries
in the process. Thank you.
Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, hon Deputy Minister, for the reply. What
would be your comment, hon Deputy Minister, to comments by some judicial
officers who indicated their displeasure at using these retired judges in
some sensitive cases. In the minds of some people some of them are still
``glued’’ and you cannot ``un-glue’’ them from the old order. Some of them
are not even sensitive to some issues and their judgments in some cases are
even questionable. How do we comment on these concerns by some judicial
officers who are against the usage of the retired judges?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I do not
know who is saying this. I would like to see who they are and talk to them
because I imagine such a person - the head of the court - having to come
and say he wants a particular person. The JSC and the Minister must then
agree to that. Now, it’s highly unlikely in those circumstances that
someone who is clinging to the old order is going to be appointed in the
process, because such a person in any case will not be interested to do
this kind of work. I have my doubts about that.

But, of course there is some resistance. I mean you have been in front of
the court and the other day you heard of old judges that appeared in front
of the court the other day because they said they don’t want to ask for
permission to do other work and so on. But the problem is that a particular
salary framework was agreed to in 1989 before we were in government by the
late Kobie Coetzee. What they have agreed on is that from 1989 onwards
every judge appointed is appointed for life. What does that mean? You only
have to work for 15 years as a judge. So, you come there at age of 55, you
only have to work till the age of 70. Then for the rest of your life you
receive a judge’s salary. If you die, your spouse receives two-thirds of a
judge’s salary for the rest of her or his life. In all of that time you
received an A-series Mercedes - worth R750 000. Every five years you get a
new car. That car is completely maintained by government. So, if the car
crashes, we have to look after it and we have to provide the petrol for it
too.

No pension is paid during the process. When you are a judge you do not
contribute to any pension because you do not retire. You only pay, like the
rest of us, your medical aid and PAYE. But you and I, we pay seven-and-half-
per cent of our salary to pension. Legally we are obliged to pay 7,5% to
pension. Judges do not do so, yet they get the salary for the rest of their
life. When they have done 15 years or a lesser period on pro forma, they
get between R1 and R1,5 million rand as a gratuity after the 15 years.

This is the burden that this government has had with all judges since 1989.
When they discussed this matter with the late Kobie Coetzee and agreed to
this, we weren’t there. But, we do not want you after you have been a judge
to create embarrassments for the Bench and so on. We will pay you salaries
for the rest of your life but the quid pro quo is, if you want to do any
other work, you ask us for permission to do. And that is what they have
agreed to. Now they have come along and are saying, no, they want to take
the salary every month and want to do whatever work they want to do. No, I
mean that just cannot work like that. You cannot have two regimes that
apply to you. By the way, I must say to you of course that they have said
to the committee that they found that this is illegal, unconstitutional and
so on.

For the last, I do not know how many years, most of the judges themselves
applied to the Minister more than 200 times for permission to do other
work. All this time they were never told that this thing was illegal and
unconstitutional. Now suddenly it is so. These things have existed long
before we came here and so on. That is that complaint that is in the public
domain. So, I do think that when we debate these things we have to look at
it nicely. I do not want to tell you what the burden is. But, the burden
that we have that we have to care for judges and their families for the
rest of their lives, is huge - without any money going into that.

Now if judges that retired said that they wanted nothing to do with
government, then there was a way of dealing with it. You then retire and do
not get discharged. Then you can do whatever you want to do but we do not
have to pay you money. We cannot pay your full salary, a gratuity of R1,5
million, give you a new car after every five years and so on, and then
there is just nothing you have to give up for it.
The second issue is that, you know most of the work they are doing at the
moment is arbitration work. Most people think that arbitration is not a
problem. The problem is that arbitration work is at the top of commercial
work in this country. What is happening is that all that top commercial
work has been privatised out of the system, has been putted in arbitration
and these judges are now sitting in those cases.

So, what they are doing is that the top civil work has been taken out of
the courts, so there are no experienced judges to do that work anymore.
There is no precedence being created because arbitration does not create
precedence and, therefore, that law is being privatised outside the
constitutional system. And we are giving permission for those judges to go
and run that system, which undermines our civil justice system.

So, the implications of these things are huge with regard to our system and
huge also in terms of our fiscus and so on. I think that when they raise
these issues, let’s have them and let us have a debate. I mean we are happy
to have the debate. If they want to let go of those privileges that the
system has given them, that’s fine. Then they can go and do whatever else
they want to. Then they are not judges for life. But if they want to be
judges for life and get the money, then clearly they cannot do these other
things. That is what the issues are.

Mr N J MACK: Deputy Minister, I’m now more confused and concerned. After
these discharged judges had opted for four years, is there a process to
still determine whether they have the capacity to do any cases? The other
question would be: When they do extra work do they demand extra payment or
salary for that, besides the money that they are already getting?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: No,
obviously, as I’ve said, the system is so that everyone cannot just do it.
The system is rigorous. Your head of the court, JSC and your Minister must
agree to it. So between them surely they will pick up if the person hasn’t
got the capacity.

Look, the times when people are called back, really is quite a unique case.
It is where special skills are needed or, for example, where you get very
long cases that are going to run on for a year or something. If you tie-up
your own judges in that, it means there is a judge missing from the court
at all times. And then, those cases for which they are brought in are also,
of course, for commissions of inquiry that are invariably done or often
done. It is such as in the case of Judge Hefer, who is already retired. So,
they definitely have the capacity always to do the work.

The second question you ask: If they have been discharged do they still get
their salary? Of course, any other work they do they get paid for. So, if
you do a commission of inquiry as a judge you get two salaries. You get
paid your discharge salary that you get in any case because the law says
you can get it. And then because you are doing work, you get paid a second
salary.

Now, that is why we changed the law to say only the JSC must give
permission for the person to be able to do the work because we are paying
the second salary. We would rather want to take on young people, put them
on the Bench, let them learn the skills and then they would be something
you can use in the future and save that money. But, any judge that has been
discharged who then does work for the state gets a second salary. So, any
commissioner of inquiry gets a double salary every month.

Mr S SHICEKA: Deputy Chair, everybody says: “Mm, Mm!” It is quite
interesting. [Laughter.] Deputy Minister, the sad thing is that the
judiciary in this country is seen as a holy cow in a way that nobody must
criticise it and nobody must raise views around it. But, you find that
sometimes it encroaches on the legislative arm of government as a whole in
terms of their views and so on. You can see the judgments that have taken
place.

However, it will be important that these discussions should be actually
taken to the public, because the way things are at the moment, it is as if
the government is interfering in the judiciary and the government is doing
things wrong. This information that you are presenting to this House today
is not known by the public out there. They always see that the government
is interfering but without knowing all the facts at the disposal of the
public so that the public can be able to form its own views.

There must probably be letters that are written to explain these issues,
maybe on papers and so on, so that everybody knows what is happening in
relation to the issues of the judges.

Minister, having said that, is this matter as agreed upon by the previous
Minister Kobie Coetzee, sacrosanct? Is it to be with us for the rest of our
lives or it is open to discussion or for review?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Look, I do
think that we are a young democracy; and in young democracies one must be a
little bit careful. Institutions are still fledglings, people are trying to
find their feet and they are trying to get the right balance and so on. I
think there is a good reason why we have been relatively careful, how we
tackle different levels in different branches of government exactly,
because it could send out wrong messages and so on, which are just not
intended. But I think as our democracy matures, it is very important that
we engage each other so that we do not talk in dark corners somewhere and
so on. We must do so when it comes to the judiciary.

I think one thing I’m always very careful about with regard to the
judiciary is that we must not respond to it on an emotional level,
particularly in court cases, and in this country particularly with the
issue of race. Often when you read about a court case and you hear that
something happened, and the judge is of one colour and the accused is
another colour, or the victim was another colour then we jump to a whole
lot of conclusions. I do think that when we want to comment on those issue
we need to get all the facts.

You know, there is a famous case here of the farmer who shot a boy whom he
thought to be a dog. When I spoke to the prosecuting authority – and I rely
on my information from the prosecuting authority – the picture that is out
in the public is completely different from the facts that the prosecuting
authority has. I mean they say that this little boy and this farmer were
very close. Every single day when the farmer came in, the little boy would
drive with him and he would be all over the farm with him. And in fact, the
farm labourers were with him and they were looking for a dog that
slaughtered some sheep and other things. When they were going, in fact the
aunt of the little boy shouted: “There is a dog!” Then the farmer shot
where they had said and when they got there, they saw the little boy lying
there. The farmer was actually completely devastated, according to the
prosecuting authority.

Now when you hear this case and someone is saying a little black boy is a
dog – the media has taken that in a certain way and people have commented
in a certain way. But, when you speak to the prosecuting authority and why
they accepted the plea and so on, is because they spoke to all the
labourers and so on and said this is what happened. I mean, in fact, that
farmer was with them and was looking for this dog.

So, you see, that is the problem when we are commenting on what we do not
always have facts for. I am one that says we must engage with the judiciary
and the magistracy. But we have to do it from an informed basis and with
informed facts, because most judges in this country are doing a good job.
They are working hard. The magistrates are also working hard, and so on.
They are fully committed to making this country work, and so on. Maybe
there are one or two who aren’t, but we should not, of course, paint
everything with one brush.

I think that as our democracy matures, we will definitely be able to deal
with these things more robustly and more effectively but in a very balanced
way. As far as whether this will exist – well you know we’ve got a clause
in this wonderful Constitution of ours somewhere which says that the
salaries of the judiciary is entrenched. As far as that system is concerned
it is entrenched in our Constitution at the time when we signed it. If
there is any discussion on whether that should change or not, then we need
to embark and hold discussion where we would want to amend the
Constitution.

But whatever we do in the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development, we would not want to do it without creating certain
protections, and one of them is the security of tenure. Your judges must
never make you feel that you would lose your job because you are not doing
something that government wanted you to do.

Secondly, there must be financial security. They must get a good, decent
salary, but of course it also mustn’t be a possibility you can take away
arbitrarily. So if we want to enter into any discussions, there are certain
principles of separations of powers that we have to stick to and make sure
that we do not undermine those in the process.

But I don’t think anything should stop Parliament from engaging in balanced
and rational debates about our relationship with the judiciary and what
should be done and not.

On the last issue you raised, on whether there is intrusion into policy
matters, I think sometimes the courts do this. In my own personal view, I
think there is a line that is difficult to draw regarding where you stop
and where you start with policy. Obviously, therefore, there could be an
instance in which I may feel or you may feel that they haven’t been true in
terms of policy issues, and others may feel differently about them.

But again, there is a debate that we should be having and we should be
rational about it and we should do it in a balanced way. So I don’t want to
be misunderstood. I do think we should be engaging it. Our democracy is now
14 years old and we will become more mature, and whatever we do, we must do
it in a way that the judiciary does not feel that the debate is threatening
them somehow; they must be part of the debate, of course.

   Departmental policy in relation to reformational versus rehabilitative
                                  approach

82.   Mr Z C Ntuli (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:



      (1)   What is his department’s policy  or  strategy  in  view  of  the
           former Inspecting Judge of Prisons’ reported  preference  for  a
           reformational approach as opposed to rehabilitative approach  of
           the prisoner;


      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         CO1787E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Chairperson, hon Ntuli, the
Department of Correctional Services has placed rehabilitation at the centre
of all its activities. After a series of in-depth discussions and debate in
various forums, the process of conceptualising this rehabilitation
culminated in the White Paper on Corrections in South Africa which presents
a new vision in line with its legal mandates: the department must balance
safe and humane custody and rehabilitation.

Government has tasked the department with a key role in crime prevention,
namely that of preventing reoffending and of breaking the crime cycle.
Rehabilitation is an internationally accepted concept and a useful guide to
the conduct of Correctional Services in South Africa. It’s provided by the
Bill of Rights, as well as section 35(2) of the Constitution. In the
context of corrections in South Africa, rehabilitation is understood as the
creation of an enabling environment where a human rights culture is upheld,
reconciliation, forgiveness and healing are facilitated and offenders are
encouraged and assisted to discard negative values and adopt and develop
positive ones which are acceptable to society.

Finally, hon Ntuli also asked if I would make a statement on this.
Rehabilitation is not merely persuading offenders not to do crime again. It
is equipping offenders with the skills and motivation to be good citizens
and active anticrime agents in their communities. Rehabilitation is a
fundamental part of government’s crime prevention strategy aimed at
developing social stability in South Africa. The members of the Department
of Correctional Services should work in partnership with the community and
offenders to realise this vision. Thank you.

 Role of Justice, Crime Prevention and Security meetings in the delivery of
                             justice to society

83.   Mr S Shiceka (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development:

      Whether the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security cluster meetings
      are assisting in the delivery of justice to the society; if not, why
      not; if so, what are the relevant details?

                  CO1789E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy
Chairperson, I thank the hon member for the question. The meetings of the
JCPS cluster are very important in assessing the rate and level of service
delivery.

The cluster system was always informed by the desire to ensure that there
is an integrated manner in which service delivery is provided by all
departments. Such integration ensures that the public is provided with a
wide range of services through processes that take into account the fact
that services must be delivered in a manner that result in little hardship
for communities and is as easily accessible as possible.

The JCPS cluster, therefore, does a number of things in order to ensure
delivery. One of the things it does is to forge partnerships with various
stakeholders on a wide range of issues. These partnerships give
stakeholders an opportunity to make inputs in government processes. I
therefore invite the hon member to obtain more information about the
cluster in order to learn more about the activities thereof in meeting the
objective of government’s programme of action. Therefore, I answer your
question with a very positive yes.

Mr S SHICEKA: Deputy Chairperson, thank you, Deputy Minister, for the
response. Of course the question that I would like to ask as a follow-up is
whether there is any monitoring mechanism to check the functionality of
these structures across the country in various provinces? Not only that,
but also to look at the institutional arrangement whether, at the
subnational level, they are functioning properly and involving all role-
players. You find in some areas provincial government says they are not
involved, they are not participating and so on and therefore the
chairpersonship is sometimes a bit of an issue.

In addition to that, are these structures going to be taken to a local
government level, at a level where there are districts or at a level of a
metro, so that even local government as an institution and as a structure,
which is responsible for government at that level, participates and
interacts with the JCPS cluster?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I think
you’ve put your finger on a big problem in any criminal justice system in
the world. The problem with criminal justice systems is that they run
across a whole lot of departments. You get police, and the police have
detectives and forensic units. Then you have the prosecuting authority,
magistrates, judges, the Legal Aid Board and some things to do with social
development, even with education. The system runs across all these spheres.
The departments are organised downwards from the top with the Minister at
the top, then the laws and so on. The problems really arise in-between.

In most democracies you find that, over time, traditions develop and
conventions develop in-between and that glues it together. In a new
democracy, like ours, that isn’t there. The second issue, therefore, is
then how do you do this? Most countries in the world just let this system
run and plod along as it goes. Because the system exists, people go to work
every day and they do something, but there is no co-ordination and
management of this system – the system, not the departments, the criminal
justice system as a whole. My own view about it, and others may have a
completely wrong view, is that the cluster system doesn’t work too well
together yet, because we still operate as departments. You get very few
projects where you actually get people across departments running the
project. You’ll get that this department is responsible for the project and
the rest of us fit into it.

Those things are things that we’ve learnt and we are starting to do that
better. We have had a lot of discussion. In fact today we had four or more
hours of discussion, spending time on this specific item. You are quite
right that we will now be looking at this issue of whether we shouldn’t
actually be creating a structure that looks at the criminal justice system.
This new structure should run right from the top to the bottom, so that
people can feed issues and information into this system and you can
escalate problems upwards to the top of the system. At the moment that does
not happen. If it’s a cross-cutting issue you can forget about it.

What also happens is that there is no accountability, because if this one
does something wrong they blame that one. In the criminal justice system
you get lots of blaming. Soon this one is blaming that one and that one and
that one, because we don’t have all synergies there. If we had a structure
where we can co-ordinate and manage, that will work very, very differently.
I think those are the issues.

The other problem you raised is a big problem. The criminal justice system
on the whole is a national competence. There is a little bit of policing in
the provinces, but the rest of it - Justice, the National Prosecuting
Authority, Correctional Services and the SA Police Service - are all
national functions. Yet, a lot of programmes we create deal with the issue
of children, for example. Secure care facilities are a provincial
responsibility. There is a problem of disjuncture. When you are creating
alternative services and they are being created in the provinces, then you
have a problem where you’re actually harmonising that and making sure that
the budgets in the provinces actually reflect the services.
I think from your questions that you have asked, you can see that we are
grappling with these issues. What are the best solutions? As I have said to
you, there are very few countries in the world that actually have been
dealing with this. Britain is one of them. You can go and check and do some
reading on the UK. They have now created such a structure which is quite
interesting in the way it works and so on. Those are the things we are
looking at - the structures, how we make sure that provinces actually do
provide the services in the criminal justice system, if they are not part
of it how do they become part of the structure and how do we try and co-
ordinate and manage that system? Those are all things that we are trying to
look at.

       Consideration of members of nonstatutory forces left out during
                           demobilisation process

84.   Mr S Shiceka (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      Whether any members of the nonstatutory forces who were left out
      during the demobilisation process will be considered by his
      department; if not, why not; if so, by when will this be done?

                  CO1794E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Chairperson, in reply to hon
Shiceka’s question, there was a call for all former nonstatutory force
members to register their names on the Certified Personnel Register before
the integration process began. The CPR was meant to be the only document to
provide a guide on the number of the nonstatutory force members to be
integrated into the SA National Defence Force. Members were given options
of whether to integrate into SANDF or to apply for the demobilisation
package. Some did apply for the package and some integrated into the new
force.

It became clear, however, that when the CPR list was finally drawn up not
all members had registered their names. Some approached the department on
an individual basis and were advised to apply for posts that were available
depending on the requirements of the particular post. Some applied to be in
the reserve force and they were accommodated.

The department is presently not integrating any former nonstatutory force
members as the process was terminated by the Termination of Integration
Intake, Act 44 of 2001, except for members who were granted amnesty by the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

You will realise, Mr Shiceka, that the SANDF, as I said in my previous
answer, is in the process of rejuvenating; and it is one structure that
takes in very young people. You will notice that in our recruitment drive
we are taking 4 000 every year and we are taking between 18 and 22 years.
We are hoping that next year we will be taking 6 000, and from 2009 we will
be taking 10 000 a year. So, you can see that we are in the process of
rejuvenating our defence force by taking in young people.

If you look at the people who were not integrated, then you’ll find that
some of them left in 1976. So, you would assume that when they left, some
of them were between 16 and 17 years of age. You can imagine how old they
are now. They are probably old men now, because in Defence, once you are
more than 23 years of age you are considered to be an old man, and we don’t
employ any old people in the Department of Defence. [Interjections.] That
is why we cannot integrate those people. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Madam Chairperson, arising from the Minister’s reply,
can I find out if, as rightly said and conceded, there are those who
unfortunately did not register? Can those young men and women who camped
somewhere in KwaZulu-Natal on one of the farms, and who claim that they
duly qualify to be part of the contingents, be part of the process? What
has been done by the department to address that particular issue, because
there seems to be a structure that was not co-ordinated properly and some
people were a bit violent?

I want to find out from the Deputy Minister if something has been done in
that regard.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Well, I don’t want to talk much about those
things, because I can see that some of them are candidates for the
Correctional Services. [Laughter.] They are the candidates of the Minister
of Correctional Services because of some of the things that they are doing.
For instance, we realise – like we are saying - that some were not
integrated and we are again registering some of them in the reserve force.
And, of course, we are also busy trying to see what we can do for them as
military veterans, but insofar as integrating them into the SANDF, it is
out of the question. We don’t even want to create an impression that there
could be a possibility for that because the SANDF cannot take old people.
Once someone is in the age bracket of say 40 or 30 they are considered as
old men in the SANDF. Even if you are 30, you cannot join the defence
force. You can go and join the Department of Correctional Services and
other departments where old people are employed. [Laughter.]

However, those people who are camping there at Ngwavuma have claimed to be
everything. They have claimed to be members of MK and it was said, “No, no,
no. Kahleni kancane.” [Wait a bit.] Some of them claimed that they belong
to the IFP and the IFP said: “No, kahleni kancane – asinazi.” [Wait a bit –
we don’t know you.] So, we actually don’t know who they belong to. But
there is one thing that we are clear about, and it is that they are now in
the process of committing crimes because of what they are doing while
sitting there making threats to the state. That in itself is committing a
crime and it cannot be allowed. Most of us have gone to KZN and various
provinces, talking to the people and discussing these matters with them and
doing whatever we could do to take them through the process of being part
of the society.

What cannot be done and cannot be tolerated is people sitting somewhere in
the corners and threatening government and everybody. So, we are dealing
with that matter on that basis, and I believe that they are candidates for
Correctional Services, because of the way in which they are behaving.

  Steps to address personnel shortage for supervision of offenders released
                         into community supervision

85.   Mr A L Moseki (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      Whether his department is addressing the personnel shortage for the
      supervision of offenders released into community supervision; if not,
      what is the position in this regard; if so, how urgently is this being
      done?                        CO1797E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy
Chairperson. Hon Moseki, one of the flagships of the Department of
Correctional Services is correctional supervision.

Correctional supervision is one area that is very important for the
management of overcrowding at our correctional centres and also for
diverting those people who may not be a danger to society to correctional
supervision, or what we call community correction. At the moment we are
doing all we can to revamp that kind of community correction so that it can
lend itself to the rehabilitation process and policies that we are holding
on to.

We are indeed addressing a number of issues at community corrections such
as the vacancy rate. I hope by the end of this term, that is, up to
September, we will have done quite a lot in revamping them. The new
Commissioner of Correctional Services is seized with ensuring that
community corrections work and to meet up with judiciary and the magistracy
so that they can also have confidence in community corrections and to
diverting of people that are probationers as well as those that get
paroled.

Therefore, I can assure you that this is quite urgent to us and we will
keep you informed with this type of revamping. Thank you very much,
Chairperson.

Mr S SHICEKA: Madam Deputy Chair, you will agree with me – I think even the
Ministers will agree with us – that this cluster has engaged them. That’s
value for money today. Very strongly too!

The concept of community corrections and community supervisions is a good
one. However, I would think that it’s important that the department begins
to mobilise communities to play a role in relation to debriefing offenders
when they come out of jail.

What are we doing here? What are the developments? At the same time it
plays a role even in ensuring that the offenders or ex-offenders are not
breaking the law, because they are part of the community. I think that has
to happen. If there is an idea around that from the department, how soon do
you think that you will take that up?

Secondly, if one is stays at Qunu or Empangeni and happens to be under
community correction but wants to get a job in Johannesburg – and before
one comes to Johannesburg, one would need to be trained in Johannesburg –
is that person allowed to do that and get permission that will allow him or
her to stay in Johannesburg and study? One is not confined to that area
because in terms of the law he or she is required to be checked every now
and then by the correctional officials. What happens in that situation in a
way that encourages people to be productive?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. If
I should start with the last question: There are different levels of people
that get released on parole. Those levels are determined by the sentence
one was doing and also by the parole board and one’s behaviour as well.
Therefore, if one gets out of jail and is on parole and gets a job in
Johannesburg and one comes from Beaufort West, community corrections in
Beaufort West will look at a number of things in one’s documents and be
able to say to community corrections in Johannesburg, parolee so-and-so is
coming there, he or she has a job and has a place to live. Can we hand him
or her over to you? When one gets to the other side, the kind of
supervision that one was getting in Beaufort West will be the kind of
supervision that one will get in Johannesburg. Therefore, one can go out of
one’s magisterial district, but with permission. If that doesn’t happen
with permission, one should write a letter to the parole board and
community corrections and tell them that he or she has found a job in such
place and that he or she will be staying at that place. They are able to do
that.

I’m sure this answers your last question, hon member. We do not want to
disadvantage any of the ex-offenders by tying them down to a place where
they can’t get a job. But first we’ve got to have confirmation that he or
she has got the job. That will make our lives much easier.

The issue of community correction is happening now, hon member. There are
some parole boards that are headed by people who are not employed by
Correctional Services. We have employed chairpersons and deputy
chairpersons of parole boards. They are at the forefront of mobilising
communities, ensuring that if offender Ngconde Balfour is going to be
released they do the groundwork of going to that family and ensuring that
everybody there knows what’s going to happen. Then the same Ngconde Balfour
is informed: This is the way we are going to deal with you and this is the
way we are going to supervise you. That should be known so that even the
community can assist us in helping this particular parolee.

So, there is community correction that is going on right now. We’ve asked
area commissioners and regional commissioners to go out to communities and
explain how we intend revamping this whole community corrections how we are
going to ensure that it does the work that it is intended to do to
supervise and to ensure that an offender goes from that level because after
some time you are then taken up to other levels where we don’t have to
supervise you every day. We can now see you after a month, and no longer
every two weeks. So, you do graduate if your behaviour is going well. You
do graduate until you finish your term. Therefore, those things are in
process everywhere where we have parolees and probationers. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair.

Mr N J MACK: Madam Chair, maybe this is a naughty question. Minister, when
we rehabilitate these people when they are out on parole we actually say we
did a good job of sending them out of jail. But when they apply for work at
our own centres, then we don’t accept them because they have a criminal
record. This is on every form where they apply for jobs. The problem is
that if we don’t accept them, how can we say that we have done a good job?
Is that issue not a contradiction, hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Yes, it is, hon member. But we have
to take society with us. Remember that the approach we have taken is new.
So, people have to buy in into that.

We have just recently released Mthobeli Mzanywa from Fort Glamorgan Prison.
He has served 22 years of his life sentence. He is now 58 years old. We
started with the social reintegration to see to it that members of his
family do accept him back into their fold. That was fine. The community
also accepted him back in their fold.

At 58 years, he was surely not going to find a job. We had to ensure that
the Department of Social Development helps us to look after him because he
has an old mother. In the process, we tried and eventually got him a job.
He is now working. I’m quite happy to meet with him and bump into him. He
is a family person now. He has just got himself a wife and is doing well.

On 20 August 2007, a young woman started to work in my office. She is an ex-
offender. She was supposed to do 12 years and she has done 10 years. She’s
got an LLB. She’s here across the road, at level 4, and working there.
This, because we are saying we have to do it ourselves first.

In terms of government Z83 forms, I think what is needed even with the
recruits is something that asks: Have you had a criminal record? I think
every country should have that; I have no problem with that, but it’s up to
the person to declare. I know, sometimes when you declare something, people
would look at it and say: No ways! That’s the problem that we are facing.

Bathi sisigebenga esi. [People will say this is a criminal.]

We are not going to employ this person. But we need to do more to talk to
our colleagues and other people and persuade them that if they don’t give
them that second chance; who will? You’ve got to do that to try and give
them that second chance. It might happen that this was the first offence
for that person - a genuine mistake. I’m not saying when they murder people
it is mistakes, but sometimes it was not that bad. So, you need to give
them that second chance, because if we don’t want to employ them then we
are going to have a problem. They are going to go back to prison.

So, I’m pleading with everybody. We are doing this in our department; we
are trying our best to employ them as much as possible but also to set up
some co-operatives so that they can work as a group just like you saw the
other day in Khayelitsha. All the Department of Housing, the SABC and the
local government wanted from us was: Correctional Services, can you give us
labour? And they were right and that house should be finished by 31 August.
They are building a house for a very, very disadvantaged young mother of
about 40 who is blind.

In some of these I do want to make the call that we are not a contractor.
We don’t do tenders and contract up, but whenever there are churches to
build – we’ve just finished a church in Gugulethu – please do ask us as
Correctional Services to give you the labour. You won’t pay, we pay them a
stipend. Those guys look forward, as they were telling me the other day, to
going to work. They really look forward to that – going to work and being
able to pay back something into the communities. So, I’m making that plea:
let’s give them that opportunity to do what they think they can do best to
assist and to atone for whatever they have done. Thank you, Madam Chair.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Madam Chairperson, on behalf of this cluster we want to
thank the hon Minister for responding to our questions frankly and
honestly. Knowing him as a man of God and as one of the best motivational
speakers this country has ever had, how can he motivate and change the
attitude of some parents who refuse to accept their own kids who are ex-
offenders?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Chairperson, it’s a call that
we need to be making to all parents. We are saying that rehabilitation is a
societal responsibility and that it starts with the family. A call should
be made not only to parents who have children in prison or in correctional
centres, but also to parents who don’t look after their own children well.
That is the kind of call we should be making. It pains one to see a 14-year-
old girl in a correctional centre, and one wonders where her parents are,
what they are saying, how she landed up there, what type of parents they
are. So, we need to make that call.

I think the appeal we can make, as public representatives, is that people
should look after their children so that they don’t end up in correctional
centres. It becomes quite painful to see that. I’m not saying some of them
are angels. Not all of them are angels. Some of them have committed serious
crimes, but again we need to have that kind of a net to catch them and to
be able to return them back to society so that they can become the proper
children that we want. So, that call is the call that all of us should be
making. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I take this
opportunity to thank Minister Balfour, Deputy Minister George and the
Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development for all the
educational and informative contributions to the debate.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 17:01.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 22 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bills as section 76 Bills:


         (a)     Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).


         (b)     Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21 –
             2007] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).

    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism also classified the Traditional
         Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] as a Bill falling within
         the ambit of section 18(1)(a) of the Traditional Leadership and
         Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No 41 of 2003).

2.    Translations of Bills submitted

     (1)    The Minister of Health


         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Gesondheidsberoepe [W 10 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).
         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Health
         Professions Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
         75), as introduced in Parliament.

         (b)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Beheer van Tabakprodukte [W 24
             – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Tobacco
         Products Control Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2006] (National Assembly –
         sec 75), as introduced in Parliament.

                            MONDAY, 25 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


    a) The Secretary to Parliament has, on 25 June 2007 in accordance with
       section 18(1) of the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework
       Act, 2003 (Act No 41 of 2003), referred the Traditional Health
       Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] (National Council of Provinces (sec
       76 (2)) to the National House of Traditional Leaders, which must,
       within 30 days from the date of this referral, make any comments it
       wishes to make.
TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     (a)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
         dated 13 June 2007 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
         Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the employment of
         the South African National Defence Force in Uganda:


         EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN UGANDA
         FOR SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNION


         This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
         have authorised the employment of the South African National
         Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to Uganda, in fulfilment of the
         international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
         the African Union (AU), as part of the AU Mission in Northern
         Uganda.


         This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
         of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act
         No 42 of 2002).


         A total of five SANDF members are employed from 01 June 2007 to 31
         March 2008 as military observers in the AU Mission in Northern
         Uganda.


         I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
         and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
         attention of the National Council of Provinces.


         Regards


         signed
         THABO MBEKI

                           WEDNESDAY, 27 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill


     (a)    South African Airways Bill [B 35B – 2006] – Act No 5 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 14 June 2007)

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT - T070627-insert1 – PAGES 1394-1448

CREDA INSERT - T070627-insert2 – PAGES 1449-1453


                            FRIDAY, 29 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


           a) Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – proposed sec 74) [Bill published in
              Government Gazette No 29910 of 25 May 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
              Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 29
              June 2007.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.

     (2)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


           a) Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
              Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2007] (National Assembly – proposed
              sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill published in Government
              Gazette No 29992 of 15 June 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 29 June 2007.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


    (1)     Written comments received from the public and provincial
        legislatures on the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24 -
        2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 74), submitted by the
        Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development in terms of
        section 74(6)(b) of the Constitution, 1996.

            Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs.

                             MONDAY, 2 JULY 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa on Development Co-operation 1 July
         2004 – 30 June 2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
         of Sweden and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
         Development Co-operation 1 July 2004 – 30 June 2007.

     (c)    Government Notice No R. 478 published in Government Gazette No
         29958 dated 1 June 2007: Rules made by the Minister of Finance
         under section 771 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
         of 1964).

     (d)    Government Notice No R. 484 published in Government Gazette No
         29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1337)
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (e)    Government Notice No R. 485 published in Government Gazette No
         29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/612) in
         terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (f)    Government Notice No R. 486 published in Government Gazette No
         29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/306) in
         terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    2. The Minister of Safety and Security


    a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
       the Government of the Republic of Malta in respect of Police
       Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
       1996.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson
     (a)    Written statement submitted in terms of section 106(3) of the
         Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000):
         Maquassi Local Municipality by the North West MEC for
         Developmental Local Government and Housing.


       Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.


                             FRIDAY, 6 JULY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister for Public Enterprises
          a) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Bill published in Government Gazette No
             29879 of 11 May 2007.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
             Enterprises of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160, on 29 June 2007.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.


2.    Assent by President in respect of Bill


     (a)    Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment Bill
         [B 1 – 2007] – Act No 4 of 2007 (assented to and signed by
         President on 29 June 2007).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Finance
     for consideration and report:

     (a)    Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Swiss Confederation for the Avoidance of Double
         Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Swiss Confederation for
         the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income.

     (c)    Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Portuguese Republic for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income,
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
         Portuguese Republic for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with
         respect to Taxes on Income.

     (e)    Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income,
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (f)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom
         of Saudi Arabia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect
         to Taxes on Income.


2.    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Security
     and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

     (a)    The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 13 June
         2007 to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
         informing Members of the Council of the employment of the South
         African National Defence Force in Uganda.

3.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Finance:

     (a)    Proclamation No R.12 published in Government Gazette No 29921
         dated 1 June 2007: Fixing a date on which section 147(1) of the
         Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 45 of 2003), shall come
         into operation.

     (b)    Government Notice No 467 published in Government Gazette No
         29913 dated 1 June 2007: Definition of “Retirement Annuity Fund”
         in section 1 of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

     (c)    Government Notice No 472 published in Government Gazette No
         29913 dated 1 June 2007: Proviso to paragraph 9(3) of the Fourth
         Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


4.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Security
     and Constitutional Affairs:

     (a)    Proclamation No R.7 published in Government Gazette No 29831
         dated 25 April 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

     (b)    Proclamation No R.10 published in Government Gazette No 29831
         dated 25 April 2007: Extension of the period of operation of
         sections 51 and 52, in terms of the Criminal Law Amendment Act,
         1997 (Act No 105 of 1997).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Diamond Export Levy Bill, 2007.

     (b)    Government Notice No R.492 published in Government Gazette No
         29966 dated 15 June 2007: Municipal Regulations on Debt
         Disclosure, in terms of section 168 of the Local Government:
         Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     (c)    Government Notice No R.493 published in Government Gazette No
         29967 dated 15 June 2007: Municipal Regulations on Minimum
         Competency Levels, in terms of section 168 of the Local
         Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
         2003).

2.    The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
         (UTF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 45-2007].


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, as the
      Chairperson of the Rules Committee of the Council, presents the First
      Report of the Rules Committee of the National Council of Provinces,
      dated 5 July 2007, as follows:

      To amend the following rules by insertion of the underlined words.





             Establishment

             147 (1) The Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative
             Proposals consists of one Council member from each province
             designated by the delegation head.



             Chairperson
             148. (1)  The Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative
             Proposals must elect one of its members as the chairperson of
             the committee.



             Functions and powers

             149. (1) The Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative
             Proposals must consider and make recommendations to the
             Council on all legislative proposals made by Council
             Decisions
             150. A question before the Committee on Petitions and Members’
             Legislative Proposals is agreed when at least five provinces
             vote in favour of the question.


             Referral of proposals to Committee on Petitions and Members’
             Legislative Proposals
             179. (1) The Chairperson of the Council must refer the
             member’s memorandum to the Committee on Petitions and Members’
             Legislative Proposals.


             Council’s consideration of proposal
             180. (1) The member’s memorandum and the recommendation of the
             Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative Proposals, ...


             Referral of petitions to committees
             234. After tabling a petition in the Council, the Chairperson
             of the Council must refer the petition to the Select Committee
             on Petitions and Members’ Legislative Proposals.

                            FRIDAY, 27 JULY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)     Rental Housing Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister
         of Housing. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing and the
         Select Committee on Public Services.


    (b)     Social Housing Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of
         Housing. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing and the
         Select Committee on Public Services.


    (c)     Local Government Laws Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister for Provincial and Local Government. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government and the
         Select Committee on Local Government and Administration.


    (d)     National Gambling Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Trade and Industry. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs.


2.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Transport


         (a)     Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27 –
              2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill published in
              Government Gazette No 30115 of 24 July 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


     (2)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


         (a)     Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill published in
              Government Gazette No 30034 of 2 July 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


     (3)    The Minister of Housing


         (a)     Social Housing Bill [B 29 – 2007] (National Assembly –
              proposed sec 76) [Bill published in Government Gazette No
              30022 of 6 July 2007.]
             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Housing of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.


     (4)    The Minister of Housing


         (a)     Rental Housing Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2007] (National
              Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Bill published in Government
              Gazette No 30022 of 6 July 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Housing of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


     (5)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


           a) National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2007] (National
              Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Bill published in Government
              Gazette No 30124 of 26 July 2007.]
              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


     (6)    The Minister of Correctional Services


         (a)     Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 32 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill published in
              Government Gazette No 29893 of 18 May 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Correctional Services of the National Assembly, as well as
              referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


3.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
        Committees:

        Budget
        Appointed:     Gumede, Mr D M (Alt); September, Ms C (Alt); Sotyu,
                  Ms M (Alt); Tsenoli, Mr S L (Alt); Zita, Mr L (Alt)
        Defence
        Appointed:     Ngwenya, Ms W
        Discharged:    Matsemela, Ms M L

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Repositioning Strategy of the Financial and Fiscal Commission
        (FFC) for 2007-2010.

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
        on the Road Accident Fund for 2005-2006.

    (b)     Government Notice No 503 published in Government Gazette No
        29984 dated 14 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (2/290) in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

3.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     International Convention for the Control and Management of
        Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments – 2004 (Ballast Water Management
        Convention), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for the
        Control and Management of Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments – 2004
        (Ballast Water Management Convention).

    (c)     Report of the Railway Safety Regulator for 2005-2006 [RP 7-
        2007].

4.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Government Notice No R.451 published in Government Gazette No
        29898 dated 25 May 2007: Notice under section 47A(6) in terms of
        the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act, 1995 (Act
        No 34 of 1995).

    (b)     Government Notice No R.466 published in Government Gazette No
        29914 dated 1 June 2007: Regulations regarding promotion of access
        to information: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Promotion
        of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).

    (c)     Report of the Railway Safety Regulator for 2005-2006 [RP 7-
        2007].

5.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy
    (a)     Accession to the Framework Agreement for the International
        Collaboration on Research and Development of Generation IV Nuclear
        Energy Systems, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Accession to the Framework
        Agreement for the International Collaboration on Research and
        Development of Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Written comments submitted in terms of section 74(6)(b) of the
        Constitution: Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill of 2007, by
        the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development.

        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs.

                            TUESDAY, 31 JULY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
    (a)     Education Laws Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister
         of Education. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Education and
         the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.
    (b)     National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal
         Management Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of Environmental
         Affairs and Tourism. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs.


    (c)     National Environmental Management: Waste Bill, 2007, submitted
         by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. Referred to
         the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism and
         the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.


    (d)     National Environmental Management Laws Amendment Bill, 2007,
         submitted by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
         Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
         Affairs.


       e) National Environmental Management Second Amendment Bill, 2007,
          submitted by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
          Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
          Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
     (a)    Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department on the South
         African Reserve Bank for the year ended 31 December 2006.

     (b)    Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
         Deposits for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March
         2007.
     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
         on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2005.

2.    The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report of the Railway Safety Regulator on the State of Railway
         Safety in South Africa for 2005-2006 [RP 7-2007].

          Please note: The tabling above replaces item 3(c) under “Tablings”
          on page 1472 of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports
          of 27 July 2007.

     (b)    International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response
         and Co-operation, 1990 (OPRC Convention), tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (c)    Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention on Oil
         Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation, 1990 (OPRC
         Convention).


     (d)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Senegal on Cooperation with
         regard to Civil Aviation Security, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (e)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Senegal on Cooperation with regard to Civil Aviation Security.

                          WEDNESDAY, 1 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


          a) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26 – 2007] (National Assembly – (sec
             75)).

                           THURSDAY, 2 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a money Bill:


         (a)     Diamond Export Levy Bill [B 22 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             (sec 77)).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – (sec 75)).

2.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (a)    Immigration Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2007] – Act No 3 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 28 June 2007).

     (b)    Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2007] – Act No 7 of 2007 (assented to
         and signed by President on 24 July 2007).


     (c)    Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] – Act No 9 of
         2007 (assented to and signed by President on 24 July 2007).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Government Notice No R 621 published in Government Gazette No
         30072 dated 13 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/291) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 56 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


     (b)    Government Notice No R 622 published in Government Gazette No
         30072 dated 13 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/292) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 56 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (c)    Government Notice No R 624 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Correction Notice to Notice No 518 of
         Government Gazette No 29455 dated 15 December 2006, Amendment of
         Schedule No 1 (No 1/1338) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
         No 91 of 1964).

     (d)    Government Notice No R 625 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1339)
         to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 48
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (e)    Government Notice No R 626 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1340)
         to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 48
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (f)    Government Notice No R 627 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1341)
         to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 48
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (g)    Government Notice No R 628 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/614) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 75 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (h)    Government Notice No R 629 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007:  Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/615)
         to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 75
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (i)    Government Notice No R 630 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/616) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 75 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
     (j)    Government Notice No R 631 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/617) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 75 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (k)    Government Notice No R 632 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Correction Notice to Notice No R 105 of
         Government Gazette No 29596 dated 9 February 2007, Amendment of
         Schedule No 5 (No 5/85) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
         No 91 of 1964).

     (l)    Government Notice No R 576 published in Government Gazette No
         30051 dated 13 July 2007: Cancellation of an Authorised Dealer in
         Foreign Exchange in terms of the Exchange Control Regulations,
         1961.

     (m)    Government Notice No R 577 published in Government Gazette No
         30051 dated 13 July 2007: Appointment of an Authorised Dealer in
         Foreign Exchange in terms of the Exchange Control Regulations,
         1961.

     (n)    Government Notice No 647 published in Government Gazette No
         30074 dated 20 July 2007: Listing and delisting of public
         entities, made in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the Public
         Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

                           TUESDAY, 7 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Finance:

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa on Development Co-operation 1 July
        2004 – 30 June 2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
        of Sweden and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
        Development Co-operation 1 July 2004 – 30 June 2007.

    (c)     Government Notice No R.478 published in Government Gazette No
        29958 dated 1 June 2007: Rules made by the Minister of Finance
        under section 771 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).

    (d)     Government Notice No R.484 published in Government Gazette No
        29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1337)in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R.485 published in Government Gazette No
        29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/612) in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
    (f)     Government Notice No R.486 published in Government Gazette No
        29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/306) in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (g)     Explanatory Memorandum for the Diamond Export Levy Bill, 2007.

    (h)     Government Notice No R.492 published in Government Gazette No
        29966 dated 15 June 2007: Municipal Regulations on Debt Disclosure,
        in terms of section 168 of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
        Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (i)     Government Notice No R.493 published in Government Gazette No
        29967 dated 15 June 2007: Municipal Regulations on Minimum
        Competency Levels, in terms of section 168 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (j)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
        on the Road Accident Fund for 2005-2006.

    (k)     Government Notice No 503 published in Government Gazette No
        29984 dated 14 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (2/290) in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

2.    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Security
    and Constitutional Affairs:

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Republic of Malta in respect of
        Police Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


3.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land and
    Environmental Affairs:

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
        (UTF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 45-2007].


    (b)     Report of the Railway Safety Regulator on the State of Railway
        Safety in South Africa for 2005-2006 [RP 7-2007].


    (c)     International Convention for the Control and Management of
        Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments – 2004 (Ballast Water Management
        Convention), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.

    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for the
        Control and Management of Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments – 2004
        (Ballast Water Management Convention).

                          WEDNESDAY, 8 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

    Please note: The announcement below replaces item 3 under “Referral to
    Committees of papers tabled” on page 1537 of the Announcements, Tablings
    and Committee Reports of 7 August 2007.

3.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Public
    Services for consideration and report:

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
        (UTF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 45-2007].


    (b)     Report of the Railway Safety Regulator on the State of Railway
        Safety in South Africa for 2005-2006 [RP 7-2007].


    (c)     International Convention for the Control and Management of
        Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments – 2004 (Ballast Water Management
        Convention), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.

    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for the
        Control and Management of Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments – 2004
        (Ballast Water Management Convention).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Public Enterprises
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Ltd and the Group
        for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

                           TUESDAY, 14 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

    Please note: The following item amends the entry “Introduction of Bill”
    (English text), published on page 1465 of the Announcements, Tablings
    and Committee Reports of 6 July 2007:


     (1)    The Minister for Public Enterprises


           a) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26 – 2007] (National Assembly –
              proposed sec 75) [Bill published in Government Gazette No
              29879 of 11 May 2007.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Enterprises of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 6 July 2007.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (a)    Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007] – Act No 8 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 5 August 2007).


    Please note: The following item amends item (a) under the entry “Assent
    by President in respect of Bill”, published on page 1530 of the
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 2 August 2007:


     (b)    Immigration Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2006] – Act No 3 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 28 June 2007).

3.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a Constitution amendment Bill:


         (a)     Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – (sec 74)).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
             Matters Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2007] (National Assembly – (sec
             75)).
    (3)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27 –
             2007] (National Assembly – (sec 75)).


    (4)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     Social Housing Bill [B 29 – 2007] (National Assembly – (sec
             76)).


    (5)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     Rental Housing Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – (sec 76)).


    (6)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:
         (a)     Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 32 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – (sec 75)).

4.    Membership of Committees

(1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
    Committees:


    Budget
    Appointed:   Swart, Mr M; Van Dyk, Dr S M

    Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
    of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons:
    Appointed:   Marais, Mr K; Swathe, Mr M

                          WEDNESDAY, 15 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


   (a)      Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill, 2007, submitted
        by the Minister of Sport and Recreation. Referred to the Portfolio
        Committee on Sport and Recreation and the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
    Committees:

         Joint Standing Committee on Defence
         Appointed:    Le Roux, Mr J W


         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons
         Appointed:    Thetjeng, Mr O M


         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Women
         Appointed:    Lamoela, Ms H
                           FRIDAY, 17 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill


     (a)    South African Red Cross Society and Legal Protection of Certain
         Emblems Bill [B 25 – 2006] – Act No 10 of 2007 (assented to and
         signed by President on 9 August 2007).


2.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – (sec 76)).


TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
    (a)     Government Notice No 505 published in the Government Gazette No
         29996 dated 19 June 2007: Establishment of the new Mokala National
         Park, made in terms of section 20(1)(a)(i) of the National
         Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of
         2003).

    (b)     Government Notice No 514 published in the Government Gazette No
         29999 dated 21 June 2007: Constitution of the National
         Environmental Advisory Forum, made in terms of Chapter 2, section
         6(1)(a)(i) of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act
         107 of 1998).

    (c)     Government Notice No 830 published in the Government Gazette No
         30057 dated 206 July 2007: Notice of intention to establish the
         National Framework , made in terms of section 7 of the National
         Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
         2004).

                           MONDAY, 20 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

   (a)      Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
         Laws Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister for Justice
         and Constitutional Development. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Education


         (a)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2007] (National
              Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Bill published in Government
              Gazette No 30107 of 20 July 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Education of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
              Certain Laws Amendment Bill Education Laws Amendment Bill [B
              34 – 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill
              published in Government Gazette No 30172 of 13 August 2007.]
              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
              Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    Please note: The following item amends item (c) under the entry
    “Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism” published on page 1581
    of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 17 August 2007:

    (a)     Government Notice No 830 published in the Government Gazette No
         30057 dated 6 July 2007: Notice of intention to establish the
         National Framework, made in terms of section 7 of the National
         Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
         2004).


