---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 20 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-06-20
---

WEDNESDAY, 20 JUNE 2007
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

House Chairperson Mr T S Setona took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of this House, I shall move:

   That the Council –


   (1)      requests the Departments of Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
         Provincial and Local Government and Land Affairs to investigate the
         City of Cape Town’s building of a public road within the Table
         Mountain National Park; and


   (2)      notes that –
         (a)      the city has proceeded to clear land of endangered and
               scarce species of our finest Cape Floral Heritage, like
               fynbos and indigenous trees, without obtaining prior
               permission from the parks authority to do so;


         (b)      this hubristic attitude of the city under its new regime
               is clearly an indication that it thinks it can do as it
               pleases;


         (c)      the city started the work outside its area of jurisdiction
               in a world heritage site and is now also refusing to
               contribute money to the said national park, with which it has
               a partnership agreement; and


         (d)      through all this Cape Town Mayor Helen Zille has not
               distanced herself or her party from these actions.

                RESCINDING OF DRAFT RESOLUTION OF MR R J TAU

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

   (1)      notes Rule 75(1), which states that “a matter proposed for
         discussion in the Council may not in substance be the same as a
         matter that has been discussed in the Council during the preceeding
         six months”;


   (2)      further notes the powers vested in the Council for the “amending
         or rescinding” of “any resolution on the previous draft resolution”
         conferred on the Council in terms of Rule 75(2)(b);


      3) therefore resolves to rescind the draft resolution proposed by the
         hon R J Tau on Thursday, 14 June 2007, as recorded on the Order
         Paper of 19 June 2007, as it was clearly and deliberately of the
         same substance as his very own address during the youth debate held
         on 13 June 2007; and


      4) determines that this proposed resolution be dealt with and ruled on
         as a motion without notice in terms of Rule 77(a).

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Is there any objection to the
motion? [Interjections.] The motion is objected to, and it will therefore
become a notice of motion.

 ASHLEIGH SIMON BECOMES THE YOUNGEST WINNER OF A LADIES EUROPEAN TOUR EVENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

   (1)      notes with pride that at 18 years of age, South African golfing
         sensation Ashleigh Simon has become the youngest professional
         winner of a Ladies European Tour event;


      2) further notes that this inspirational teenager accomplished this
         feat upon winning the Catalonia Ladies Masters in Spain over the
         past weekend;


   (3)      congratulates Ms Simon on her remarkable victory; and


   (4)      realises that she is an  inspiration  to  many  South  Africans,
         especially the youth.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

               CANCELLATION OF NATIONAL YOUTH DAY CELEBRATIONS
                        BY CITY OF CAPE TOWN’S MAYOR

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council notes that —


   (1)      National Youth Day celebrations were cancelled by the City of
         Cape Town’s Mayor, Helen Zille;


   (2)      while all the youth across South Africa celebrated Youth Month
         and Youth Day, the Mother City distanced itself from the cause and
         spirit of Youth Day;


   (3)      all the provinces took part in the process to have workshops and
         youth parliaments to discuss topical youth issues, such as violence
         in schools, economic opportunities, drug trafficking and skills
         development, and the National Youth Parliament is under way in  the
         very same building in which we are sitting, and yet the needs and
         aspirations of our youth in Cape Town do not matter to its mayor,
         who says it is a waste of money and donated the allocation for
         Youth Day celebrations to her favourite charities;


   (4)      this is tantamount to cancelling Christmas or, even worse,
         taking sweets from little children; and


   (5)      children have a right to be heard and to share in celebrations
         in a way they can relate to, and cancelling Youth Day is a very bad
         signal to our future leaders, who have to look after our interests
         when we are old and frail.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Is there any objection?
[Interjections.] Order, hon members! In the light of the objection, the
motion may not be proceeded with. It will therefore become a notice of
motion.

                     POINT OF ORDER RAISED BY MR R J TAU

                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, before I come to the
first Order of the Day, I did make a reservation in terms of making a
ruling yesterday and I want to make the ruling now, before we proceed.

Hon members will remember that the hon Tau rose on a point of order in the
course of our deliberations yesterday. The hon member asked whether it was
correct for hon Watson to refer to what had been said in the House
previously and whether he would also be given the opportunity to respond to
the allegations. What hon Watson did was to clarify what he thought had
been misunderstood when he stood up to apologise for apartheid.

In terms of Rule 50(1)(a) of the Council, a member may be allowed to
explain a previous speech, but only to the extent that the speech has been
misquoted or misunderstood. That is the Rule of the National Council of
Provinces. I therefore rule that, what the hon member did was to explain
what he thought had been misquoted or misunderstood. Therefore, that was in
order. That is my ruling. [Applause.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 5 – Provincial and Local Government:

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister and hon Deputy
Minister, you are welcome in this august House for the debate on the
important Budget Vote speech. I welcome and allow you to take the podium
and proceed with your speeches.

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, hon, MECs,
delegates and hon members, exactly two weeks ago to the day, we tabled the
Budget Vote of the Department of Provincial and Local Government in the
National Assembly. We opened the policy debate with a speech, which focused
on the following: a synoptic overview of the human capacity deployment
programme and the impact this has had on the performance of local
government and ultimately on the lives of our people; the status of
integrated development plans for the financial years 2004–05 and 2005-06 as
well as of the generation of municipal IDPs, which will guide our work in
the forthcoming financial year; and a snapshot update on the nodal economic
programme.

On the occasion of the policy debate in the National Assembly, we
emphasised the crucial importance of drawing the correct lessons from the
outcomes of our earlier endeavours. We further postulated that, and I
quote:


   Experience over the past 13 years of democratic government has produced a
   logical case for a local government policy review and for the
   consideration of steps to establish a coherent policy framework for
   provincial government.

At the time of our debate in the National Assembly, 29 organisations had
taken part in the hands-on support programme. We are most grateful for the
generosity and efforts of these organisations. The department has advised
me that many more organisations have indicated their readiness to join in.
This deserves our expression of appreciation in anticipation.

Thanks to this intervention, appreciable progress has been recorded with
respect to a substantial removal of service delivery backlogs and the
realisation of improvement with respect to municipal financial viability
and management as well as the provision of technical capacity to support
infrastructure development.

In order to successfully take advantage of opportunities offered by this
hands-on support programme, two elements have to be in place. Local
government must accelerate efforts at getting its own house in order and we
have to be more precise as to how local government is to be imbricated into
the total synergy of our multisphered system of government.

Already in the 46 districts, all the intergovernmental structures of the
district municipalities which are visualised in the Intergovernmental
Relations Framework Act of 2005, are in place. The introduction of these
structures has the effect of reshaping institutional dynamics towards more
effective governance and developmental ends.

Thus, we have seen that a combination of the mobilisation of resources from
outside government as well as better alignment of governmental resources
through more integrated intersphere planning, budgeting and execution, have
produced a new type of the opportunity challenge nexus.

The challenge we now face is one of finding ways through which to tilt the
outcomes of our recent endeavours in favour of the opportunity side. The
main thrust of our efforts to date has been directed towards helping local
government acquire the requisite institutional capacities to discharge its
constitutional obligations to the people.

However, this must be seen as but one element of the government-wide effort
to strengthen our institutional capacity across all the three spheres of
government. We take this opportunity, again, to report to Parliament and we
say that thanks to the integrated development plans engagement process, we
now have a better idea as to the national and provincial support actions
which are needed to help enhance the quality of municipal IDPs.

More importantly, these IDPs are in practice fast becoming a forceful call
to arms through which local, provincial and national spheres of government
are aggressively promoting the goals of nation-building, social cohesion
and economic rejuvenation from below. The Department of Provincial and
Local Government has now initiated an IDP national assessment process and
this has improved the prospects for the profound enhancement of the quality
of our work across all the three spheres of government.

This process must also be seen as an integral part of our institutionalised
mechanism for monitoring the implementation of our government-wide Five-
Year Local Government Strategic Agenda. In this regard, it is our pleasure
to report that provinces have made impressive progress toward establishing
provincial monitoring and evaluation units in the offices of the Premiers
and the provincial departments of local government.

In the National Assembly we also spoke about the rural development and
urban renewal nodes which, as we all know, are home to many of our
country’s poorest people and therefore sites of formidable development
challenges. We spoke of the Maruleng and Bushbuckridge nodes, which are the
current pilot sites for our programme of building capacity for economic
development and poverty reduction in the nodes.

We reported that in its first year of execution the pilot facilitated
R4 million in direct business development support and that it saved
investment in agriculture, agriprocessing and tourism worth R41 million.
Furthermore, it created 766 job opportunities, it created 18 SMME linkages
to commercial markets, and it conducted four community public-private
sector partnerships.

We again call on all development stakeholders, ranging from the SA Local
Government Association, national and provincial governments, state-owned
enterprises and private sector organisations, to the institution of
traditional leadership to fully internalise the demonstration effect of
these successes and to translate them into the universal experience of
other areas, which were similarly historically neglected.

The advent of democracy also saw government introducing a process of state
spatial restructuring. The erstwhile 10 Bantustans, four provincial
administrations and more that 1 200 municipal entities were rescaled into
new political economic spaces. The new configuration seeks to move the
country away from the institutionalised regressive politics of ethnic
balkanisation and economic marginalisation which were embedded in apartheid
spatial planning.

During the process leading to the enactment of the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Act of 2005 and the Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and
Related Matters Act of 2005, we undertook to pay special attention to
former cross-boundary municipalities. This would entail the formalisation
of protocols to govern a smooth transition and ensure a practical and
effective response to circumstances that may impact negatively on
governance and service delivery at the municipal level.

In this regard, we wish to report that the local government equitable share
has been realigned to the new provincial boundaries and the allocations
adjusted for the 2007-08 Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. At the
commencement of the new fiscal year, all provinces would be receiving these
allocations and this will enable them to take responsibility for functions
and the provision of services in the areas of the new municipalities.

The former cross-boundary municipalities also benefited from the additional
funding to the equitable share baseline allocated from the vertical
division of revenue, and were shielded from any negative impacts of the
adjustments to the population, powers and functions that were effected to
the equitable share formula in making allocations for the previous
financial year. This is in addition to the approximately R550 million that
had been allocated to former cross-boundry municipalities as at 31 March
2007 for purposes of facilitating the implementation of municipal
infrastructure projects.

Finally, we have deployed experts in the former cross-boundary
municipalities who are providing both infrastructure and institutional
support. Institutional support includes financial and economic development
and integrated development planning-type support. The National Treasury,
the Department of Provincial and Local Government, and the SA Local
Government Association as well as the provincial and national sector
departments will upscale efforts for continued service provision.

It is clear that many of the advances we made in the last three years were
a result of special rapid capacity enhancement measures which we introduced
as and when they were deemed necessary. Indeed, others were a result of the
system of government itself achieving requisite levels of maturity. A
critical implication of this is that we need to determine whether or not
the current governance and development context requires a rethink of
aspects of the local government policy which was, in any case, formulated
in the period between 1993 and 1998.

We need to ask ourselves whether some of the inertness we have experienced
so far is path-dependent or perhaps a function of retrogressive routines we
have evolved since 1994. This and other related questions have come to
light following the local government review of 2005 which shows challenges
that need to be addressed.

The lessons learnt through Project Consolidate have brought these matters
into even sharper relief. It is clear that we do not as yet have a settled
model, in the necessary detail, to efficiently handle the inevitable
contestation over powers and functions within and between spheres of
government. We must establish a policy framework which is clear enough to
enable us to navigate the necessary tension between processes of
recentralising some aspects of power and those of decentralising others.

In view of this, the January 2007 Cabinet lekgotla instructed the
Department of Provincial and Local Government to initiate two separate but
related processes: a review of the White Paper on Local Government and the
formulation of the White Paper on provincial government. This has not
existed up to now. There has been a constitutional provision but no policy
framework.

The two processes are about to begin. They are meant to span a two-year
period. They will unfold in a three-phase process: firstly, there will be
the publication of questions in July 2007 to provide an overview of the
major issues on which policy is required; secondly, there shall be ongoing
extended research to examine these issues in more detail and to provide
possible policy options in a Green Paper which will be published towards
the end of 2007; and lastly, following gazetting, public comment and
feedback, the final drafting of the two White Papers will commence in early
2008.

Chairperson and hon members, we call on all South Africans to fully embrace
the opportunity created by these processes and participate in helping shape
a governance system which, needless to say, will have immensely profound
implications for all of us. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I just want to bring to the
attention of hon members that the presiding officer is guided by the
decision of the whippery in terms of the speakers’ list. With due respect,
hon Chief Whip, I am responding to some notices I have been inundated with.
Unless I am directed by the Chief Whip to make changes to the speakers’
list, I cannot do so on my own. No notice, except one from the Chief Whip,
can change that. I also want to bring to your attention that, through the
authority of the Chief Whip, which I am following now, I will call upon the
hon chairperson of the committee, hon Shiceka, instead of hon McKenzie.
Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, Minister, the Deputy Minister in abstentia, MEC
from the smart province, special delegates present, members of the media,
officials of the department, comrades and friends, it is a privilege and an
honour, once more, to be addressing you on behalf of the NCOP, through the
select committee.

This policy debate takes place at a time when the youth of our country are
engaged in the process of commemorating and remembering the sacrifices that
were made by their forebears in the struggle for liberation. This
celebration takes the form of a Youth Parliament that is starting today and
will end on Friday.

This activity is taking place here as the culmination of a protracted
process that started in provincial parliaments and that ends here, in
Parliament. This process was supposed to have started in all our 283
municipalities across the length and breadth of our country. Parliament is
recognising the valuable contributions that have been made by the youth,
but at the same time those contributions are still being made in shaping
the democracy of our country.

Minister, through you Chairperson, the youth are speaking to the issues of
being politically active and taking charge of the future. But, at the same
time, the youth are informed and appreciate the shape of our democracy. It
is the youth that are focused on community issues, that ensure that matters
are resolved through debates and discussions.

We have to ask ourselves a question: How do these policies find expression
in our municipalities, in terms of institutions that have developed that
level and also in terms of service delivery? How much of the over R100
billion Budget in the MTEF period is going to the youth?

Also, this debate is taking place at a time when the ruling party is going
to pause and reflect on activities of the past 13 years, and develop
policies that are going to shape our country, our continent and the world
in the next 10 years.

There is no time in the history of this country where there has been so
much focus on local government through Project Consolidate and through the
Five-Year Local Government Strategic Agenda. You have managed to capture
the imagination of our society. You have managed and continue to mobilise
all sectors of our society to ensure that this sphere of government is
responsive to the needs of the populace and to ensure that the economy
grows. All these activities are informed by the integrated development
plans, which are supposed to be used as the Bible is by Christians, in the
activities that guide the municipalities.

The only time that we had a situation where the focus was put on local
government was in the period 1995 to 1999. It was when there was the
Masakhane Campaign. That Masakhane Campaign encouraged our communities to
say that, as much as they enjoy rights, those rights go with
responsibilities, namely you must pay for the services that you receive.
But that applied to people who could afford to do so.

In our view, as a committee, the department is on the right course in terms
of the strategic direction, because everyone knows where we are going,
except those who might not want to know where we are going as a country.
The committee has conducted oversight activities by calling MECs from
various provinces, Salga structures in various provinces as well as the
portfolio committees. To date, we have dealt with five provinces.

We have also conducted oversight visits to provinces jointly with the
Select Committee on Finance. We have been focusing on public participation,
in terms of ward committees and community development workers. We have been
focusing on the development of priorities at local level in the form of
IDPs and at the same time focusing on the state of finances in
municipalities, but that also goes with viability.

We have also looked at institutional development, organisational capacity
and delegation of powers amongst office bearers at local level. This joint
oversight has taught us one of the lessons that we have learnt: That
regarding the development of IDPs, we still have to strengthen the
participation of departments from provinces and also at national level, as
well as that of state-owned enterprises.

That area needs to be strengthened and, at the same time, when we look at
the Millennium Development Goals in terms of attaining the goals we have
set ourselves, we find that there is still a lot that has to be done
concerning the co-ordination of these activities to ensure that we are able
to reach that target.

We welcome, Minister, the efforts that have been made by your together with
the MECs, in ensuring that this year your focus is going to be focusing on
the eradication of the bucket system, so that we are able to reach the
target set by our country. In this regard, we feel that the step that we
are taking is going to assist us to move in the proper direction. Under
your leadership, we believe that the co-operative spirit that must be
undertaken through co-operative governance in these spheres of government
is very important.

The community as such is going to be focusing on the implementation of the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act to ensure that these systems that
have been put in place institutionally are functioning optimally. They are
utilising the best of the country so that we are able to move forward. We
are proposing that legislation must be developed. Such legislation must
focus on development planning. It must be an instrument that strengthens
joint planning, joint implementation as well as joint monitoring at that
level.

We feel that there is a lacuna at this stage in our country, which is
supposed to be filled in. It is supposed to be developed so that, as a
country, we can move forward in raising our issues.

One other matter that we want to raise is that the NCOP has a strategic
partner in the form of the Minister for Provincial and Local Government.
The Minister for Provincial and Local Government is responsible for
strengthening the development of provinces and local government. At the
same time, the NCOP is a House of provinces and municipalities.

We are seeing a decline in the participation of the executive in this
House, and that of the Premiers and the MECs. Even in this House today we
have one MEC and this is proof of what I am saying.

We think that this matter is supposed to be given attention. It is supposed
to be discussed by the leadership of the institution, working with
ourselves so that we are able to find creative solutions on this matter.
Probably, this matter needs to be taken to the Presidential Co-ordinating
Committee, where provinces are encouraged to use their House to get the
best out of it so that this platform will be able to ensure that issues of
national importance are taken up.
I want to conclude by saying that we support the budget of the department.
We believe that we are on the right course with this budget, but we believe
that the utilisation of this budget is key to avoiding a situation of
underexpenditure which is happening in various municipalities and also in
various provinces.

I want to thank the department for its co-operation with the committee.
Also, I want to thank the committee members for their incisive engagement.
Moreover, I want to thank my family for their understanding and support.
Thank you very much.

Mr P C MCKENZIE (Western Cape): Chairperson, Minister, hon members, it is
good for me, once again, to be in this House. It is a privilege to be
speaking after my friend and comrade and I am glad that he thanked me also,
as part of his family. Thank you. [Laughter.]

Minister, we support the idea of the proposed White Paper on provincial
government and local government that you are talking about. I think it will
help us to begin to strengthen provincial support for local government,
especially now that more responsibility has also been given in terms of an
oversight over municipalities’ finances.

So, I think, after 13 years, it is the right thing to look back and see how
we can improve, so that no one in the various spheres of government feels
that you are just a post office, but that there is empowerment and growth
amongst everyone.

Minister, I also want to thank you, from the Western Cape side, of course,
for your assistance and your department’s assistance to us in this
province. You have been a good delivery arm and we can always depend on
you, especially since we had floods the other day in the Western Cape –
particularly on the West Coast side where different kinds of floods occur
in the townships.

Floods occur in the townships on a yearly basis and it is just a pity that
the local government and municipalities surrounding those areas are not
coming to the party to assist those people, especially in Crossroads and
other areas that, year after year, experience this problem with floods. In
fact, I looked at the newspaper the other day and saw an item where the
mayor of the area said that it was just a matter of people blocking the
drains with stones and paper. We investigated the issue and actually found
out that those drains have not been cleaned for the last couple of years.

So, one needs to say thank you for your assistance in terms of the flooding
and we ask you to ensure that the quality of life of people is always
improved and looked at, and that our people are not subjected to this
annual flooding, which results in such a bad situation in the area.

Regarding some of the challenges that we have in the Western Cape, I want
to mention some of them and just talk around them. We are grateful for the
CDWs that were started. Some of them are doing tremendous work, but are we
really getting quality for the money that we are putting into it? By this I
mean that we have a number of CDWs within the province of the Western Cape
who have been trained but who are not equipped. They are trained, but some
of them are just sitting at home. They are being trained, but some of them
are just used for organising political meetings.

Now, I don’t believe that that is what the government intended for CDWs. I
believe that the CDWs are an important aspect and can play a meaningful
role as our people in local government also change and transform to the new
standards that have come before us.

I want to say, Minister, regarding the other field of housing where there
is this Breaking New Ground approach – and we are grateful for that – in a
number of townships within the Western Cape that were built in the olden
days under the ghetto system we have still not seen radical improvement,
especially in this metro, in those areas. Those people in the townships
that have voted for and supported us and this government are turning around
and asking what changes are there from what was there before to what is
there now, in the streets where they live.

Regarding the province where I come from, I begin to wonder if a concerted
effort cannot be made in those ghettos that were created by the apartheid
government so that we can begin to see how we can make life a little bit
better for those people in those houses by improving the facilities,
standards and roads and by improving service delivery within those areas.
This is what we ask.

It is a pity that our system is calling for many more ward committees but
we still have a situation within this very metro where ward committees have
not yet been established. We have now had 13 years of democracy but ward
committees have not yet been established, and so I ask that there must be
pressure ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Hon members, Cape Town
belongs to all South Africans and, please, let us understand that. The hon
member is protected, he must speak and express his views without any undue
interference and interjections. You may continue, hon member.

Mr P C MCKENZIE (Western Cape): Thank you very much, Chairperson. The
reason I ask for ward committees is because, through ward committees, you
draw your local communities closer to local government. And, this is in
terms of your own speech, hon Minister, in which you spoke about the IDPs.
Regarding the IDPs, you clearly asked that there must be consultation with
the local community and either the provincial or national levels.

Now, because there are no ward communities in this city, you find that your
consultation for IDPs have not really taken place within the community that
the IDPs affect. This is the type of dilemma and challenges that we have.
Another challenge, of course, is the capacity in those areas, and this was
mentioned by you when you spoke of the human capacity and the resources.
Our rural areas in the Western Cape are faced with this problem of
capacity.

When we speak about capacity, Minister, there is a lack of municipal
managers within this province. There is a lack of town planners within this
province and so where rural municipal areas want so much to deliver, they
cannot deliver because they do not have the necessary capacity and the
necessary human resources to do that. When they place an advertisement in
the newspaper, one can immediately see that when a metro places a similar
advert, people would rather apply for the metro post and not for the one in
the rural areas.

A new plan needs to be envisaged and a new plan needs to be thought out,
perhaps by you at the various MEC meetings that you have. District councils
should perhaps be capacitated, strengthened and empowered so that they can
have the human resource capacity. That capacity can be shared with the
municipalities around them.
We ask you to look at one major concern, namely the disaster management
programme. Now, Minister, we try to devolve, we try to say to local
authorities and local municipalities: You should run with disaster
management. But then we have a municipality that turns around and says,
“Disaster management is not part of our competency.” Disaster management is
not part of the schedule for municipalities but, like libraries, it is part
of provincial and national competencies.

One needs to really look at that issue. Perhaps one needs to review whether
it is not an amendment to the Constitution that is necessary; and whether
the system is working, so that local areas where disasters happen can come
to the fore and not just try to get help from provinces. There are a number
of local authorities that have the necessary know-how and the necessary
capacity to deal with disaster management, but they like to do only what
the law tells them to do and nothing further and the community and the
people suffer as a result.

In my final point, I just want to say to the Minister: There is a huge
problem and we have experienced that problem here in the Western Cape. Even
recently - and with our dry summers and even now with our winters when
people light fires within their houses in order to stay warm - we have
found a number of shacks and a number of informal houses and areas which
have burnt down. By the time the fire department or fire engines get to
that place, everything is already destroyed.

We looked at that and we wondered why it was that by the time the fire
department got to a place in Crossroads, Mfuleni, everything was destroyed.
The reason is that there is no fire station that is built within a
disadvantaged area, in this province. The only two that were built are the
one in Mitchells Plain and the one in Khayelitsha and nowhere else. All the
fire stations that are built in this city, Minister ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mnr L H FIELDING: Agb Voorsitter, agb lede van die Raad, besoekers, dames
en here, goeie middag. Ek wil vandag begin deur hier te sê dat plaaslike
regering `n besigheid is en as sulks gehanteer moet word. Ek wil verder
noem dat die tyd van vergaderings verby is. Die mense wat vir ons gestem
het, wil vorentoe gevat word en dit is ons plig as leiers.

Kragtens die Openbare Finansieswet, na aanleiding van `n berig van 18 Junie
2007, mag die regering met geen misdadigers besigheid doen nie. Ek verwys
spesifiek na behuisingskontrakte op plaaslike regeringsvlak. Ek wil ook
verwys na die Nasionale Intelligensie Agentskap wat glo ontplooi sal word
in verskillende staatsdepartemente en indien dit so is, dan wil ek dit
verwelkom. Hulle sal korrupsie binnenhuis hokslaan en dit sodoende uitroei.


Ek wil ook in die afwesigheid van ons Minister van Verdediging baie dankie
sê namens die gemeenskap van die Noord-Kaap vir sy vinnige optrede na
aanleiding van Ammunisiedepot 93 nader aan Jan Kempdorp.

Minister, ek dink u gaan met my saamstem vandag in hierdie Raad as ek sê
dat Suid-Afrika oor al die nege provinsies heen in `n dilemma geplaas is as
gevolg van huise wat `n agterstand in Suid-Afrika het. Daar is `n
agterstand, nie omdat die regering nie geld het nie, maar `n agterstand
omdat die regering aan misdadigers en bankkrot kontrakteurs geld uitbetaal
het en nou kan hulle nie die huise vir ons mense voorsien nie. Ek beskou
dit as `n groot skande teen ons regering, ongeag wie in die regering is,
hetsy die DA of die ANC. Dit is `n skande vir `n regering dat ons dit
verder sal toelaat. Ek wil vra dat die Minister dringend daaraan aandag
gee.

Ek wil verder gaan en dan wil ek kyk na die oorsigbesoek van die
provinsiale regering in die Noord-Kaap waar `n waterrekening van R15
miljoen oor 43 jaar dateer. Dit is by die Sedibeng Waterraad. Dit strek so
ver terug as 1964. Minister, as ek vandag nie die kennis van plaaslike
regering gehad het nie, dan het ek vandag gesê: Skryf die skuld af en gee
ons arm mense drinkwater om te kan drink. Dit is wat hulle vra. Water is `n
bron waarsonder niemand kan klaarkom nie. Hierdie mense in Jan Kempdorp en
Pampierstad is almal arm mense. Dit is mense wat dit nodig het. Dink
daaraan. Werk daaraan. Dit is `n verleentheid, nie net vir my nie, maar ook
vir my medeburgers in Suid-Afrika.
Ek het dokumentasie in my kantoor wat verwys na Eskom, want ek glo Eskom
moet ’n hulp vir hierdie regering wees en nie `n opponent nie. Maar Eskom
sê aan mense in Pampierstad: Voordat `n nuwe uitbreiding nie 80% bewoon
word nie, gaan hulle nie infrastruktuur daar skep nie. Ons kan nie meer
daardie tipe van dinge duld nie. Ons leef nie meer in daardie tyd nie.
Daarom vra ek vir u dat ons daarna sal kyk: 80% is baie wat op `n nuwe
uitbreiding moet gaan bly. Mense gaan nie daar bly nie omdat hulle nie daar
wil bly nie, maar die omstandighede waarin hulle lewe met `n
werkloosheidsyfer laat hulle nie die keuse om daar te bly nie.

Ek wil verder gaan. Ons lees die Grondwet so mooi. So ek glo ook ons
verstaan artikels 105, 106 en 139 van die Grondwet wat die bekwaamheid van
`n munisipaliteit bepaal, en of dit bestuur kan word, al dan nie. Minister,
doen wat u gedoen het in Oudtshoorn in die hele land, dan sal ons mense op
grondvlak kan lewe. Gaan kyk na die verkeerde dinge. Ek sê nie dat
Oudtshoorn verkeerd was nie, maar ek sê ook nie dat hy reg was nie. Die
feit wat vir my belangrik is, is dat daar `n stap in die regte rigting
geneem is en gevra is: Is daar `n fout en wie is skuldig?

Die samewerking tussen die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies en die provinsies
is vir my van kardinale belang, omdat ek nog altyd agterkom dat daar ’n
bietjie van ’n gaping is tussen die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies en die
provinsies. Soos ek hier staan, aanvaar ek nog altyd dat ek `n deel van my
provinsie is, want ek is `n afgevaardigde van my provinsie. Baie dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr L H FIELDING: Hon Chairperson, hon members of the Council, visitors,
ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. Today I want to start by saying that
local government is a business and should be treated as such. I also want
to add that the time for meetings is passed. The people who voted for us
want to be taken forward and that is our duty as leaders.

In terms of the Public Finance Management Act, and in consequence of a
report of 18 June 2007, the government may not do business with any
criminals. I am referring specifically to housing contracts at local
government level. I also want to refer to the National Intelligence Agency
that is apparently going to be deployed in various state departments and,
if this is so, then I want to welcome it. They will crack down on
corruption internally and, in so doing, stamp it out.

In his absence, and on behalf of the community of the Northern Cape, I also
want like to thank the Minister of Defence for his rapid response in
connection with 93 Ammunition Depot closer to Jan Kempdorp.

Minister, today, in this Council, I think you will agree with me when I say
that South Africa, across the nine provinces, has been placed on the horns
of a dilemma because of the backlog in the provision of houses in South
Africa. The backlog exists not because the government has no money, but
because the government paid money to criminals and insolvent contractors,
and now they cannot provide houses for our people. I regard this as a
massive disgrace to our government, irrespective of who is in power,
whether it be the DA or the ANC. It is a disgrace for a government that we
allow it to continue. I would like to request the Minister to attend to
that urgently.

I want to go further and look at the oversight visit of the Northern Cape
provincial government, where a water account of R15 million dates back 43
years. This is at the Sedibeng Water Board. It dates back as far as 1964.
Minister, had I today not had the knowledge of local government, then I
would have said: Write the debt off and give our poor people water to
drink. That is what they ask. Water is a resource without which no one can
survive. These people in Jan Kempdorp and Pampierstad are all poor. These
are the people that need it. Think about it. Work at it. It is an
embarrassment, not just for me, but also for my fellow South African
citizens.

In my office I have documentation that relates to Eskom, because I believe
that Eskom has to be an aid to this government, and not an opponent. But,
Eskom says to the people of Pampierstad: Until a new extension has an 80%
occupying rate they will not create infrastructure there. We cannot
tolerate those types of comments any longer. We do not live in those times
any more. That is why I am asking you that we should review that. Eighty
per cent is a huge number that need to live in a new extension. People
choose not to live there not because they don’t want to live there, but the
circumstances under which they live, coupled with unemployment, do not
offer them the choice to live there.

I want to go further. We read the Constitution so beautifully. So I would
assume that we understand sections 105, 106 and 139 of the Constitution
that determine the competency of a municipality and whether it can be
managed or not. Minister, if you can do to the whole country what you did
in Oudtshoorn, then our people at grass-roots level will be able to live.
Go and look at the wrong things. I am not saying that Oudtshoorn was wrong,
nor am I saying it was right. The important fact for me is that a step in
the right direction was taken and the question was asked: Is there
something wrong and who is to blame?

For me, co-operation between the National Council of Provinces and the
provinces is of the utmost importance, because I have detected that there
is still a bit of a gap between the NCOP and the provinces. As I stand
here, I still accept that I am a part of my province because I am a
delegate of my province. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government,
Deputy Minister, hon members, special delegates, in 2004 the Premier of
Mpumalanga, Thabang Makwetla, said:


   Local government has to become the point of first contact between the
   citizen and government, making municipalities the frontline service
   delivery institutions ... The role of Salga in partnership with the
   provincial government is crucial in ensuring that the capacity of
   municipalities in delivering services is enhanced.

He went on to say that we also need to answer the question whether local
government is really closer to the people. Local government must have
meaning in the lives of the people. Are we accessible? Do we report back?
How do we conduct ourselves? As leaders, we must reduce the social distance
between us and the people.

As the ANC, we are worried about the political instability in many councils
that threatens to negatively impact on service delivery. We cannot allow a
situation where councils are changed for the sole aim of gaining political
power to the detriment of the people. With every change of a mayor, the
officials are changed.

In the Western Cape there are 30 municipalities, of which 26 are coalition
municipalities. We create much more space for instability. Maybe we must
have a look at how coalitions are put together, because we have one big
party ganging up with a lot of small parties that don’t even have enough
representation ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Hon members, I beg your co-
operation to make my work easier, please. Some people are doing certain
things and when those things are done against them they are the first ones
to accuse presiding officers of partiality and I wouldn’t like that. I want
all of you to make my work of maintaining the decorum of the House easier.
Please continue, hon member.

Mr N J MACK: Accordingly, last year’s local government elections saw many
new councils established and councils inaugurated. As such, the department,
in partnership with Salga, has to prepare the incoming councillors to
understand their central tasks to enable them to properly discharge their
responsibilities.

We must also ensure that each of the district and metropolitan
municipalities have the necessary managerial, professional and technical
staff to enable them to implement the required developmental programmes
beyond Project Consolidate. Let me refer to Oudtshoorn in the Westen Cape,
to which the previous speaker also alluded. Oudtshoorn is under the
administration of the province, in accordance with sections 106 and 139 of
the Constitution. This municipality was not under Project Consolidate. So,
how do we identify beforehand when a municipality is getting into problems
so that we can act timeously and give assistance? So, how can we see the
warning lights regarding this beforehand? This is one of the concerns.

Demonstrations in some local communities that we have witnessed and
continue to witness, emphasise the importance of continuous contact between
the municipalities and the people to avoid opportunistic elements taking
advantage of genuine grievances of the people in pursuit of their own goals
that are inconsistent with those of the national democratic government that
is led by the ANC ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! On what point are you rising,
hon member?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it in order for the hon
member to mislead the House by quoting sections 106 and 139 of the
Constitution? Section 106 has to do with citizenship.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): What is your point of order, hon
member? Please, sit down.

Mr A WATSON: I will do that, sir.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Proceed, hon member.

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, we are aware that our challenges are around
strengthening capacity, transforming the financial systems and achieving
greater co-operative governance. However, these need to translate into
improvement in the delivery of services and better management of resources,
including compliance with the Local Government: Municipal Finance
Management Act. This has been alluded to by the chairperson of the Select
Committee on Local Government and the chairperson of the Select Committee
on Finance.

I must thank them for taking the two committees jointly to the Eastern
Cape. This oversight visit was very empowering to all those who were
involved and has really given us some insight into the financial management
of municipalities. I would also like to propose that we should perhaps
include the portfolio committee when we go on these visits and do them
jointly.

There is insufficient contact, support and interaction between these
stakeholders and, as a result, municipalities are undercapacitated to take
on the challenge of transforming the quality of life at the local level.
This also impacts severely on municipalities’ ability to implement the
IDPs.

More than 80% of ward committees have been established in order for
communities to be actively involved in managing this development. However,
the department needs to work more on improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of our system of local government.
This year’s budget continues to pay particular attention to Project
Consolidate as one of the drivers for capacity-building and support. It is
also important for municipalities to have effective monitoring systems and
tools in place to support free basic services. Project Consolidate is
already beginning to have a positive impact in some of the municipalities
by drawing the collective strengths of national and provincial government.
The department is well placed to ensure that these spheres of government
work harder from now on to further what has been achieved in the spirit of
co-operative governance.

There is a concern that I also want to raise in respect of the suspensions
that are happening in different municipalities – suspensions of municipal
managers and directors. Sometimes you have a municipal manager who is
suspended for more than six months or a year with full pay, sitting at home
and doing nothing. Municipalities must also give more regard to the process
of discipline and ensure that these processes are well advised.

Since the DA has been making such a loud noise today, we should also have
our eyes focused, especially on the Central Karoo district municipality
where they have a municipal manager whom they will have to pay R800 000.
Whilst they were at the Western Cape government they pleaded for money.
They are, however, a couple of million rands in the red. They also went to
national government to look for money but they have to pay this municipal
manager a lot of money. We have to look how this fits into the Local
Government: Municipal Finance Management Act. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, my bydrae sal grootliks vanuit die
Vrystaat se perspektief wees. Dit is bevind dat die beginsel van
groepsmunisipaliteite duidelik nie suksesvol is nie. Dit het daartoe
bygedra dat kiesers verder vervreem word van hulle plaaslike
regeringsinstellings. Kleiner munisipaliteite kan hierdie probleem
suksesvol ondervang.

Die beste munisipale bestuurder kan nie ’n munisipaliteit doeltreffend
bestuur tensy so ’n persoon die ondersteuning van doeltreffende finansiële
bestuur geniet nie. Dis ook verder vir die munisipaleraad onmoontlik om
sinvol te beplan en besluite te neem as daar nie sekerheid bestaan oor die
werklike finansiële posisie van die munisipaliteit nie. Daar is talle
munisipaliteite in die Vrystaat wat nie eers behoorlik
bankrekonsiliasiestate kan doen nie en dan is daar ook munisipaliteite wat
nie in staat is om die maandrekenings van verbruikers te hanteer nie.

Tot op datum is die finansiële administrasie van ’n groot groep
munisipaliteite gedoen deur konsultante of ouditeurfirmas teen hoë koste,
dit terwyl daar personeel is om die werk te doen, maar omdat hulle nie oor
die vermoë beskik om dit te doen nie moet vir konsultante betaal word, dit
wil sê dubbele betaling. Hierdie toedrag van sake is die grootste, indien
nie die enigste rede vir swak bestuur, korrupsie, swak dienslewering,
ensovoorts nie.

Die eerste stap om die probleem op munisipale vlak reg te stel is om
doeltreffende finansiële administrasie te verseker. Sowat ’n jaar gelede
het die Vrystaatse VF Plus leier, mnr Oosthuizen, ’n voorstel gemaak en in
die lig van die omstandighede wat geheers het, het hy voorgestel dat die
tesouriedepartemente by die munisipaliteite in die Vrystaat spesifiek
gesluit word en vervang word deur streekstesouriesentrums op distrikvlak
wat dan deur kundige personeel wat op meriete aangestel word beman word.

Hierdie sentrums verrig dan die finansiële administrasie van die
munisipaliteite en wel teen betaling deur die betrokke munisipaliteite.
Rekeninge sal dan nog steeds plaaslik betaal word en die inkomste sal
plaaslik gedeponeer word, maar die res van die finansiële administrasie sal
by die sentrums hanteer word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, my contribution will mainly be from a
Free State perspective. It has been proved that the principle of group
municipalities is clearly unsuccessful. It has contributed to the further
alienation of voters from their local government institutions. Smaller
municipalities can successfully solve this problem.

The best municipal manager cannot manage a municipality effectively unless
such a manager has the support of effective financial management.
Furthermore, it is also impossible for the municipal council to plan
meaningfully and make decisions if there is no certainty about the true
financial position of the municipality. There are many municipalities in
the Free State that cannot even draw up proper bank reconciliation
statements and there are also municipalities that are incapable of handling
the monthly accounts of consumers.

To date, the financial administration of a large group of municipalities
has been done by consultants or auditing firms at high cost; this while
there are staff members who are employed to do the job but because they do
not possess the skills to do so, consultants have to be paid to do the
work, and this results in double payments being made. This state of affairs
is the primary, if not the only reason, for poor management, corruption,
poor service delivery, etc.

The first step that must be taken to solve the problem at municipal level
is to ensure effective financial administration. About a year ago the
leader of the FF Plus in the Free State, Mr Oosthuizen, made a proposal and
in the light of existing circumstances, he proposed that treasury
departments at municipalities in the Free State, in particular, should be
closed down and be replaced with regional treasury centres at district
level, staffed by expert staff that are appointed on merit.

These centres will then deal with the financial administration of the
municipalities and will indeed be remunerated by the relevant
municipalities. Accounts will still be settled locally and revenue will be
deposited locally but the rest of the financial administration will be done
at these centres.]

I listened with interest when the Minister referred to the deployment of
experts from the former cross-border municipalities and he said that they
will supply institutional support and include financial and economic
development. It may be something in line with what we have in mind. If that
is the case, then it needs to be welcomed; if not, we would like to make
this proposal: Come up with regional treasury centres instead of the local
treasury departments at the municipalities. I thank you.

Mr A T MANYOSI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs and hon members, I
would like to address this House on the key issue of urban and rural
development in general, with particular reference to the predominantly
black areas. Martin Luther King Junior once suggested that our lives begin
to end the day we become silent about things that matter, and in our case
it is about the legacy of the policy of separate development.

I put the emphasis on black areas precisely because centuries and decades
of colonial and apartheid rule respectively had targeted black areas – the
townships and rural areas - as testing grounds for the viability or
otherwise of the policy of separate development. That policy left us with a
huge challenge to repair, reconstruct and develop a situation that had been
deliberately and elaborately created to enforce and ensure racial
inequality.

In contrast to that barbaric policy, the present democratic government has
to ensure the improvement of the lives of all our people, with particular
attention to the most vulnerable and needy communities in the urban
townships and rural areas. In discharging this crucial responsibility, the
democratic state should, for a moment, turn a deaf ear to the desperate
screams of self-interest.

These desperate screams are intended to defend unduly accumulated privilege
and distract government from taking appropriate corrective steps to achieve
equity, for there is no other way that can allow our society to move from
racial discrimination to true equality for all racial groups. This will
also address the challenge of the influx and migration of people to
developed areas to escape the effects of underdevelopment. Underdevelopment
is the source of all social ills and affects those who live in developed
areas too.

It is in this context that we should view the budget of the Department of
Provincial and Local Government. In the words of our President:

   It should seek to strengthen our system of local government to respond to
   the challenges of reconstruction and development in urban and rural
   areas.


Local government should be financially resourced to effectively pursue its
central responsibility to develop infrastructure and also contribute to job
creation, small business development and other development programmes
striving continuously to eradicate poverty and underdevelopment.

The issue of the delays in the filling of vacant posts in most
municipalities, as also highlighted by the President in his state of the
nation address, has indeed had an adverse effect on critical service
delivery. Therefore, this requires urgent attention. This situation is
obvious in almost all the provinces and cries out for the redirection of
our education and training towards the development of appropriate skills.

The participation of the masses on the ground is a condition without which
we cannot achieve our collective objective to reconstruct and develop these
areas. Having elected representatives and administrators does not absolve
the masses of our people from active participation and from playing an
interventionist role in the process of development and governance through,
amongst other things, the ward committees.

The need for partnerships with other social partners to address the growth
and development challenges posed by the Integrated Sustainable Rural
Development Programme and the Urban Renewal Programme cannot be
overemphasised. Local government should be supplied with adequate funds to
prepare and ensure the implementation of integrated development plans and
the development of co-operatives and other projects in both urban and rural
areas. This is key to the achievement of the goals of reconstruction and
development.

We should derive satisfaction from, and applaud, the new developments
yielded by government efforts in a patient dialogue with traditional
leaders who have since accepted their historical responsibility to
participate fully and actively as partners in the struggle to eradicate
underdevelopment.

Our Constitution expects government to create a legislative space for the
role of traditional leaders in matters affecting local communities. We now
have traditional councils in a number of municipal areas with our
traditional leaders enthusiastically playing a leadership role that has
been lacking in recent years.

In conclusion, our Constitution provides for co-operative governance and
this requires, in this case, that provincial and national governments
extend a helping hand and support, financially or otherwise, local
government endeavours to bring about a better life for all.

The ANC supports the budget, moderately increased as it is. [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe kazwelonke nePhini lakhe, Ngqongqoshe
wesifundazwe - noma esephumile, nani bozakwethu, unwele olude!
[Chairperson, national Minister and his Deputy, provincial Minister -
although she has left - and colleagues, long live!]

We all know that the main function of the Department of Provincial and
Local Government is to develop and promote a national system of integrated
and co-operative governance, and to support provincial and local
government.

In this debate, the IFP will focus on the department’s strategic plan up to
2009-10 containing the department’s objectives to establish a sustainable
system of local government, to provide infrastructure and other essential
services.

The other main issue is Project Consolidate. While we welcome the
government’s initiative in launching this intervention, the question must
be asked whether it has in fact provided weak municipalities with the
necessary fiscal and other resources to recruit and appoint appropriate
personnel to improve service delivery.

We have to raise these questions because of the recent protest marches in
various municipalities, where lack of service delivery and, in some
instances, nondelivery were highlighted by disgruntled citizens. We have to
ask whether the department has taken note of the reasons for these protests
and whether it has taken stock of the success or failure of Project
Consolidate.

The IFP also wants to focus on the policy framework for provincial and
local government, the Integrated Rural Development Programme and the Urban
Renewal Programme. I have to ask whether these policies have achieved their
stated objectives. Have they in fact improved service delivery and, more
importantly, have they actually alleviated poverty? Hon Minister, are the
poor, marginalised and disadvantaged communities actually benefiting and
are they getting better service delivery from these policies?

The 2007-08 budget for the Department of Provincial and Local Government
increased by about R3,5 billion, with most of the increase going to the
bigger allocations for systems and capacity-building, and transfers to
provincial and local government.

While the IFP supports the increased allocation to DPLG, we must ask why,
after 13 years, the department is still struggling to put adequate and
workable systems in place and to obtain the necessary capacity to carry out
its mandate. Surely there has been more than enough time for planning and
policy formulation. It is now time for service delivery. In fact, service
delivery should have been the focus from day one and because it was not, we
can understand why protests are taking place around the country.

Minister, herein lies the crux for your department: It is simply not good
enough to say that the national department only plays a policy role and
that, actually, delivery takes place at provincial and local government
level. We know that that is the case, but we also know that co-operative
governance means that your department must lead the way and must monitor
service delivery at the lower levels. You must also ensure that service
delivery actually takes place to alleviate poverty and improve people’s
lives. I thank you.

An HON MEMBER: Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Igama lakho!
[Kwahlekwa.] [Let your name be praised!] [Laughter.]]

Hon Chairperson, hon MEC for local government, chairperson of the Select
Committee on Local Government and Administration, hon Shiceka, hon members
of the House and distinguished guests, I am tempted to respond to hon Mzizi
– ongamamelanga ngoku, noncokolayo [who is not listening now, but is busy
talking]. Mr Mzizi speaks as if he lives on another planet, but I will
leave that to my Minister so that he can respond to the many questions that
you have asked regarding what we are capable of and not capable of doing,
as the Department of Provincial and Local Government.

The hon Minister spoke earlier on about our achievements regarding our
Project Consolidate interventions and the important relationship between
our basic services and infrastructure delivery, and economic development
initiatives at local level. It is important that we build and talk more
about these themes.

The NCOP stands at the apex of our intergovernmental relations system and
brings together all three spheres in areas of policy deliberation and
legislation. As such, the NCOP has a crucial role to play in ensuring that
the system of co-operative governance works effectively.



I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the NCOP on its
initiative of taking the NCOP to the people. Direct interactions with the
people of our country have become a routine practice that contribute to
deepening democracy and responsiveness to the developmental needs of our
communities.

Hon members should note that we have done well to improve the adoption rate
of the integrated development plans, which stands at 98% for the 2006-07
financial year. All Premiers’ co-ordinating forums have been established,
and all 46 districts have established their intergovernmental forums in
terms of the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act of 2005. Provinces
have established monitoring and evaluation units in their Premiers’
offices. These intergovernmental processes have, in part, directly
contributed to the steady progress that we are making in addressing our
service delivery backlogs and challenges.



The President, in his state of the nation address, said that this year we
should complete concrete plans on the implementation of the targets for
universal access to water in 2008, sanitation in 2010 and electricity in
2012. Today we can report on some key indicators of progress.



The current national backlog on the use of the bucket system stands at 106
873 households. We are confident that our immediate target to eradicate
this backlog will be achieved by December 2007. Universal access to water
supply had increased from 59% of the total households in 1994 to 86% by
April 2007. Universal access to sanitation had increased from 48% in 1994
to 73% by April 2007.



Hon members, we know the spread of these backlogs throughout our
municipalities, and the kinds of assistance and support that they require –
Mr Mzizi from the IFP. We know about that.

In closing his state of the nation address, the President was correct to
say, and I quote:


   We are not there yet. But no one, except ourselves, shall ensure that
   this dream is realised. And so, let us roll up our sleeves and get down
   to work, fully understanding that the task to build the South Africa for
   which we yearn is a common responsibility we all share.



[Interjections.] That hon member is right – including the DA and they must
learn to be responsible.



Regarding learning from experience and feeding these lessons into policy
reform processes, what makes us comfortable to talk openly about these
challenges is the fact that we do believe that we have the full might of
the intergovernmental machinery as well as the support of major private-
sector partners behind us to deal with many of these challenges. We
believe, and we have proved this through the two years of implementing
Project Consolidate since 2004, that, through working collaboratively and
partnerships, we can get faster and better quality services to our
communities.

The lessons learnt will therefore feed into a review of the White Paper on
Local Government to bring aspects of policy in line with practice and the
development of a coherent policy framework for provincial government. As
partners in development, we should heed the President’s call in his state
of the nation address to ensure that our development initiatives do not
exclude the often-marginalised groups in our society: our children, youth,
women and people with disabilities. 

To the extent possible, we have to afford these designated groups access to
opportunities for development and advancement and continue to capacitate
them so that they not only benefit from our development initiatives but are
also able to contribute to the achievement of our development objectives,
now and in the future.

Going forward, partnerships are critical, if we wish to succeed in bringing
quality services to our people, especially regarding vulnerable groups. We
are committed, going forward, to focusing on the partnerships we have built
to enable more attention to be paid to improving the quality of delivery,
especially aimed at vulnerable groups such as women, children, youth and
the disabled. 

Violence against women and children remains one of the most pressing
challenges in South Africa. Entrenched social and cultural norms make
gender-based violence a particularly difficult problem. But, we do not need
to feel defeated by this difficult challenge of violence against women and
children. It is through the small things that we do that we can make a
difference.

Local government has a big role to play. By paying attention to very small
things, it should ensure that the planning and service delivery focus on a
holistic, targeted approach to ending violence against women and children.

Members would recall that the 16 Days of Activism Campaign against violence
directed at women and children has already intensified its fight against
gender-based violence by getting all the partners together, including big
business and NGOs to, once more, put the issue of women and children’s
safety on the national agenda. We launched our 365-Day National Action Plan
early this year, which aims at dealing with this scourge in a more
interventionist and programmatic manner.

As the campaign drivers, we still insist on taking the action plan to where
it has never been, and where it matters most. We are taking it to the rural
areas, to the farms and informal settlements. With this plan, we want
ordinary women and children to feel, make sense of and find meaning in the
notion of a free society for all.

There is no better place to make an effective start than our very own
municipalities. This plan requires the dedicated support of all sectors of
our society for it to stand a chance of succeeding.
The provision and location of water and sanitation points, parks, open
spaces, community centres, public transport routes and links, as well as
municipal markets, are all critical priorities. These are examples of
decisions we make on a daily basis as government, and they can have a
significant effect on the safety and quality of life of women and girl-
children.

When we develop our integrated development plans, our local economic
development strategies and our strategic plans, we must speak to women and
children and ask them what their needs are. That simple conversation and
consultation with women and children does not cost much money and can make
a big difference to how we plan and implement projects, and can ultimately
lead to a safer and better quality environment for our communities.

If municipalities do not consult on their plans, chances are they will
experience protests that would otherwise have been avoided had this simple
conversation taken place. In this regard, our ward councillors and ward
committee members have an important and proactive role to play.

Our ward committees are not just intended to get government to communicate,
plan and implement better together, but ultimately these plans must be
consulted on and communicated to intended beneficiaries. Ward committees
are critical structures in the facilitation of this communication. We all
have a responsibility to improve our communication with our people. If we
do not communicate with our people, we leave them vulnerable to all sorts
of negative influences that, in turn, create the social gap between
government and its people.

We want to call on our communities to use their energies to contribute
positively to the achievement of national priorities, targets and plans. My
call to communities is: We need the passions and energies that you are
displaying, but we need these to be deployed in support of the positive
efforts of your local elected leadership in order to create a better life
for all.

Hon members, I mentioned this in the National Assembly, but its importance
compels me to mention it once again in this House: For me, communication is
important because it helps us to convey good news to the communities we
serve. Equally so, it helps us to convey the challenges we face, the plans
we have in place to deal with those challenges, but most importantly it
provides a platform where our communities can air their views, and
sometimes even help us find solutions to our problems. [Time expired.]
Thank you very much.

Ms Q D MAHLANGU (Gauteng): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,
hon members, comrades and friends, I would like to talk about a few issues
and not elaborate on issues that we are dealing with in the province.
However, I will touch on some issues that are pertinent if we are to
succeed in the work we are doing.
The first issue that I would like to talk about is an integrated approach
which, in my view, is crucial if we are to succeed in implementing the
Local Government Five-Year Strategic Agenda. I am saying this because,
without national parastatals and provincial entities, the integrated
development plans would not remain our basic planning tool. As we speak
today, some sector departments as well as parastatals are still not seeing
the IDPs as the basic planning tool of government.

At this point I would like to indicate that in Gauteng province the IDPs of
municipalities have increased in terms of quality and submission of their
annual financial statements on time. However, the input from stakeholders
remains a challenge. At this point I would like to highlight that the work
that the Airports Company of South Africa is doing, working with
Ekurhuleni, is one of those examples which I would like to call upon all
other parastatals to emulate and work with us in order for us to move
forward.

One of the challenges in terms of using the integrated development plans as
a planning tool concerns parastatals such as Eskom and Rand Water and so
forth, in that by the time municipalities have adopted the IDPs they still
do not have sufficient information from these public entities. In my view,
this remains an ongoing weakness for us to succeed in this integrated
approach that we are talking about.

The second matter that I want to talk about, Minister, is in relation to
the issue of the provision of basic services. In my view, we are well on
course in my province, whether it is in relation to issues of sanitation,
water or eradication of the bucket system. As we speak now, we have already
eradicated the bucket system in the province.

However, the major challenge is that most of our communities who live in
informal settlements still do not have the appropriate sanitation system.
Therefore, going forward, we will work with the Departments of Provincial
and Local Government, Water Affairs and Forestry and other relevant sector
departments to address these challenges as well as issues of access to
potable water for households. We are well on course concerning these
issues.

Again, the challenge is that we have huge numbers of people who live in
informal settlements who still do not have water for their households. This
is an issue to look at as we move into the inclusionary Breaking New Ground
housing policy. Going forward, we will be in a position to deal with this
issue.

In terms of the provincial government, we have, together with
municipalities, adopted a province-wide indigent strategy which is meant to
make sure that communities that are still facing difficulties in paying for
services could be assisted through that policy framework. Regarding people
who are unable to bury their loved ones upon their death, the indigent
burial policy that municipalities are implementing, in my view, is
complementing what municipalities are doing in the province.

The challenge, Minister, and one of the things we must talk about, is that
the media is very good at highlighting problems that municipalities face
but it is not good at highlighting the significant areas. Among the
challenges which remain a thorny issue in terms of electricity supply, are
illegal connections of electricity which result in most people having no
access to electricity, cable theft and inefficient usage of electricity by
all of us.

I think those are issues that all of us, as a society and as MPs, should be
working on together as a whole and across the spectrum of our society. We
need to try and manage matters related to electricity in an efficient way,
because if we do not do that, we are simply reversing the infrastructure
investment that could be made in fast-tracking and preparing us to meet the
2012 target.

With regard to municipal support, my view is that, through Project
Consolidate, municipal support is bearing fruit in our municipalities. I
would just like to cite a few success stories.  For the first time in the
province, the municipalities have been in a position to submit their annual
financial statements on time to the Auditor-General. Out of those
municipalities that submitted their annual financial statements, a number
of them have received unqualified audit reports.

There has been an improvement in expenditure in terms of infrastructure
and, to a great extent, a reduction in problems relating to the billing
systems. However, the community is not informed about these things because
the media chooses to publicise the negative over the positive.

There are challenges that we must still overcome regarding these areas,
together with the provincial treasury and the Department of Provincial and
Local Government, and with other national departments. I am confident that
the remaining challenges will be overcome and that capacity-building within
municipalities will be strengthened.

We welcome the review of the White Paper on Local Government because, in
our view, we have observed that, over the past few years, there have been,
amongst other things, weaknesses in the local government system that we
need to deal with. One of these relates to issues of oversight and
accountability, that is at local government level there is no difference
between the executive and the council.

We have observed that the council plays the referee and a player at the
same time and we have already begun to pilot through some of the projects
that seek to separate the powers between the executive and the council, in
that regard. We have introduced public accounts committees in all the
municipalities in the province and, as we speak, they are undergoing
training in order to give the council the authority to exercise oversight
over the executive and its entities.

The second issue relating to the above-mentioned is the two-tier system of
local government and its relationship with municipalities in the districts
and local municipalities. I hope the review that we are talking about is
going to help us strengthen and improve certain areas that we have observed
in local government.

With regard to the White Paper on Provincial Government, this is long
overdue and we must welcome the processes that we have outlined. We must
all work within that process to bring our views to the table and this will
provide guidance as we go forward and improve our system of government,
particularly regarding Chapter 3 of the Constitution.

One of the challenges that we are faced with in the province is that of
implementing the Growth and Development Summit programmes as they have been
agreed upon, in terms of funding and capacity. The point I am emphasising
here is about integration, co-ordination and working together with a number
of important departments.
These include the Department of Trade and Industry as well as the
Department of Minerals and Energy, in talking to some of the issues that
the Growth and Development Summit requires the municipalities to deal with,
because without implementing those programmes relating to issues of local
economic development, improving people’s lives and ensuring that they
realise the benefit of this freedom, we are not going to get anywhere.

Municipalities are also faced with the issue of continuously looking for
people who are qualified local economic developers, and I think,
collectively and working with different institutions, we can overcome some
of these challenges.

Lastly, we are paying attention to the issue of deepening democracy as part
of improving public participation, and our governance model is also an
issue that we are paying attention to. However, we cannot succeed if indeed
our communities continue not to be capacitated.

Our citizenry are very weak. Regarding the lack of ability to engage the
state which is so well resourced and has skilled personnel, we are not
going to be in a position to get the benefits to our citizenry as we expect
them to access those, because their capacity to engage with us remains
weak. Of course, we have ward committees in place and we have community
development workers in place - who are not replacements for ward
councillors.

I think, in the long term, we have to find a clear mechanism of ensuring
that those CDWs support ward councillors and also enable them to do their
work on a daily basis. The CDWs should be able to mobilise all the
communities to be behind them, because some of these protests that we see
throughout the country are not about service delivery only but are also
about lack of access to information.

As a result, people are frustrated and then they take to the streets. We
must not view them in a negative light. However, to the extent that they
are keeping us on our toes, we need to accordingly respond to the issues
they raise, because some people are still living in informal settlements
and there is no clear plan outlined and communicated to the communities.

I want to thank you very much for allowing me to participate in the debate.
[Applause.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Hon Minister and Deputy Minister, hon MEC, hon members of
the NCOP and our representative of Salga, the strides we have made since
the introduction of our first democratic local government system from the
year 2000 to this day make us proud and such achievements are unprecedented
anywhere in the world. More than at any time in our history, local
government is being judged on its ability to deliver services, promote
socioeconomic development, deepen democracy and govern effectively.
When we began the long journey in the year 2000, we were cognisant of the
fact that along the way we would have to revisit some of our plans and
strategies to make sure that we remain on the right path. This we have done
without fail, as we have introduced programmes such as Project Consolidate,
the Five-Year Local Government Strategic Agenda, and interventions such as
on areas of municipal finance viability and management, and technical
capacity to support infrastructure development. These and other programmes
and interventions have all been aimed at making sure that we remain on
course.

When delivering your budget speech on 6 June in the National Assembly, hon
Minister, you gave us a road map that we must follow in making sure that we
continue with our efforts to transform local government with its financial,
technical and administrative challenges.

Our integrated developmental plans are our focal points. We fully concur
with you, hon Minister, that the IDP engagement processes have increased
community engagement and have led to the adoption of these IDPs. Through
the engagement processes in the past financial year, all municipalities in
Mpumalanga were able to adopt their IDPs on time.

The introduction of the Five-Year Local Government Strategic Agenda has
enabled us to assist municipalities to deliver on their mandate. It is also
important to state that the rolling out of this programme has set
challenges in our provinces. One of the major challenges has been the
involvement of the other sector departments. We are also glad to inform
this House that we are, certainly, overcoming this challenge. These
challenges and lessons will assist us as we push forward with the strategic
agenda.

Our municipalities continue to be faced with the problem of the exodus of
skilled personnel. This can be attributed to the brain drain and the
reaching of retirement age. These problems are worsened by the fact that it
is extremely difficult to attract skilled personnel to small
municipalities. Often, the salaries in these municipalities are not
competitive and a small town is not that attractive to skilled people.

In the past financial year, only eight experts were deployed to the
province through the Siyenza Manje Programme. Our need for these experts
continues to grow and we will be engaging both the Department of Provincial
and Local Government and the Development Bank of Southern Africa to request
more experts to assist our municipalities.

As a province, we continue to ensure that governance and public
participation are the pillars on which we build our democracy in
municipalities, in our province. To date, we have established 365 ward
committees in all our municipalities. Furthermore, we have been able to
make a positive impact with the community development workers’ programme. A
total of 360 CDWs have been employed in the past financial year and have
been deployed to municipalities.

This year, Mpumalanga has identified five flagship programmes which have
the potential to make a macro impact on the development of the province.
These programmes have been identified for special attention through
dedicated project management capacity, concentration of resources and the
provision of leadership. The flagship programmes are the Maputo Development
Corridor, the Moloto Development Corridor, the tourism industry and the
Water for All project.

The department of local government and Housing will be responsible for the
Water for All flagship programme. This flagship is aimed at accelerating
the eradication of the water infrastructure backlog affecting approximately
171 586 households, while also ensuring that we, at least, provide
universal access to water by the year 2008. While rolling out this project,
we will also be tapping into the expertise of our different sector
departments and, of course, our social partners.

Minister, we fully understand that transforming local government is a long
and arduous task, and we are in it for the long haul. We shall walk the
long walk together.

In conclusion, hon Minister we are thankful for all the information that
you are making available to us and for its distribution in our communities,
especially this innovative publication called Voice. It is lightweight, not
glossy but a heavyweight in terms of content and has all the necessary
information to make every caring resident streetwise. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Rre A L MOSEKI: Modulasetilo wa Ntlo e, Tona Sydney Mufamadi le Motlatsa-
Tona, Mme Hangana, Tona ya Lefapha la Diporofense le Pusoselegae kwa
Gauteng, badirimmogo mo Ntlong e, le baemedi ba Salga fa ba le teng,
badiredi puso kwa Lefapheng la Diporofense le Pusoselegae, a re simololeng
ka gore santlha, re le ANC, re ema tekanyetsokabo e nokeng, kwa ntle ga
maparego.

Botlhokwa jwa tekanyetsokabo e ga bo na ka mokgwa o bo ka tlhalosiwang ka
teng, ntle le gore re re maitlhomomagolo a  yona ke go netefatsa gore
dipusoselegae, batho ba ga rona mo metseng le mo ditoropong tse di
farologaneng ba bona ditirelo tse di maleba, tse di nonofileng.

Jaanong fa go na le motho yo o nang le bothata ka tekanyetsokabo e e nang
le maitlhomo a a ntseng jalo, go raya gore motho yoo, kgotsa lekoko leo le
tla bo le na le bolwetse mo tlhaloganyong.

Botlhokwa ba tekanyetsokabo e ke go lebelela kwa morago go le gonnye gore
Lefapha la Diporofense le Pusoselegae le tswa kae go fitlha fa re leng
teng. Re tswa kwa ngwageng wa 1995 kwa phethogong tsa puso [transitional
government], re fitlhele kwa 2000, re aga bommasepala, gompieno re mo go
2007, se re tshwanetseng go ikgantsa ka sona ke gore bommasepala ba re nang
le bona ga se ba tlhaolele.

Bommasepala ba re nang le bona ke bommasepala ba ba emetseng batho ba rona
botlhe mo Aforika Borwa. Bommasepala ba re nang le bona ke ba ba dirisang
ditekanyetsokabo tse re di bonang, go samagana le dikgatlhego le go
tokafatsa matshelo a batho ba ga rona. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr A L MOSEKI: Chairperson, Minister Sydney Mufamadi and the Deputy
Minister, Ms Hangana, MEC for local government in Gauteng, colleagues in
this House, Salga delegates present, and the officials of the Department of
Provincial and Local Government, I would like to start by saying, we as the
ANC support this Budget Vote without any reservations.

There is no other way of explaining the importance of this Budget Vote save
to say that its main aim is to ensure that local government, our people in
the rural areas and different urban areas receive the relevant effective
services.

Having said that, if there is any other person or political party which
does not support this type of Budget Vote based on these reasons, then that
means that person or political party is suffering from a mental disorder.

The importance of this Budget Vote is to review the progress made by the
Department of Provincial and Local Government to date. We regard 1995 as a
year in which government was in transition, while in 2000 municipalities
were established and what we are supposed to be proud of in 2007 is the
existence of nonracial municipalities.

Our municipalities are representative structures of all the people of South
Africa and they should use this budget to address the needs of the people
in order to improve their lives.]

Having said that, we also need to go back a little bit ...

... gore re re, fa lefapha le ntse le tswelela le dira phetogo eo, le go
tlhabolola, le lemogile gore go na le dikgwetlho tse di sitisang karolo ya
dipusoselegae le dipororense mabapi le thebolo ya ditirelo. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[... to say that, when the department was dealing with these developments
and improvements it realised that there are challenges that hinder progress
with regard to service delivery in some parts of the local and provincial
governments.]

The department came up with the strategic plan that is well known to all of
us, Project Consolidate. The overall objective of this strategy was to
ensure that the municipalities that lack capacity in all spheres are
assisted to ensure effective service delivery.

Fa re lebelela kwa morago go sekaseka gore [Project Consolidate] porojeke-
kgolagano e re fitlhisitse kae go fitlha jaanong, go totobetse gore mo
dimmasepaleng di le 85 tse go simolotsweng ka tsona, mathata le dikgwetlho
tse di neng di le teng di fokotsegile.

Go totobetse gore mo dimmasepaleng tse dingwe tse di neng di supilwe ke
diporefense di na le dikgwetlho tsa thebolo ya ditirelo, seemo se fetogile,
se tokafetse.

Ke tseela gore re tshwanetse iteye lefapha ka letsogo mo magetleng ka
phitlhelelo e kalokalo ya go tokafatsa matshelo a batho ba ga rona.

Morago ga go sekaseka botlhokwa jo bo dirilweng ke porojeke-kgolagano fa
lefapha le lebelela kwa pele, le re bontshitse gore sengwe gape ke
maitlhomo a togamaano a dingwaga tse tlhano [Five-year strategic agenda], a
a beetseng kwa pele mo lenaaneng dikgwetlho tsotlhe tse di supilweng fa go
ntse go tswelelwa ka porojeke-kgolagano.

Re lebeletse ditlapele tseo re le komiti. Re ile kwa diporofenseng, re
bone, re utlwile, Mme Oliphant. Re bone re utlwile - kwa diporofenseng.

Re kopane le lefapha mme re reeditse gore ba reng re be re tsaya se ba re
bolelelang sona, se ba se bitsang maitlhomo togamaano a dingwaga di le
tlhano tse di tlang, se se kaya gore strategic objectives for the next five
years, re di tshwantsha le se re se boneng le se re se utlwileng.

Re lemogile gore rona jaaka komiti le lefapha re bona dilo ka go tshwana.
Ke ka lebaka leo re reng maitlhomo a togamaano a dingwaga di le tlhano a na
le tshegetso e e tletseng ya komiti e e ikgethileng ya dipusoselegae.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[When we go back and look into what Project Consolidate has achieved so
far, it is clear that in 85 initial municipalities, the problems and
challenges which were encountered have decreased.

It is clear that the situation has improved and it is now better in other
municipalities which were identified by the provinces as ones having
challenges with service delivery.

I believe the department deserves a pat on the shoulder for that great
achievement of improving the lives of our people.
After the department had examined its way forward regarding the importance
of Project Consolidate, it showed us that another thing at the top of the
list is the Five-Year Strategic Agenda, which is identified by all the
challenges in pursuit of Project Consolidate.

As a committee we first look at those basics. I would like to say to Ms
Oliphant, we went to the provinces where we observed and had time to listen
to people’s views.

We had a meeting with the department and we seriously considered their
views about the strategic objectives in the next five years, and we
compared them with what we had gathered.

We realise that there are serious differences between the committee and the
department. That is the reason we say the Five-Year Strategic Agenda has
the full support of the local government committee.]

Having said all these things, we also want to say it is very clear ...

... gore dilo tse lefaphapa le di beileng kwa pele, ke dintlha tse di ntse
di tlhagiswa gangwe le gape, go tswa mo puong ya pulo ya Palamente ya
Moporesidente go simolola ka 2004-05 go fitlha jaanong.

Dingwe tsa dikgwetlho tse di ntseng di bonagala ke go aga bokgoni kwa
dimmasepaleng. E seng fela kwa botsamaising, e seng bokgoni fela jwa
bokgoni jo bo tlhaelang, gonne go le gantsi o fitlhela boradipolotiki ba
thulana le badiredi puso kwa pusoselegaeng. Jaanong go tshwanetse go nna le
bokgoni jo bo feletseng mo botsamaising le mo polotiking. (Translation of
Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[... that the things that are the department’s priorities, are the issues
that have been raised now and again by the President in his state of the
nation address speeches starting from 2004-05 until now.

One of the noticeable challenges is to instil skills in municipalities, and
not just in management or in scarce skills, because in most cases you’ll
find politicians fighting with the public servants at local government
level. Therefore, there must be good skills in management and in politics.]

Once again, on behalf of my chairperson and the team, I would like to say
that the select committee supports the department on these future plans
that have been developed.

Having said that, I want to conclude ...

... ka gore 16 Seetebosigo ke letsatsi le le botlhokwa thata mo nageng ya
rona. Letsatsi le la 16 Seetebosigo le thusitse gore gompieno re be rena le
baeteledipele ba  ba eteletseng naga e pele, ba ba tlhagisitsweng ke nako
tse di ntseng jalo.

Re rata go akgola baša bao, ba bangwe ba na le rona ka fa, ba bangwe ba
rometswe kwa mafelong a a farologaneng. Re rata gape gore lefapha ka kemo
nokeng ya rona le ba bangwe, le tla bona kemonokeng e e maleba gore re
tlhabolole baša ba naga e, gore ba kgone go re etelela pele fa rona re
setse re lapile. Ke a leboga, Modulasetilo.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[ ... by saying that June 16 is an important day in our country. This day
contributed in producing current leaders of this country.

We would like to congratulate some of the youth who are with us today and
some who are deployed in different places. We would also like to assure the
department of our support and that of others who nurture the youth of this
country so that they will be able to lead us when we retire. Thank you.]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Chairperson, hon
members, on behalf of the Ministry and the department, allow me to thank
all the hon members who participated in this policy debate, especially for
the numerous observations and suggestions that they made in the course of
their participation.
A special word of thanks goes to the chairperson and members of the select
committee for all the support that they have given to the department and
the Ministry, and indeed for the work that they have done in the provinces
as well as in their municipalities.

Ningadinwa nangomso. [Thanks for your efforts.]

Na matshelo zwi ḓi ralo. [Please do it again.]

The great deal of advice that was given here will indeed be followed up.
The hon chairperson of the select committee drew our attention to the fact
that participation by members of the executive in the business of this
House is diminishing somewhat. I really wish to undertake that, as the
Ministry, we will make sure that this matter is discussed in the MinMec
meetings. We will communicate with our colleagues and make sure that the
matter is also discussed in the President’s Co-ordinating Council so that
the necessary remedial steps can be taken.

The hon Mr P C McKenzie informed the House that there is some confusion in
some municipalities about the role that municipalities are expected to play
in carrying out the disaster management function.

We will also be happy to get an indication as to which of our
municipalities are confused about this, because the Disaster Management Act
actually places district municipalities and metropolitan municipalities at
the spearhead of this process of disaster prevention and disaster
management. So, we need more information to share amongst ourselves so that
we can take steps to correct this problem.

Also, if we start listening to one another and behaving like functional
adults, and stop howling, we will be able to know what it is that we need
to do together.

The hon Fielding suggested that what we did in Oudtsthoorn is something we
need to do in all the municipalities. We have come up with the idea of
mainstreaming what we are doing, in terms of Project Consolidate, which is
something that was being done in targeted, select municipalities.

We need to make sure that we develop the capacity, particularly at
provincial and national government levels - and even at district level – as
well as provide ongoing support in order to make it unnecessary for
interventions of the kind that are made in terms of section 139. We can
prevent dysfunctionality by making sure that you are proactive in the
provision of support.

I must say that many suggestions that were made belong, appropriately, to
the White Paper processes that we spoke about. So, the participation of
this House, particularly in the White Paper processes, that is both the
review of local government White Paper and the introduction of the White
Paper on provincial government, can’t be overemphasised. We also can’t
overemphasise the need to improve the capacity of the House as an oversight
body and in actively generating greater levels of mass participation in
matters of government.

I was slightly taken aback that the hon Mr Mzizi’s input ended rather
abruptly. After he had said that it was not enough to say that the national
department only plays a policy role, he was not able, within the time
allocated to him, to tell us who says that the department must only play a
policy role. Certainly, it is not us; he was probably debating with someone
who is not in this House.

As far as we know, we have, as the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, actively sought to provide hands-on support to the
municipalities. We have also gone out of our way to mobilise other sector
departments, provincial departments and private sector organisations to
come on board and play a role in helping to support municipalities.

In February 2005 there was a backlog of 262 000 buckets, and now, on 31
May, the buckets backlog stands at 105 000. All this happened with the
active participation of the department and other departments, such as the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.

So, it is clear that hon Mzizi will do himself a favour if, during the
recess period, he pays a visit to the MEC for local government in Gauteng,
because she can share this information with him. It’s important that, as a
member of this esteemed House, you become a bit more informed than you seem
to be. Thank you very much for all the support you have given to the
department and the Ministry. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you very much, hon Minister.


Ngifuna ukuthatha leli thuba ngibonge uNgqongqoshe nePhini lakhe kanye
noMnyango, ngibonge uNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe saseGauteng kanye nezithunywa
eziyisipesheli ngokubamba iqhaza kule nkulumompikiswano ekade ikhona.

Siyile Ndlu, sisazoqhubeka nePhini lakho Ngqongqoshe. Singajabula uma
ningahlala nathi kodwa-ke kuzoya ngokuthi ithuba ninalo yini. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister, his Deputy as
well as the department, the Gauteng MEC and the special delegates for
taking part in the debate that we had.

Minister, this House will proceed with your Deputy. We would have liked you
to stay with us, but it will depend on whether you have time or not.]

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES PROVINCIAL WEEK OF
                              14 TO 18 MAY 2007

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: House Chairperson, Minister and Deputy
Minister who have already departed, hon members and our special delegates,
and in particular, the Speaker from the Northern Cape, I must apologise in
advance for the wrongly spelt surname on the speakers’ list.
[Interjections.]

Mr Watson, if you will behave and listen, you will hear that 40 years ago
the departed hero of our people and a great son of Africa, Chief Albert
John Mvumbi Luthuli said, and I quote:


   As part of the efforts to liberate ourselves from apartheid and
   colonialism, both physically and mentally, we have to engage in the
   process of telling the truth about the history and conditions of our
   country, so that all our people, armed with this truth, can confidently
   face the challenges of this day and the next, with the hope that their
   lives are destined to be better.

It is this philosophy of one of the greatest leaders of our country and a
gallant servant of our people that compels us to narrate the story of our
people and the conditions that they are facing, without reprieve. Today, we
convene to witness, yet again, the thorough entrenchment of this noble
fallen leader of our people, and to say we must tell the story of our
people and their needs without reprieve.

Indeed, as a Council that has made it our sole responsibility to give voice
to the needs of our country's provinces and its people, we can take pride
that, since the establishment of our Council in 1997, we have established
numerous innovative mechanisms to achieve all facets of our mandate, and to
give life to the quest of leaders of our movement such as Chief Albert
Luthuli, Moses Kotane, Moses Mabhida, Oliver Reginald Tambo, Dr A B Xuma,
Walter Sisulu and many more.

Since its inception, the provincial week has proved to be a success in
giving our Council information on the progress that our provinces and
municipalities are making in delivering quality and efficient services to
our people. The provincial week is one of the initiatives which provide a
forum for the exchange and sharing of ideas by both permanent delegates to
the NCOP and provinces on service delivery issues and challenges that are
confronting the provinces in fulfilling their constitutional mandates to
deliver quality and efficient services to the people.

Our Council embarked on yet another successful provincial week where all
our permanent delegates, during the week of 14 to 18 May 2007, went to
their respective provinces. The theme that we chose for that particular
week was: Addressing challenges for effective and sustainable service
delivery to our people.

We chose this theme out of the commitment that we made in our Programme
2009, which obligates us to broaden the scope of participation by
provincial and local governments in shaping the national agenda. This theme
was also intended to highlight challenges that our provinces and
municipalities are facing in meeting their constitutional mandate,
particularly in ensuring that the people of South Africa are given access
to quality and efficient services.

If one glances through the provincial reports we received after that week,
one will get the impression that many of our communities have access to
basic services such as clean water, housing and electricity. We have also
noted that a number of the projects are intended to put into practice our
government’s commitment to ensure that by the end of this year the
appalling remnant of the apartheid bucket system is eradicated.

We must also say that, while there are all the overall, general successes,
there are still challenges. For instance, in the case of health care, we
have seen, as we go through some of the provincial visits, that some of the
clinics are not well resourced in terms of medical personnel, essential
equipment and medicine, etc.

Touching on the issue of community safety, we have said our people must get
involved in the fight against crime through the community police forums.
However, these forums will remain in their offices if they are not provided
with the necessary support from the communities which they are supposed to
serve. Furthermore, it is also necessary that the relevant department
provides the necessary resources to all those volunteers who are part of
the fight against the scourge of crime.

We also want to call on the Department of Safety and Security to ensure
that everyone who uses vehicles has a proper licence and uses them for
their intended purposes. It is completely unacceptable that in one region,
as we read in the report of Gauteng, the Government Garage receives 300
damaged vehicles per month. That translates into 3 600 damaged vehicles per
year. [Interjections.]

During our visit to Mpumalanga, we also went to one police station at
Vaalbank. In a matter of three months, three vehicles had been overturned.
You can just imagine what would happen if the department keeps on
functioning without ensuring that those vehicles are used by people with
the necessary advanced and defensive driving skills. You cannot expect an
inexperienced police officer to be chasing, for instance, criminals who
have some years of driving experience, which are necessary in terms of
dealing with hijacking, etc.

We also looked at the issue of access to water and electricity. Of course,
hon Chairperson, you will also agree that this debate will, in a way,
relate to some of the issues which have been raised here before. That is
why we, as the Whippery, decided that it should coincide with the debate on
the Department of Provincial and Local Government. Unfortunately, the
Minister could not stay, as you requested, owing to other commitments.

Looking at the issue of access to water and electricity, we have noted that
some of the municipalities have already started providing free basic
services. However, when one looks at the rural municipalities, one sees
that it is still quite a challenge to implement the indigent policies. It
will require us, as permanent delegates in this House, to engage with the
national departments which should serve as the backbone in institutional
support regarding those areas of need.

The same will apply to access to housing. We have a situation where we want
to put it categorically that we will not tolerate a situation such as the
one that our delegates witnessed in areas such as Ndokwenza, Kenton-on-Sea
and Alexandria housing projects in the Eastern Cape that have been stalled
due to reasons such as noncompliance with agreed terms by developers, and
in other instances developers leaving projects unfinished.

There are also allegations of corruption in the allocation of houses and
shortages of funds in that regard. It is something that we need to take up
and deal with constructively with the relevant departments. We need
feedback that can result in the tangible delivery of goods to the affected
communities, because we cannot afford a situation where we, as the NCOP, go
to all those communities and have a hit-and-run kind of visit. That is why
we decided to say, as we go to this upcoming provincial week, “We need to
ensure that we follow up on those areas that we have visited, to ensure
that there is progress as far as that is concerned.”

There is also one issue I want to raise, in terms of the national
democratic revolution: We want to attain a nonracial democratic South
Africa. However, we cannot have that nonracial democratic South Africa when
people, in terms of spatial settlement, are still being housed in different
areas.

We are calling upon our municipalities to embark upon very aggressive and
vigorous programmes to ensure that municipalities spend whatever money is
necessary to ensure that there is affordable land and that there is
affordable block housing for people who have been settled far away, in the
townships and the bundus so that they can live where they also sacrifice
their labour. We cannot continue in perpetuity where people use buses and
trains to go and deliver their labour in the CBDs, and, come sunset, they
have to go back only to sleep in the townships and come back again to
donate their labour in the CBDs, which are still not nonracial.

With regard to the preparations for the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup, I think
the general idea that we get through our provincial delegation’s reports is
that all the provinces are really moving ahead, as has also been confirmed
by the President of Fifa, Sepp Blatter, who said, in very strong and
emphatic words, that we, as a country, must not be discouraged, because
those who are criticising us are actually jealous of the good work we are
doing. According to Fifa there is no other alternative except South Africa,
regarding 2010. [Interjections.] Thank you very much for saying, “Viva,
South Africa,” hon Watson.

In conclusion, let me convey our sincere gratitude to the leaders of our
provinces who continue to guide the preparation and execution of the
provincial week. Many of them could not hold back their appreciation for
the entrenchment of the provincial week as one of the important mechanisms
for our Council to solicit provincial interest. Amongst these were the
various Premiers, Speakers and MECs who requested that we look at expanding
the provincial week visits from two a year to at least four.

The provincial week not only gave our hon members the opportunity to
interact with their provincial leaders, but they also visited various
communities in order to get first-hand information. We will encourage those
provinces which did not have public meetings with the various communities
to look into that aspect as we go to the next provincial week from 13 to 17
August.

We also need to take note that the African Peer Review Mechanism process,
through the reports of eminent persons, has acknowledged that the work of
our Council continues to light a candle of hope for our people that their
needs and challenges will be represented in the national sphere. Indeed,
our people find solace in the hope and knowledge that when our Council
visits them, their situation can only change for the better.

Let us all roll up our sleeves to ensure that the conditions of our people
and the challenges that they raised are addressed so that they can
confidently face tomorrow in the hope that their lives are indeed destined
to improve. Let us put our shoulders to the wheel and be hard at work to
ensure that the critically important messages that our people in the
provinces convey to us are heard, and that proper mechanisms are put in
place to address their plight. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C SEOPOSENGWE (Northern Cape): Chairperson, hon Chief Whip, thanks for
correcting my name. I am really humbled to be afforded the opportunity to
stand at this podium this afternoon. [Laughter.]

It was in 1934 that Chairman Mao Tse-Tung wrote:


   A dangerous tendency has shown itself of late among many of our personnel
   - an unwillingness to share the joys and hardships of the masses, a
   concern for personal fame and gain. This is very bad. One way of
   overcoming it is to simplify our organisations in the course of our
   campaign to increase production and practise economy, and to transfer
   cadres to lower levels so that a considerable number will return to
   productive work.

As a legislature and a country, for the past 13 years we have embarked on a
process to simplify our structures in order to increase the level of
participation of our people, particularly women and rural communities, in
the activities of the legislature towards building a better life for all.
We have done this to guard against what I have mentioned above and also to
give meaning to the spirit of June 26, when we declared that the people
shall govern.

The NCOP provincial week in the Northern Cape and many other forums give us
an opportunity as public representatives to engage directly with our
leaders, the voters and taxpayers to test whether public participation
mechanisms - which we implement to broaden public participation - are
effective or not.

I think that it is only the ANC-led government which can have such
visionary leadership of going to all corners of our country, all the time,
to the extent that the opposition behaves like peacetime heroes in this
House. [Laughter.] It’s our responsibility to simplify our work, mode of
operation and institutions that we control. This will assist us to avoid
the dangerous tendency that Chairman Mao identified in 1934, and will also
build public confidence in the work and activities of the legislature and
government.

The NCOP provincial week or any other public participation programme gives
the NCOP and legislatures an opportunity to build a people’s government and
listen to the people’s voice. That gives the committees an opportunity to
engage in practical oversight and public participation. Reports that we
generate from these activities will ensure executive accountability to an
informed NCOP and legislature.

Through the NCOP provincial week in the Northern Cape, in particular
Pampierstad and Kgalagadi – former North West areas - the delegation from
the NCOP was afforded an opportunity to engage with a number of
stakeholders, among others the Premier of the province, provincial
leadership, local government and communities in those areas.
The Premier of the Northern Cape informed the delegates that our province
is rich in natural resources, yet its citizens are very poor. I think most
of the riches go to somewhere in Gauteng and elsewhere in the country. The
Premier informed the delegation that the provincial government was
implementing projects to turn things around for the better. The projects
are part of the provincial growth and development strategy.

The following projects have been identified, among others, to develop the
economy of the province: the State Diamond Trader, which I think has been
talked about and we are very happy that the Minister has made some
announcements regarding that; the revitalisation of the railway line in the
province; an iron-ore smelter factory - and I think this is also very
popular with the “Gautengers”; and infrastructure development and capacity-
building in municipalities.

The following challenges were identified by the provincial and local
government regarding two municipalities in Kgalagadi, Phokwane and local
communities. I’m happy that I’ve been listening to the presentation by the
Minister but I think it is very important that we must raise some of these
issues. Those challenges are: a shortage of office space to provide basic
services; overcrowding in schools - some schools are in a very bad
condition; the demarcation process, which has moved communities further
away from service points; lack of transport for learners; the quality of
RDP houses that is not up to standard; lack of ablution facilities; the
housing backlog and privatisation of water.

The rest of the community of Pampierstad wants the demarcation board to
revisit its decision, because there is so much serious tension. There is
tension to the extent that you find people living in the same street but
one side is in North West and the other side is in the Northern Cape. One
has a situation where a house is in the Northern Cape but the toilet is in
the North West. [Applause.]

These conditions are not unique to our province or our continent. The
challenges identified by stakeholders in the process of engagement with the
delegation from the NCOP and legislature are a direct challenge to us, as
elected public representatives and lawmakers.

Chief Whip, next time I would ask for more minutes, because I think we are
the most underprivileged province, as the Northern Cape. It is a challenge
because we make and approve laws. Therefore, we must ensure that the laws
we make benefit our people.

The delegation, in consultation with the provincial legislature, made a
number of recommendations to deal with some of the areas of concern
identified by the stakeholders and our own observation. The first one is
the audit of all buildings belonging to the Department of Public Works, for
example Phokwane Municipality. The second one is that the Department of
Land Affairs needs to speed up the title deeds.

Thirdly, Eskom and Sedibeng Water Board must work closely with
municipalities. We still have a very serious problem as far as Eskom is
concerned and I think the MEC from Gauteng has alluded to that as well.
Fourthly, the National Treasury must allocate funds immediately to revamp
schools, and other requirements are captured in the provincial week report.
These recommendations give us a clear mandate, which must be implemented
without fear or favour.

We must decide what is going to be done with the recommendations. I think
it’s within our means to ensure that those responsible for implementing
these recommendations do so within a reasonable time. The Constitution
empowers us to ensure that they implement these minimum recommendations.
The implementation of these recommendations will take us closer to the
achievement of the millennium goals.

I hope the consideration of this report by the NCOP will assist our
movement forward to ensure that the hope for a better life becomes a
reality. As the Speaker of the Northern Cape legislature, I would like to
take this opportunity to appeal to the NCOP to give us the necessary
support to ensure that the recommendations, as outlined in the report,
become a reality.

The House can also assist us through lobbying of relevant stakeholders and
ensuring that legislation passed through this House meets our needs. A
special appeal is that the Minister of Defence is lobbied to build a
demolition plant in the Northern Cape, which I think will improve the GDP
contribution. I think hon Fielding wanted to raise that issue but regarding
the manner in which he presented it, he really behaved like a real
peacetime hero. [Interjections.]

Chairperson, it is fitting that the NCOP is taking the lead in public
participation towards a better life, for it’s the legislature that is a
custodian of our freedom and democracy, and it is the legislature that must
hold the executive to account in order to change society for the better.
It’s us that must ask the searching questions and ensure that government
fulfils its mandate of delivery to the people to build the better life that
we promised in 1994.

I remain confident that, with the support of the NCOP, the Northern Cape
legislature will ensure that the flag of freedom as the torch of democracy
flies higher and burns brighter over our province and our land. The
implementation of the recommendations will build public confidence in the
work of the legislature and members.

The NCOP provincial week has drawn citizens directly into policy debates.
We have learnt, through public participation, that we have a vocal and
questioning citizenry, supported by informed organs of civil society.
I think the Chief Whip also alluded to the fact that we need to have more
time to engage with our people, especially in terms of reporting back. We
shouldn’t wait too long before we report back to the people we’ve been
interacting with.

I also need to draw your attention to the problem of infrastructure in our
areas such as Hartswater, Jan Kempdorp and Pampierstad. The infrastructure
needs to be revamped but this is being hampered by limited financial
resources.

People living on formalised sites were given proper sanitation facilities.
However, some people are still using the bucket system, particularly where
the municipalities are still busy formalising the areas. We are just
emphasising this. I heard the Minister and the Deputy Minister saying they
know exactly where the backlog is, but I’m just ensuring that I emphasise
that aspect.

Although the Sedibeng Water Board supplies water to the community, the
municipality remains the authority responsible for water. The municipality
wants to take over the water provision function but it has a debt of R15
million owed to Sedibeng Water. Because of the debt, the municipality is
unable to take over this function.

Eskom is the service provider in the area and they require that 80% of
houses must be occupied before they supply electricity and, unfortunately,
it’s the poorest of the poor who are affected in that regard. The community
in Bonita Park will have electricity provided by the end of June, with the
municipality being the sole service provider.

The North West province did not have a transport policy for learners who
have to walk to schools. The Northern Cape has put out tenders for
transporting learners from Kgalagadi, and this should be finalised soon.
The hospital in the area is falling apart and, to a large extent, is
nonoperational. There has been a mushrooming of low-cost housing next to
Mothibistad but these houses are not up to standard. There are also no
services in the area, for example there are no streets and no electricity
supply.

I think these are the issues we wanted to raise before this House. Other
concerns are that the nurses that serve in the hospital at Pampierstad ...
[Time expired.] Thank you very much. Long live the NCOP! [Applause.]

Mr T S RALANE: Chairperson, I am going to donate four minutes to the
Speaker of the Northern Cape. As a delegation, we focused on bucket
eradication in the Free State province and the mayors that we met are the
following: acting Mayor of Mangaung; mayors of Matjhabeng, Lejweleputswa,
Setsoto and Mantsopa. The entities that we interacted with are the
following: the department of local government and housing, the department
of water affairs and forestry, Bloem Water Board, Sedibeng Water Board and
Eskom. We also visited some places where we were able to see developers at
work.

We made the following observations: Firstly, we observed that there was a
problem regarding unreliable projections. We think that that is a big
problem. Already, the department is projecting that it needs R400 million
to do all of this work and, as a delegation, we did raise the fact that we
had reservations about that issue. It is something sucked out of their
thumbs, and part of the problem is that some of the municipalities, whilst
they need money now, have put some money in investment portfolios, which is
a very big problem. This is why we are saying the projections are not
realistic.

Secondly, there seemed to be confusion in terms of the definition and the
areas of focus. Therefore, where would you start implementing bucket
eradication? There is again a problem in terms of the projections because
people are focusing on the wrong places and that is another area we picked
up on, as an observation.

Here are the challenges: There was non-acceptance of what is called the VIP
toilet system, and Mr Setona was very passionate about this one, just in
terms of norms and standards. The second problem related to issues of
popular participation, that is: How do municipalities talk to communities
to the extent that they can be persuaded to accept these VIP toilets?
The problem there is that you have areas which are separated by a road - on
one side they have a water-borne sewerage system and on the other side they
have VIPs. That is a problem that we picked up. The shortage of bulk water
supply was also a problem that was identified. Unavailability of land for
the construction of oxidation ponds also came up as an issue.

It was also mentioned that service providers were doing poor work. The
shortage of building materials was identified. Natural causes - in other
words, rock formations – were also identified as something creating
problems. It looked like some of the projects were going to be finished
much later. Also, it was becoming much more expensive, and the equipment
had problems, in terms of excavations.

You also have lengthy decision-making processes by municipalities, which
was a huge problem. Problems with contractors who stop working due to
nonpayment were mentioned. The acquisition of land was again found to be
problematic, owing to long and protracted environmental impact assessment
processes.

There was also a delay in procurement processes by the municipalities; lack
of capacity within the project management units; and lack of prioritisation
of counter-funding. In other words, municipalities regard these things as
national programmes and projects and therefore do not budget for and
prioritise them. That was another big problem in the places we visited.
Our own recommendation is that we must, as members of that delegation and
the NCOP, constantly and consistently monitor and evaluate the work on an
ongoing basis. Thank you very much for the attention. [Applause.]

Nk L F SHABALALA (KwaZulu-Natali): Sihlalo neNdlu ehloniphekile, ngifisa
ukubonga le Ndlu ngokuthi ibe yiphela endlebeni ekulandeleni ukuthi
isabiwomali sisebenza kahle, nokuthi izimali aziphindiselwa emuva
zingasebenzile kodwa kube kusilelwe emuva nengqalasizinga.

Ngaphansi kohla lwezinjongo, udaba lwezinhlelo ezehlukene zeMinyango
olubhekele ukulwisana nesifo seNgculazi luseyinselelo enkulu. IMinyango
yakithi ayikabhukuli ngokwanele. Yilokho-ke esakuthola ngenkathi sixoxisana
neMinyango. Mhlawumbe kubalulekile ukuthi sibheke ukuthi ibekelwa kumuphi
uMnyango, noma kulowo obhekele ukulingana ngokobulili nokwabelana
ngamandla. Okucacayo njengamanje ukuthi nguMnyango Wezempilo kuphela
olandela kahle ezinhlelweni, ekubeni isabiwomali sikhona kuyo yonke
iMinyango.

Ngizokhuluma-ke ikakhulukazi ngokwemibiko, ngokukahulumeni wasekhaya.
Kuyacaca ukuthi amehlo omhlaba nomphakathi abheke udaba luka-2010
olungundabamlonyeni kulezi zinsuku. Lokho kwenza kubalululeke ukuthi
uMnyango Wezohulumeni Bezifundazwe Nabasemakhaya ungenelele ekuhlelweni
kokwakhiwa kwezinkundla ngesivinini esifanele, ukugwema ukwanda kwezindleko
zokwakha lezi zinkundla. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)
[Ms L F SHABALALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson and the august House, I
would like to thank this House for being a thorn in the flesh in ensuring
that the budget is used appropriately and that money is not returned unused
while we have backlogs in infrastructure development.

In the list of objectives, the issue of the different programmes of the
department aimed at fighting Aids is still a big challenge. Our departments
are not working hard enough. That is what we discovered when we had
discussions with the departments. Maybe it is important to check which
department has been allocated this money, or whether it has been allocated
to the person who is in charge of gender equality and power-sharing. What
is clear right now is that it is only the Department of Health that is on
track, although all departments have budgets.

I will talk particularly about reports on local government. It is clear
that the eyes of the world and the community are focused on the issue of
2010, which is dominating the news these days. This makes it important that
the Department of Provincial and Local Government should intervene in the
co-ordination of the building of stadiums according to schedule in order to
avoid additional costs.]

We have a huge challenge in monitoring the delivery backlog, given the fact
that 2,7 million people, as reported by the local government MEC, out of
10,2 million in our province, are without access to clean water and
sanitation. The fact that the department reported that R3,2 billion is
needed to meet this backlog completely demands radical and sharper
oversight activities, against the contradictory delivery indications where
you find that, at this crucial moment, other departments and local
municipalities will underspend or appeal for roll-overs.

One of the shocking realities is the challenge facing KwaZulu-Natal,
regarding an estimated 609 slums, with 440 of them being in Durban alone.
This is an indication of how socioeconomic history will perpetually shape
our future budgets. How Durban has sheltered and shielded migrant workers
from rural areas is amazing, but it has financial constraints.

The response to and updates on guidelines on free basic electricity as
developed and workshopped with municipalities is a great milestone.
Equally, concerning free basic water, implementation by the municipalities
should be through a uniform approach. For instance, there are
municipalities that provide blanket free basic water. We should monitor how
policies talk to each other, and in this instance I am talking about the
indigent policy.

Capacity-building was a question that was a concern that came from
permanent delegates and was posed to the local government. Capacity-
building and the role of the department as raised by our delegates was very
crucial. Some municipalities had failed to spend the municipal
infrastructure grant and that reflects negatively on the department of
local government. We all agreed that this has constitutional constraints,
because the transaction is between the local municipalities but it does not
prevent an interventionist approach by the provincial government.

On public hearings, it was a pleasure for the permanent delegates to be
part of us as a team that went out to the remote rural areas. Regarding
public participation with the people of Umsinga, this exercise is our
political responsibility. It is not by grace. Meeting the youth and women
as well as communities around Umsinga was a sad reminder of the historical
past, how our socioeconomic fibre was destroyed by colonisation and the
apartheid system. It served as a wake-up call to deal with the fact that,
as our President once mentioned in the past, we are two nations.

Other youth in other sections of our communities are worried as to what is
the best international university they can study at. The youth at Umsinga
don’t know about this privilege. All they are crying for is a little thing
- they want to be afforded a recreation centre or just a simple sports
facility. To be on the road in Umsinga was a strenuous drive, due to the
topography of the area and the state of the tarred roads, which are full of
potholes.

Basic services, in terms of water and electricity, are a strange, far-
fetched reality in that community. Access to economic opportunities by the
youth is a wild dream, for what they know is through reading the newspaper,
for instance reading about the Umsobomvu Youth Fund. Home Affairs was one
of the services not accessible to the communities. Two staff members were
servicing the huge community of Umsinga. This works against our commitment
to a better life.

In today’s Mercury - I had the privilege to get a newspaper when I was on
the flight - there is a sad story about a young 24-year-old girl from
Umzumbe who completed her Grade 12 in 1998 but, since that time, she has
failed to get her ID. For two years, she has been taking transport up and
down to the offices. The last straw was after she had applied for the
second time. When she went back to collect the ID, she was told that it had
been posted but nobody could tell her where it had been posted to.

She had to go around all the offices and nobody knew where her ID had been
sent to. What she did was hang herself. She committed suicide and left her
three-year-old daughter. She left a suicide note. She cited her shattered
dream of being employable and her frustrations about being asked to produce
an ID wherever she went.

I wish to thank the NCOP, including you Chairperson, for being the foot
soldiers who are continuously committed to the contract we have with the
people of South Africa, that we have a mandate to make their lives better
and better. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr S MOTIMELE (Limpopo): Modulasetulo, rena ba Limpopo re leboga
monyetlanyana wo o re filego wona gore le rena re lahlele la bošiwana.
[Chairperson, we, the people of Limpopo, are grateful for the opportunity
you have given us to participate in this debate.]

I must say from the onset that though my colleague, the hon Pilusa
Motsoane, and I were not part of the delegation that visited the various
projects in Limpopo, we assure you that that will not serve as an excuse
not to talk to the issues that were raised in the report about the NCOP
visits to the provinces that was made available to us.

We welcome the objectives as set down by the NCOP for visiting provinces,
especially regarding the challenges facing the projects in the provinces.
We believe that these challenges are the building blocks towards coming up
with a successful service delivery programme, not only for Limpopo but also
for all the provinces. The other objective is that of getting feedback from
the communities as to whether service delivery is satisfactory.

As the ANC-led government, we say we seek to make life better for all. And
if we are really serious about that, we must, from time to time, go to the
constituencies and get feedback as to whether the lives of our people are
indeed getting better and better.

We are, however, disturbed by the unavailability, for one reason or
another, and the lack of co-operation from some of the stakeholders who
were invited to the meetings of the NCOP. In the report, there is a
suggestion that this report should be debated in the provincial
legislature. We promise you that we will ensure that this report is debated
in the provincial legislature, so that this question of unavailability for
one reason or another and lack of co-operation should be nipped in the bud.
[Applause.]

I must say that we commend the NCOP for visiting our border with Zimbabwe –
Beit Bridge. It is very good for the NCOP to realise that Limpopo is a
gateway to Africa. Beit Bridge is not the only gateway to Africa, there are
also gateways to Botswana and Mozambique, and Polokwane International
Airport is also a gateway to Africa.

This is important, because the matter of border posts impacts on
international relations, national security and our provincial growth and
development strategy. Inasmuch as we will ensure that there is co-operation
and availability of people who are invited, we will make a follow-up on
issues that were raised regarding that border visit.

We must also commend the strides that have been made by the Mogalakwena
Municipality together with Potgietersrus Platinum Limited, especially on
the issue of social responsibility. I’m sure we are all aware that social
responsibility is one of the principles of corporate governance, according
to the King II report. We are, however, disturbed.

In the report, we didn’t see any commitment from the mines as to their
environmental management strategy, despite the fact that communities
complained about pollution. Therefore, I want to say that in this era of
climate change, the issue of pollution is very serious. I understand that
in the recent G8 meetings, the biggest polluters, such as America, who were
very much reluctant to be part of the Kyoto Protocol, changed their mind.
So, the sooner we have the mines committing themselves to that kind of
strategy, the better.

I think all other issues that were raised in the report are known.
Therefore we should say to the NCOP: We are going to make a follow-up. We
promise you full co-operation and you must keep up the good work, and come
back again. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon Speaker of the Northern Cape
legislature, as members of this august House, we were fortunate to embark
on the provincial week programme almost immediately after our successful
Intergovernmental Relations Summit. We were therefore presented with a very
exciting opportunity to consolidate those gains and live up to our
utterances made and resolutions taken at the summit.
The Premier of Mpumalanga, hon T S P Makwetla, commended this Council for
the insightful summit. He indicated that, although the NCOP has a limited
number of members it has proved its ability to meet its constitutional
mandate. He further stated that a member of the NA represents about 50 000
people whilst a member of the NCOP represents about 300 000 people.

We in Mpumalanga have also suggested that an ad hoc committee be
established that will facilitate the participation of permanent delegates
in the state of the nation address. With regard to governance issues, we
further discussed that, in order to deepen interaction with our
legislature, an ad hoc committee will be formed to correlate measures that
need to be thrashed out to ensure a smooth working relationship between the
permanent delegates and the legislature.

To start with, the Rules and Orders of the legislature will be reviewed to
enhance active participation of permanent delegates in the activities of
the legislature, as provided for in section 113 of the Constitution. Just
to refresh our minds, that section of the Constitution allows members to
participate in all activities of the legislature, except voting.

With regard to service delivery issues, we focus on Mpumalanga as being
renowned for having the big five of the animal kingdom. We have them in
abundance. However, the province now also has the “big five” flagship
projects. These are the Maputo Development Corridor, the Moloto Corridor,
tourism, heritage and Water for All. These flagship projects will enable
Mpumalanga to accelerate the realisation of a better life for all by
exploring and exploiting our natural resources and combine these with other
resources to enhance economic activities and thereby defeat poverty.

On budgetary issues, the interaction with the MEC for local government and
housing as well as with one municipality has indicated that some
considerable work needs to be done if the current quality of our IDP is to
inform allocation and guide development in our communities.

The abolition of the cross-boundary municipalities brought, in the
Bohlabela district from Limpopo, with it infrastructural challenges.
Although some adjustments, through the Division of Revenue Act, have been
made, the legislature still feels that the Financial and Fiscal Commission
should re-examine this matter so that provinces are adequately resourced
for the additional responsibilities.

This issue was addressed extensively during the briefing for the Division
of Revenue Bill. However, the province persists in calling for further
assessment of the allocation. We also take note of the presentation by the
Minister for Provincial and Local Government concerning this matter, this
afternoon.
With regard to educational matters, the two schools visited reflected
challenges emanating from the legacy of apartheid. We also noted that the
social partners of the school – the school governing body and the private
sector – were not coming to the party as required. Regarding our effort to
involve everybody in educational matters, there is a slogan in Mpumalanga
that says: We are making the education enterprise everybody’s business!

In one of the schools there were complaints that it seemed there were
regional offices that arranged workshops during school hours and therefore
disrupted the functioning of the school. In one school we noted that it was
an FET institution but there were no visible signs to that effect, either
in their curriculum or in any infrastructure. In our report back to this
school we will have to tell them how much of the billions allocated to the
FET institutions will be received in that area.

We also visited a typical rural municipality, which had no real source of
revenue. Though its councillors showed some commitment to their
responsibilities, they also highlighted that some of the IDP reliability
was very doubtful, as not all stakeholders participate during the IDP
process, particularly the sector departments in the province. However, we
were relieved to note that the MEC for local government and housing had
said that no project would be undertaken in a municipality if that project
did not appear in the IDP of the said municipality.
We also visited the sports stadium that will host the Fifa 2010 Soccer
World Cup. We were accompanied by the MEC for arts, culture and sport as
well as the mayor. We were told that work was well ahead of schedule.
Although the first challenge was that the site highlighted to us was a
school, this challenge was well managed. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, the Speaker has gone, hon Members of
Parliament, special delegates, ladies and gentlemen, I heard a very nice
phrase here today, “peacetime heroes”. And I want to say to the peacetime
comrades: Welcome. [Laughter.]

The signing of the 1996 Constitution established the NCOP to advocate
provincial and local government issues to be placed on the national agenda.
In order to elicit provincial interest and to ensure that provincial
delegates to the NCOP are kept abreast with developments, the NCOP embarked
upon programmes such as provincial week and Taking Parliament to the
People.

The interaction between the NCOP and provincial legislatures is further
entrenched through the principles of co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations. The provincial week provides a forum for the
exchange and sharing of ideas on progress that has been made around service
delivery and the challenges confronting the provinces in fulfilling their
mandate.

We recall that Programme 2009 puts emphasis on provincial legislatures and
municipalities to participate in national programmes of Parliament. It
further states that the NCOP will be spending 70% of its time on oversight
and the remaining 30% on considering legislation in order to strengthen the
use and importance of the provincial week. I think all of us will have to
keep our coffers all packed in order to get the 70% in; it’s going to be
quite a challenge.

During provincial weeks, we in the Western Cape followed a framework that
included meetings with provincial political leadership, interaction with
the executive and departments, oversight visits and overall briefings and
assessment meetings with provincial leadership to identify issues for
intervention. I must say here that there wasn’t enough time. We didn’t meet
all the MECs that we wanted to, but we covered a fair amount of ground.

Chairperson, allow me to introduce some important points to this august
House on the report of the provincial week programme in the Western Cape.
The Western Cape delegates met with the provincial political leadership,
including the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Chief Whip, secretary and deputy
secretary to the legislature and discussed various issues relating to
administrative, logistical and governance concerns to strengthen and
advance the correct kind of link between the NCOP and the legislature. They
found that there were very many gaps there.
The delegation was invited to attend and participate – which was very
interesting – in a provincial sitting, as the issues to be discussed were
in line with the provincial week programme. The subject for discussion was
a report on the investigation into the Oudtshoorn Municipality, in terms of
section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act.

We spoke about this before, and this was very interesting because we had a
sitting before we went down to Oudtshoorn in situ. It was reported that
when the provincial government invoked section 139 of the Constitution, it
was not taken to the full extent in terms of the counts on which a council
can be dissolved. Four of the councillors, one from each party represented
in the Oudtshoorn Municipality, constitute an advisory panel to the
appointed administrator by the name of Louis Scheepers.

We had a full meeting with the community and Mr Scheepers, where he gave us
the whole layout of his programme. And I must say that, personally, I was
very impressed with the man we have there.

The Minister for Provincial and Local Government endorsed the action of the
legislature and the community of Oudtshoorn accepted the intervention,
saying that it was the best thing that could have happened. Yes, this had
to be done, and I’m sure that in many municipalities this kind of step is
going to be necessary. However, if we do oversight properly, we can prevent
this from happening in many of the municipalities.

President Thabo Mbeki, in his state of the nation address, emphasised that
we would continue to respond to the challenges of municipalities and would
undertake all necessary tasks, informed by the Five-Year Local Government
Strategic Agenda, which includes hands-on assistance to municipalities by
national and provincial structures.

Interesting oversight visits to some of the projects in the Western Cape
took place, such as the visit to the port of Cape Town to assess stumbling
blocks regarding ship repairs. We heard in one of the sittings here what
the problems there are. The Minister promised that he would look into the
boat-building sector.

Other instances of oversight include visits to the Oudtshoorn Municipality,
which I’ve spoken about, and the Langenhoven Gymnasium, which is a school
in Oudtshoorn, where apparent acts of racism occurred, according to media
reports.

Racism is a big thing in the Western Cape. Those of you from other
provinces should know that we battle with racism, which is still very big
here. We have a lot of problems in so far as farm housing is concerned,
where people are taken off their farms. We have problems with street people
being collected, along with all their goods, and left destitute.

We have a lot of problems with racism here, which need to be addressed.
Challenges to this august House are: firstly, how do we ensure that the
executive arm of government avails its vigorous insight on the combined
NCOP provincial week report? Secondly, what assessment mechanisms do we, as
the NCOP, use to ensure that we constantly assess and monitor prevailing
conditions as experienced during oversight visits?

Chairperson, with the provincial week programme, we once again proved our
commitment to ensuring a hands-on approach to effect our mandate as the
NCOP. To meet the challenges we face requires a developmental state that is
people-orientated and is responsive to the needs of the citizens. Co-
operative and partnership-based interventions are necessary, but always in
an integrated way that is globally connected and well managed. We must not
shy away from constructive criticism.

The provincial week theme, “Addressing challenges for effective and
sustainable service delivery to our people”, is indeed a well-thought-out
one.

In the couple of seconds I have left, I just want to highlight the fact
that we celebrated Youth Week on June 16 2007. I just want to say that, in
Cape Town, it was uninspiring. But I want to challenge that we need to do
something for our heroes that fell here.

This week I was thinking of Ashley Kriel and the other young man who died
in a hail of bullets in Cape Town in the late ‘80s. As we know, that was
the last thrust of the struggle and a lot of it happened in Cape Town here.
We don’t have a heroes’ acre or anything like that, that can remind our
young people of what actually happened. Thank you, Ma’am. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr M MAMPUNYE (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon Deputy Chairperson, hon
members, members of the public, friends and comrades ...

... mandiqale ngezi zinto ndicinga ukuba zibalulekile, phambi kokuba ndize
kwigalelo lam kule ngxoxo. Okokuqala, mandiyibulele into yokuba iBhunga
leSizwe lamaPhondo lithe msinyane nje emva kokuba lityelele iphondo lethu,
sibe sesiphinda sisiba lapha kwakhona ukuza kuxoxa ngezo zinto ngoku
zisakhunjulwayo ngabantu. Akukho nto imbi njengokuba nisungule iprojekthi,
emva koko nihlale ide ilibaleke nemiba ebibalulekile. Ndiyayibulela ke loo
nto.

Okwesibini, mandiphinde nditsho ukuba thina siyiMpuma Koloni siyabulela
ngokuba, ngexesha bekuxoxwa kuboniswana ngendlela emayingenwe ngayo
iprojekthi le, iBhunga leSizwe lamaPhondo lisivumele ukuba silisasaze
igqiza lethu. Ukuba uyabuqwalasela ubukhulu beMpuma Koloni, besingayi
kukwazi ukuhamba umhlaba omde ukuba besenze ikomiti enye. Ngoko ke siye
sancedwa kakhulu ke kukusasazwa kwamalungu ale komiti.

Mna ke ndingusihlalo weKomiti yoKhuselo noKhuseleko kwiphondo iMpuma
Koloni. Siye sazama ukuba sifake iiprojekthi zeekomiti ezintlanu. Siye
safaka eyezempilo, eyoorhulumente bamaphondo nabasekhaya, eyezezindlu,
eyezemfundo kunye neyezokhuselo nokhuseleko. Loo nto ke yasinceda ukuba
sifumane ingxelo yethu ivelelwe kwiinkalo ezininzi ezahlukeneyo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... let me take care of the things that I think are important first,
before I can make my contribution to this debate. Firstly, let me thank the
National Council of Provinces for the fact that shortly after it visited
our province, we are gathered here again to discuss things whilst they are
still fresh in our minds. There is nothing worse than starting a project,
and then failing to work on it until the important reasons behind its
formation become hazy. Therefore, I am grateful that this has not happened
in this case.

Secondly, as the Eastern Cape province, we are also grateful because, at
the time we were deliberating on how this project should be structured, the
NCOP gave us permission to deploy our delegation around. If you consider
the size of the Eastern Cape, we would not have covered much ground if we
had set up only one committee. Therefore, deploying the members of the
committee around helped a great deal.
However, I am the chairperson of the safety and security committee in the
Eastern Cape province. We tried to include projects of the following five
committees: the health committee, local government of provinces, housing,
education and safety and security. That helped us to get many different
aspects of our report discussed.]

Now, coming to my input, the Chief Whip of the Council highlighted various
aspects of the report, and I don’t want to delay proceedings here by going
through some of the areas he has covered. However, those that have ATCs ...

... bangakwazi ukuyifumana ingxelo yeMpuma Koloni ... [... can have a look
at the Eastern Cape report ...]

... from page 1185 to page 1195.

Chairperson, it has been a pleasure and a privilege for me to be asked to
come to this important House to add value to today’s debate. Allow me first
to make some of the following points.

Section 42(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act, Act
108 of 1996, provides that the NCOP represents the provinces in order to
ensure that provincial interests are taken into account at national level.

The NCOP does this mainly by participating in the national legislative
process and by providing national participation on matters affecting
provinces. But allow me, Chair, to state that this House has the duty and
responsibility of making sure that the role and the responsibilities of
this House are taken seriously by the respective provinces.

From time to time we hear that there is something that is not going well in
terms of how provinces relate to this House. There are some
misunderstandings in relation to the mandate of the NCOP. I think that
might be caused by the fact that there are at times weak linkages between
the legislatures and the NCOP delegates, which I think need to be
strengthened.

Events such as the NCOP provincial week should be programmed quarterly,
because I believe that can also add value to the work of the NCOP so that
the institution can be more visible and not be forgotten. However, I do
understand the limitations in terms of resources, but, ideally, I would
have loved to have the programme quarterly.

As a contribution to this debate, I can say without any fear of
contradiction that it was my first experience of embarking on a project
that cuts across committee boundaries. As committees, we normally work in
silos in terms of visiting our respective projects, but this time we worked
as a team. I admire your initiative because it has also shaped our way of
working in the Eastern Cape.

Regarding the issue of disasters, Chairperson, the national Minister talked
about a matter that was raised here, on the question of confusion around
disaster management and the role of districts and metros.

Yes, the national Minister explained the matter in very simple terms, but
to us in the provinces, when you talk about a district in terms of disaster
management, districts take too long to address the immediate problems of
those affected by that disaster. For instance, as a province we are still
sitting with backlogs from the late 90s, 2002, 2004 and 2006. Funding is a
problem. Our people on the ground lose hope that they will ever be
assisted. So we are faced with that problem and I want it to be noted.

We have also been told that there are Cuban specialists that have been
deployed to fast-track the process but I’m not sure whether that is the
right intervention strategy. We have our own indigenous knowledge that we
can use, and our people can assist government with the assessments, since
some of the houses that were damaged were indigenous houses.

Umzekelo, xa wonakalelwe ngurontabile ofulelwe ngengca, umntu ovela eCuba
akayi kuliqonda lula ixabiso laloo ndlu. Kanti ke kumntu owakhayo ozaziyo
iimeko zendawo kungalula ukwenza oko, ze ngoko kube lula ukuba loo ndlu
ilungiswe. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[For example, when your grass-thatched rondavel has been damaged, a person
from Cuba will not easily understand the value of that house. However, for
a builder who is familiar with local conditions it would be easy to do this
and to have the house fixed.]

But now the government has opted to import Cuban specialists to come and do
that, whereas we have our own people. I don’t believe that is the right
strategy.

There is a matter that I always smuggle in whenever I get an opportunity,
and we pushed for it to be considered during the national conference of the
ANC. This is the question of the non-funding of community police forums. We
don’t understand the fact that the SA National Police Commissioner is an
accounting officer of the SAPS and we don’t believe that this is the right
move. We managed to talk about that in our provincial general council. We
hope that the policy conference will do something about this.

The clustering of police stations brings about a lot of confusion as
community members would go to the nearest police station to report a
matter. With regard to demarcation, one speaker said that you find your
house this side and your toilet on the other side. So our communities are
experiencing the same problem. When they go to report a matter to the
police, they are told that their village does not fall under the
jurisdiction of that particular police station. Even if the police at that
station do take down the statement, for the case to be heard they have to
travel long distances to reach that court, and that is a problem. [Time
expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): I will now call upon hon F
Mazibuko to address the House. [Interjections.] Order please!

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo, ngisho noma ubungalibizanga igama lami ngiyazi
ukuthi kulandela mina. Umsizi wakho akabhekanga uhla lwabazokhuluma ngakho-
ke akazi ukuthi obani abakhulumayo. [Chairperson, even if you did not call
my name I know that I am next in line. Your assistant did not look at the
list of speakers. Therefore, he does not know the order of speakers. ]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): I called your name, hon member.

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Angizwanga, Sihlalo. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo ukuthi nami
ngiphefumule kuyo le nkulumompikiswano emayelana nesonto esasiphiwe kulo
ithuba lokuthi nathi sikwazi ukuya kohlangana namalungu ethu esifundazweni,
ukuze nathi sikwazi ukuthola ukuthi yiziphi izinselelo abhekene nazo.

Kafushane nje, uma ngingayichaza iGauteng ukuthi iyini, ngingathi
iyisifundazwe esikhulu kunazo zonke lapha eNingizimu Afrika. Yingakho
kuthiwa iyi-smart province. Uma uyibheka laphaya ebalazweni ubona sengathi
incane, kodwa nginitshela ukuthi bathi phecelezi “It’s impregnated with
people.”

Igama elithi “Gauteng” uma silibhekisisa ukuthi lisuka kuphi, liyigama
lesiSuthu elichaza ukuthi yizwe lapho uthola igolide khona. Phela Sihlalo
uyazi ukuthi lapho kukwanyama kayipheli kodwa kuphela amazinyo endoda futhi
kulapho kuguga othandayo. Yingakho-ke sithi iGauteng iyisifundazwe
esihlakaniphe kunazo zonke izifundazwe, idlula neKwaZulu-Natali.

Isonto esasivakashele ngalo izifundazwe lalingomhla we-14 kuNhlaba kuya
mhla we-18 kuNhlaba. Ngenzela ukuthi labo abangazange bathole ithuba
lokufunda Uhla Lwezimemezelo, Lokwethuliwe Nemibiko Yamakomidi bakwazi
ukuzifundela ngokwabo.

Ngokwesifundazwe, zintathu izinhlelo ababhekene nazo, ngokulandela inkulumo
kaMongameli ngenkathi evula iPhalamende ngenyanga kaNhlolanja. Lezo
zinhlelo ngezempilo, ezokuphepha kanye nezemfundo. Yingakho-ke osukwini
lokuqala sahlangana nekomidi lezempilo kanye nelezokuphepha. Ngenkathi
sibonisana nawo lawa makomidi sathola ukuthi anezinselelo eziningi, ngoba
nani niyazi ukuthi esifundazweni saseGauteng bonke abantu bacabanga ukuthi
sinamathuba amaningi. Uye uthole-ke ukuthi bagcina sebeswele nendawo
yokuhlala, baswele nezikole lapho izingane zabo zingafunda khona.

Kepha-ke saqinisekisa sonke ukuthi ziningi izidingo okufanele zibhekelelwe
ukuze abantu bathole impilo engcono, nokuthi nakulo ikomidi ongqongqoshe
bazoqinisekisa ukuba khona kwalokhu esikubiza ngesiNgisi sithi i-
accountability.

Saba nethuba lokuhlangana nongqongqoshe wezempilo uMnu Hlongwa – hhayi
ungqongqoshe wezifo; sahlanganga futhi nowezokuphepha, uMnu Cachalia.
Basendlalela izinhlelo ezibalulekile abanazo, ikakhulukazi ungqongqoshe
wezempilo wasitshela ukuthi singabowuthela usawoti ekudleni ngaphambi
kokubuza ukuthi ngabe usawoti usutheliwe yini. Wasitshela nokuthi ziningi
izifo ezibangela o-high blood pressure nanokuthi yingani sikhuluphele. Nani
malungu niyazi ukuthi mina yini engicabangayo ngale ndaba yokukhuluphala.

UNgqongqoshe Wezokuphepha yena wasitshela ngohlelo olubizwa nge-Take
charge, crime stops with me. Kulolu hlelo bahlongoza ukuthi umphakathi
ubambe iqhaza kwezokuphepha, nokubhekisisa ukuthi ngabe iningi lamacala
yilawo enzeka emakhaya yini, esiwabiza phecelezi social crimes - uma
abesilisa bedakiwe bashaya abesifazane babenze ama-punching bags - kanye
nokunukubeza ngokocansi.

Sabamba futhi umhlangano namalungu ezigungu zokuphepha. Yilapho sezwa khona
ngeqhaza labo ekuqinisekiseni ukuthi wonke umuntu uyalibamba iqhaza
kwezokuphepha, ekuzivikeleni kotsotsi nasebugebengwini nje obudlangile.
Sezwa-ke nangokusweleka kwengqalasizinda kwezinye iziteshi zamaphoyisa,
okuyinto ebangela ukuthi ama-CPF angabonakali ukuthi yini umsebenzi
awenzayo.

Ngezinye izinsuku savakashela izibhedlela ezinjengoHelen Joseph lapho
sathola khona inselelo mayelana nokuthi abanayo imali eyanele ukuze bakwazi
ukufeza izidingo zabo. Nezinye izinhlelo bazendlala phambi kwethu. Ngeke
ngizibale lapha ngoba iningi lalaba abavela kulezi zifundazwe ezincanyana
bazosuke bathume abazala babo beze ngale eGoli ukuze bazokwelashwa khona.

Saphinde savakashela naseReiger Park, Dawn Park nasesibhedlela esibizwa nge-
O R Tambo Memorial. Safike sathola abantu abakhulelwe eDawn Park. Basho
ukuthi, cha, abasawakhi amawolintshi, yingakho namhlanje kubathatha
isikhathi ngaphambi kokuthi babe nalokhu esikubiza ngokuthi ama-labour
pains. Maqondana nesifo seNgculazi, sathola ukuthi sebevule umtholampilo
laphaya e-O R Tambo Memorial lapho benikeza khona amakhambi kanti futhi
banezingadi abatshala kuzona imifino.

Savakashela nesiteshi samaphoyisa eKagiso lapho sathola khona ukuthi
amaphoyisa ayengenawo amahhovisi enele. Amaphoyisa amane noma amahlanu
ayesebenzela nje ehhovisini elincane. Nakhona sathola ukuthi izinqola
azenele. Bese nizwile-ke njengoba uSoswebhu Omkhulu eseshilo ukuthi iningi
lalezi zinqola silithole eChamdor ngenxa yobudedengu bokuthi abazishayeli
kahle abashayeli. Abanawo futhi nalo mshini obizwa nge-Morphotec - ngisho
lo mshini okuthathwa ngawo iminwe yezigebengu ukuze kuhlolwe ukuthi ngabe
lezo zigebengu azibenzanga yini ubugebengu kwezinye izindawo.

Saphinde savakashela indawo lapho kukhandwa khona izinqola zamaphoyisa
eChamdor. Safica isimo esethusayo kakhulu lapho ngoba sathola ukuthi
kusekhona abantu “abasenobasi” abangabaphathi kahle ngenxa yokuthi bona
abafani nabo ngokwebala. Babebasebenzisa nemisebenzi okungafanele
bayisebenze. Yize abanye babengomakhenika abakufundele ngokugcwele kodwa
babenziwa abafana bengadi khona lapho eChamdor. Kunezinqola-ke esazithola
zihlezi lapho. Baphawula bathi babesalindele izinsimbi zazo.

Siye savumelana-ke, njengesincomo, ukuthi ikomiti lezempilo nelezokuphepha
kufuneka abuye alandelele kamuva ukuze abheke ukuthi, kulezi zincomo
esizibekile embikweni, ngabe yini abangayenza, nokuthi kungathuthukiswa
kanjani.

Ngalawo amafishane, Sihlalo, singamalungu aseGauteng, esifundazweni
sabahlakaniphile kakhulu, besicela ukuthi iNdlu yamukele lo mbiko.
Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: I did not hear, Chairperson. Thank you, Chairperson, for
allowing me to participate in this debate which is about the week in which
we had the opportunity of going to the provinces to meet our members and
find out what challenges they were facing.

In short, if I were to define what Gauteng is, I would say that it is the
biggest province here in South Africa. That is why it is known as the smart
province. When one looks at it on the map one thinks that it is small in
size, but I am telling you that, as they say, it is impregnated with
people.

When we look at the origin of the word “Gauteng” we find that it is a
Sesotho word meaning land where gold is found. You know, Chairperson, that
there is plenty of meat there and that no one can finish it - one can eat
until one’s teeth fall out. It is also a place where only those who want to
grow old, do grow old. That is why we say Gauteng is the smartest of all
the provinces. It even exceeds KwaZulu-Natal.

We visited the provinces during the week of 14 to 18 May. I am doing this
for the benefit of those who have not yet read the Announcements, Tablings
and Committee Reports.

According to the reports from the provinces, they are concentrating on
three programmes, following the President’s state of the nation address, at
the opening of Parliament in February. Those programmes are health, safety
and security and education. That is why we met, on the first day, with the
committees on health and safety and security. When we were in discussions
with these committees we found that they had many challenges because, as
you all know, in Gauteng province, everyone thinks that we have many
opportunities. You then find that they end up having no place to stay and
no schools for their children to attend.

But we all ascertained  that there were many services which needed to be
considered so that  people can lead better lives and that, in the committee
itself, the provincial ministers will have to ensure that there is
accountability.

We had an opportunity to meet with the provincial MEC for health, hon
Hlongwa – not the “MEC for diseases”. We also met with the MEC for safety
and security, hon Cachalia. They informed us of the important programmes
they have. The provincial MEC for health insisted that we should not add
salt to food before enquiring whether it has already been added. He also
informed us about many illnesses that lead to high blood pressure, and also
told us why we are so obese. Hon members, you know what I think about this
issue of obesity.

The provincial minister of safety and security informed us of the programme
called Take Charge, Crime Stops With Me. With this programme they want the
public to play a role in safety and security, and to determine whether the
majority of cases are domestic or not, that is social crimes – where
drunken males beat up females, making them punch bags, as well as sexual
abuse.

We also held a meeting with members of the community policing forums. That
is where we heard about the role they play in ensuring that everybody plays
a role in safety and security, in protecting oneself from thugs and the
general hooliganism that is rife these days. We also heard about the lack
of infrastructure at some of the police stations, which result in the role
of the CPFs not being known.

We also visited hospitals such as the Helen Joseph hospital where we found
that they have the challenge of not having enough funds to enable them to
meet their needs. They informed us of other programmes too. I won’t mention
them here because most of those who come from the smaller provinces will
send their cousins to Johannesburg to be treated there.

We also visited Reiger Park, Dawn Park and the hospital known as O R Tambo
Memorial. We met pregnant women at Dawn Park. They told us that they did
not “collect oranges” anymore, which is why nowadays it takes time for them
to have labour pains. As for HIV/Aids, we found that a clinic has been
opened in O R Tambo Memorial where ARVs are provided. There are also
vegetable gardens.

We also visited a police station in Kagiso where we found that the police
did not have enough offices. Four or five police officers were working in a
small office. We also found that there were insufficient vehicles. You have
already heard from the Chief Whip that we found most of these vehicles in
Chamdor because of the negligence of the drivers. They do not drive well.
They do not even have the machine known as the Morphotek – I mean the
machine which is used to take fingerprints from criminals to check whether
they were not involved in other crimes.

We also visited Chamdor, a place where police vehicles are repaired. We
found a shocking situation there because there were people who still have
“baases” who do not treat them well because they do not look like them
colour-wise. They also force them to do jobs that they are not supposed to
do. Although some of them are qualified mechanics, they are working as
“garden boys” in Chamdor. We found abandoned vehicles there. We were told
that they were waiting for spare parts.

We then agreed as per the proposal that the select committee on health and
the committee on safety and security should make a follow up on the
proposals that are contained in the report, to check on what they can do
about them and what development projects can be implemented.

With these few words, Chairperson, as the members of the Gauteng Provincial
Legislature, the province with the smartest people, we ask the House to
accept this report. We thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Thank you, Chairperson for allowing me to give this brief
update on the North West provincial visit. I must say that the delegation
visited some provincial and local government centres of service delivery.
The aim was to evaluate the effectiveness in terms of service delivery to
the communities and also to determine if there is quality spending on the
budgets allocated to government departments.

In driving this programme, our delegates did so in a good spirit of co-
operative governance through collaborating with their provincial
legislature counterparts and Salga members in the province.

Of course, the week of 14 to 18 May was never enough to cover the whole
province, though the programme had to be developed in such a manner that
this oversight exercise would avoid concentrating on one area or one
constituency, since this kind of exercise normally takes place once or
twice a year.

I must indicate to this House that when we were developing the previous
programme, our delegation strongly felt that we should make a follow-up on
previous visits - the rounds that we did in August 2006. We really did so;
because we then visited schools, clinics, local government offices, police
stations and magistrate courts where we observed a number of challenges.

Therefore, what we did on the first day is that we called all the
stakeholders under one roof, which was the provincial conference room. What
I can inform this House is that we observed great improvements. In fact,
they were very impressed with the work done by the NCOP.

We were also impressed - I must say, as a permanent delegate - with the
fact that when we got to the province we discovered that our programme was
integrated with the provincial schedule. That was evident in the sense that
it gave ample time for our counterparts to participate unhindered.

During the first day we had to interact with our Chief Whip, the Speaker’s
Office and the chairperson. I must indicate that there was a situation
where the Speaker’s Office and the Chief Whip had to engage us regarding a
constitutional provision that gives effect to the appointment of the
Premiers as heads of delegation. They had some reservations on that, in the
sense that they felt the Speaker should be the leader of a delegation,
because the Speaker is the person who is always in charge of the day-to-day
running of the legislature. Therefore, they felt it didn’t make sense that
the Premier would have to lead the provincial delegation. However, it seems
that they are going to challenge that in the correct manner.
I must also indicate that in the afternoon of the same day we met the
Premier of the province, who hosted us over a nice dinner meeting with some
of the MECs. In that meeting there was some sort of workshop that took
place about the provincial growth and development strategy and it took some
time.

The delegation also visited the executive Mayor of the city of Matlosana,
which used to be known as Klerksdorp. The executive mayor then took us
through the housing project that had been successful but was suspended
along the way because the council suspected some corrupt activities.
However, there was a commission that was put in place to investigate that.
That commission gave rise to some litigation processes which are still
unfolding.

We were then taken to view those houses and members appreciated the
standard of the material that was used which compared well with the
material used in loan houses though there were some workmanship defects.
The delegation recommended that those units that had already been completed
be speedily allocated to needy people, because there were some units that
were finished but not utilised, which made them vulnerable to being damaged
at any time.

We also visited the district health department where we were also taken
through a number of presentations and they indicated some challenges to us.
The main challenge was that some of the health centres ... [Time expired.]
We propose that our report be accepted. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chair, I am quite confident in my
mind that this is one of the longest weeks of the year and, indeed, one of
the longest debates amongst those that we have had.

I think that the debate on the provincial week of the National Council of
Provinces is taking place against very important and critical developments
in our country. Firstly, it is taking place at a time when the ruling
party, the premier liberation movement of our people, is readying itself
for the national policy conference and getting ready for the national
conference in December, where decisions on the next five years will be
taken.

Secondly, it is also taking place during the mid-term of our third
democratic parliament. Therefore it is fitting, as we are assembled here
this afternoon, to debate critical issues that arise in our provinces. We
don’t only reflect on the issues, but we connect the debate to answering
certain fundamental questions which have permeated the debate today in one
form or another. One hon member, a special delegate from the Eastern Cape,
put it quite succinctly: the confusion about the role of the NCOP in
relation to the role of provinces.

When we debate these issues, we must always try to connect this to how we
give sense and meaning, and add flesh to the bone, in order to define the
NCOP in relation to a wide variety of issues that are confronting our
democracy, broadly. When we do that, we must not forget one thing: That
there is nowhere in the whole world where we have an animal or a structure
like the NCOP. Nowhere!

For that matter, we must acknowledge and salute the class of 1996; the
first stewards of this House under the leadership of Comrade Terror Lekota
and Comrade Bulelani Ngcuka, followed by Comrade Naledi Pandor and Comrade
Joyce Kgwadi, who laid a sound basis for the rules and procedures that
define what this House is, in relation to the National Assembly and the
provinces.

I think everything that we have done, including our own conceptualisation
of this strategic intervention through a provincial week, was an attempt to
take the particular work that was initiated by these comrades forward,
because we must not pretend to be constitutional experts. We are not and we
must not attempt to be the Constitutional Court. I think that even these
advocates in front of the presiding officer here know that they are no
experts. The only final arbiter on constitutional matters in this country
is the Constitutional Court, and nobody else. Therefore Karl Marx was
correct when he said:


   The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the
   point is to change it.

I think that this institution has been established with a particular focus.
Central to that focus, I want to refer to one of the best advocates that we
have in this country, who also happens to be a member of the national
executive committee of the ANC, Comrade Matthews Phosa. He put it in simple
layman’s language, as one of the people who negotiated this Constitution,
by saying that the political rationale behind the establishment of the NCOP
as opposed to the Senate ... It’s a pity that one hon comrade, who is here,
said that the NCOP is an Upper House. I don’t agree. We don’t have such a
thing as an Upper House. This is not a Senate, but a unique House. He said
that the political rationale was to ensure that the voices of the grass-
roots communities, which cannot access the legislature of the Eastern Cape
in Bisho, must be heard in the national Parliament.

The voices of the grass-roots communities in the Free State, in Qwaqwa,
which cannot afford to reach Cape Town - the city of Parliament - and which
cannot reach Bloemfontein - the city of the legislature and Thabo
Mofutsanyane - must be heard here. That was the fundamental political
rationale.

So, in our attempt to adhere to what the Constitution says, we are going to
miss the point if we don’t understand the philosophical and political
rationale that informs that particular constitutional formulation. I think
that is quite fundamental.

Through this provincial week, I think all the delegates that have spoken
here, have had their say. Comrade Faith Mazibuko and my comrade here from
the North West have spoken about their visits to O R Tambo Memorial
Hospital. They have touched on various centres and areas within their own
communities. We come here to say that these are the perspectives and the
experiences that come from particular communities.

So, I am saying that this provincial week is an attempt to consolidate and
strengthen our contribution as this generation, because at the end of the
day, individually and collectively or whether you would have retired, your
child or grandchild will ask you what it is that you did to make the House
relevant when you tell them that you were once a member of the NCOP.

Hon Watson, it won’t help to say that this House is not doing this or that.
The key question is: What is it that you are doing to make it relevant? I
think that is quite fundamental. I agree with the comrades in that spirit,
including the Chief Whip who said that we cannot be static regarding the
manner in which we are conducting our business. We cannot continue to be
ritualistic and do things because we are used to doing them that way. From
time to time we must review this provincial week and how we are conducting
it. We must measure its impact against the new emerging challenges.

The late president of the ANC, Comrade Oliver Tambo, said that a test of
any revolutionary parliament does not lie in any other thing but its
ability to inspire the confidence of the masses of the people. In my own
view, I think the key test for all our programmes, in particular this
provincial week programme, centres on communities.

I have not yet heard from the nine delegations whether they met the
communities. Comrade Ralane, you remember we met the officials - we were
all in the boardroom, but we did not meet mama Dlamini out there who is
affected by the provision of VIP toilets in her street when the other
street next to it has waterborne sewerage system toilets. We have not yet
met that person on the street and reported on what she says here.

We have also not met communities in order to hear about their own
experiences and the challenges they are facing. And we need to know to what
extent they appreciate some of the interventions and programmes that are
initiated by our government on the ground. [Interjections.] The Northern
Cape is chaotic, Chairperson. [Interjections.] This is not a municipal
council meeting; this is a national Parliament addressing millions of
people.
The point I am making is that, if you have done something like that, no one
from the Northern Cape has mentioned it. The Speaker from the Northern Cape
has not mentioned it and we are not aware of that. We are saying that we
may want to learn from you - how you have dealt with the matter. We are
also saying that it should not be only about the Northern Cape; it should
be the strategic vision and approach of the Council. I think it is
fundamental that we move from that particular position.

Let me conclude by responding to a few issues that were raised. I don’t
know whether I heard my comrade from the Eastern Cape properly, but culture
is not just a boundary-bound concept, both in terms of concept and
practice. It is a universal concept. I don’t know whether it is correct to
make an assumption that a Cuban cannot understand how a mud house or a
thatched-roof house can be fixed when it has been damaged. I think that is
unscientific, my fellow comrades.

If you understand the principle of internationalism which is embraced by
the ANC; and as we are going towards the second or third decade after the
battle of Cuito Cuanavale, we should understand that internationalism
teaches us one thing: It teaches us that regarding some of the problems we
are facing in this country, where we lack skills, we can be assisted by
other nations, in solidarity.

There are certain things which we don’t have the capacity to do that
Indians can do to advance our own national programme and the national
development agenda. It’s not about whether they understand the township
lifestyle or not.

I think we have the best engineers in the whole world. I’m also saying that
even Cuba is acclaimed for producing the greatest number of doctors and
engineers in the world. I might not have understood my fellow comrades but
we will have to engage.

Lastly, I want to caution my comrades from the ANC that we must not be
lulled by some voices from the opposition. When they want to use this House
as a theatre to launch a right-wing offensive against the ANC, they say it
is their democratic right to do so. One may have observed that there is a
member here who has been very consistent in attacking the ANC in every
debate, even when the debate does not warrant an attack.

But when the ANC responds they say: No, this House! The ANC is not the NCOP
and the NCOP is not the ANC but a neutral House. I am saying we must not be
lulled. We have a political revolutionary mandate to defend our theory, our
ideology and our philosophy. We are not going to spare any effort on that.

It’s a pity that the hon member is not in the House because I would have
wanted to quote some of the things that he has said which are not factual.
He said that the National Youth Commission is an employment agency for the
young people of the ANC. That is a distortion of information. I don’t know
where he was when Jabu Mbalula spent the better part of his life in prison
fighting for this freedom before 1994 - sacrificing even his education.

I don’t know where the hon member was when Hlengiwe “Mahlengi” Bhengu, a
young woman who was the first chairperson of the National Youth Commission,
spent the better part of her life at the University of Durban-Westville,
before 1994, mobilising, organising and fighting to create this democratic
Parliament that we are today. So, you cannot make a statement in this House
and say that this youth commission has been established to create
employment for the needy – meaning it’s a welfare package, that patronises
the youth of the ANC. That statement was made by a member here.

I am saying that we must continue as the ANC to respond to those statements
and we must also remind some of the members who are making these statements
about their own past, in the last 20 years. When certain developments were
unfolding in this country, like when June 16 unfolded in 1976, we must ask
them what they were doing.

I want to thank you, hon Watson, for your sincerity and your boldness.
Don’t shy away from that. If anything happens, the ANC is the political
home of all the people of South Africa. Don’t be intimidated by the right
wing within your party regarding what you have said in this Chamber.
Chairperson, on that note, I thank you very much. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon members. That
concludes the debate. I would like to thank - in particular - the special
delegates from various provinces for coming to participate in this debate.

Debate concluded.

Report noted.

The Council adjourned at 17:51.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    Select Committee on Social Services
         (a)     Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] [See
             Resolutions passed by National Council of Provinces (Minutes
             of Proceedings of National Council of Provinces, 8 June 2007,
             p 1040) and by National Assembly (Minutes of Proceedings of
             National Assembly, 14 June 2007, p 1095)].


              Introduction in the National Council of Provinces (proposed
              sec 76(2)) and referral to the Select Committee on Social
              Services of the National Council of Provinces, as well as
              referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 18 June 2007.
              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within
              three parliamentary working days.


         (b)     Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21 –
             2007] [See Resolutions passed by National Council of Provinces
             (Minutes of Proceedings of National Council of Provinces, 8
             June 2007, p 1040) and by National Assembly (Minutes of
             Proceedings of National Assembly, 14 June 2007, p 1095)].


              Introduction in the National Council of Provinces (proposed
              sec 76(2)) and referral to the Select Committee on Social
              Services of the National Council of Provinces, as well as
              referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 18 June 2007.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within
              three parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 20 June 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Public Service Amendment Bill [B 31B – 2006] (National
              Assembly – sec 76).
              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Local
              Government and Administration of the National Council of
              Provinces.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Pension Funds
     Amendment Bill [B 11B– 2007] (Reprint) (National Assembly – sec 75),
     dated 19 June 2007:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
         the Pension Funds Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2007(Reprint)] (National
         Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without
         amendments.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws
     Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007] (National Assembly sec 77), dated 19 June
     2007:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
         the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007] (National Assembly
         – sec 77), referred to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.



3.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws Second
    Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] (National Assembly sec 75), dated 19 June
         2007:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
         the Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] (National
         Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without
         amendments.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Appropriation Bill
     [B 2 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 20 June 2007:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77),
         referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

5.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
     the Protocol on Policy and Regulatory Framework for NEPAD (New
     Partnership for Africa’s Development) ICT Broadband Infrastructure
     Network for Eastern and Southern Africa, dated 20 June 2007:

         The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having
         considered the Protocol on Policy and Regulatory Framework for
         NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development) ICT Broadband
         Infrastructure Network for Eastern and Southern Africa, referred
         to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of
         the Constitution, approve the said Protocol.

Report to be considered.


