---
title: 'National Assembly - 23 October 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-10-23
---

TUESDAY, 23 OCTOBER 2007
                                    ____

                      PROCEEDINGS OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Acting Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G R MORGAN: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the contributions by South Africa to the upcoming
   climate negotiations at the next Conference of the Parties under the UN
   Framework on Climate Changes that is due to take place in Bali from 3 to
   14 December 2007.


Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice of the
following motion:


   That the House, noting President Mbeki’s response to a question from Ms P
   de Lille concerning party funding, establishes an ad hoc committee to –


      1) consider and report on the nature of party funding in South Africa;
         and


      2) recommend to the House measures for the regulation of such funding,
         if deemed necessary.

Mr M WATERS: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against
   Women and Children.

I thank you.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall
move at the next sitting:

   That the House debates the concept of South  Africa  as  a  developmental
   state, the social, political and economic implications to the poorest  of
   the poor, the impact of this in the SADC region and whether South  Africa
   should become the hegemonic power in the interest of this region.
I thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Acting Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I shall
move:

   That the House –


      1) congratulates Jake White and the Springbok team on their
         magnificent performance;


      2) acknowledges the effort of a broad team of people who have
         dedicated their skills and time; and


      3) believes their success has contributed enormously to unifying the
         people of South Africa.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Acting Speaker, on behalf of the UDM, I move:

   That the House –

      1) recognises the role that sport has played and continues to play in
         lifting national morale and contributing to nation-building;


      2) acknowledges the effect that winning the 1995 World Cup had in this
         regard;
      3) notes how the same spirit of unity and pride pervades the nation
         once more as the Springbok return victorious from the World Cup in
         France bearing the Webb Ellis Trophy again;


      4) salutes the coach, captain and all the team members for reaching
         the pinnacle of their sport and representing their country so well
         on the world stage; and

      5) resolves to schedule this matter as a subject for discussion and to
         invite the Springbok team and coaching staff to visit Parliament as
         soon as possible, so that they can sit in the gallery whilst we
         congratulate them in person and thank them, not only for their
         victory, but also for the humble and dedicated manner in which they
         went about their task.

I thank you. [Applause.]

        CONGRATULATIONS TO SPRINGBOKS ON WINNING THE RUGBY WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without
notice:


   That the House-

   (1)      notes that on Saturday, 20 October 2007, our national rugby
         team, the Springboks, won the 2007 Rugby World Cup in France,
         having defeated the England rugby team in the final match of the
         tournament;


   (2)      believes that the participation of the Springboks in this
         premier global rugby competition has contributed to the effort to
         deepen the bonds of human solidarity, and that, as they united to
         achieve victory, and with the spirit in which they sang our
         national anthem, the Boks inspired our people to love sport and be
         proud of themselves as a nation;


   (3)      expresses its appreciation that the Springboks of 2007 have
         inscribed their names on the roll of our country’s heroes and
         became only the second team to win the tournament twice; and


   (4)      congratulates the Springboks on bringing home the Webb Ellis
         trophy for the collective ownership of our heroic people.

In fact, when they won it in 1995, I was the mayor of Johannesburg. I held
that trophy. I have the feel of it, even now. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO BRYAN HABANA ON BEING NAMED INTERNATIONAL RUGBY PLAYER
                                 OF THE YEAR
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without
notice:


   That the House -

   (1)      notes that on Sunday, 21 October 2007, the Springbok winger
         Bryan Habana was named the International Rugby Board (IRB) Player
         of the Year;


   (2)      further notes that Bryan Habana scored a record eight tries in
         this year’s tournament, equalling the try record that former New
         Zealand winger Jonah Lomu set at the 1999 World Cup;


   (3)      believes that Bryan serves as an inspiration to all our young
         people; and


   (4)      congratulates Bryan Habana on winning the International Rugby
         Board Player of the Year Award.


Hear, hear, Bryan Habana! [Applause.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Hon members, from the Speaker’s Office and the
presiding officers, we would also like to associate ourselves with this
motion. We are working on you meeting the Springboks. Please try and trust
our leadership, as you have always done. The Springboks are in Cape Town on
a Monday, when we do not have a sitting, so we have started negotiations to
see whether they cannot be in Cape Town on Tuesday, so that we can have
them in the gallery. We also love them, we are also South Africans. We are
very proud of them and we will not disappoint you: You will meet them!
Halala, Springboks, halala! [Applause.]

Agreed to.

                  CONDOLENCES ON PASSING AWAY OF LUCKY DUBE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without
     notice:

   That the House -


      1) notes with profound sadness the passing away of reggae star Lucky
         Dube in a hijacking in Rosettenville, Johannesburg, on Thursday, 18
         October 2007;


      2) further notes that he was a huge icon and a well-loved personality
         in the music world nationally and internationally, and served as an
         inspiration to the youth of the nation; and

       3) conveys its condolences to the Dube family.

The ACTING SPEAKER: The nation is mourning. We thank Mr Davidson for that
motion, and we identify ourselves with it. We have also sent a message to
the family, because we have to give the family strength during this
difficult time. Thank you very much, sir.

Agreed to.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO JAKE WHITE ON BEING NAMED COACH OF THE YEAR AND TO THE
                 SPRINGBOKS ON BEING NAMED TEAM OF THE YEAR

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

       1) notes that on Sunday, 21 October 2007, the International Rugby
          Board (IRB) voted the Springbok coach, Jake White, as Coach of
          the Year;


       2) further notes that the South African rugby team, the Springboks,
          won the Team of the Year Award;

       3) believes  that these awards bear testimony to the sterling work
          Jake has done over the years in building the team; and

       4) congratulates Jake White on winning the IRB Coach of the Year
          Award.

I further want to say that this comes after perhaps 200 years on the rugby
field. Thank you. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

                           CENSURE OF GARY PLAYER

                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY (ANC): Thank you, Madam Chair. On
behalf of the ANC I would like to support the expulsion of Gary Player from
what he was supposed to be taking part in.

I want to say that some years ago, when Indian Papwa Sewgolum won the South
African Open in Durban, those who believed in apartheid were shocked. When
he had to receive his trophy it was raining but he received the cheque
outside in the rain.
I want to go further and say that Gary Player, afterwards, formed an
organisation called Fairness in Sport and went around the world, saying:
“Give South Africa a chance.” It went on and on, and he enlisted the
support of Leslie Sehume, who was then the editor of Bantu World. Leslie
Sehume travelled around, and even went to Britain and argued with Peter
Hain and said: “The day you come to South Africa, the blacks are going to
stone you.” Remember, Peter Hain is a South African who left for Britain
after what had happened.

I was living in Soweto, and we waited for Leslie. When he came back we
stoned him. He fled from Soweto and lived in the North West for almost half
of his life. He came back to Soweto as an elderly man, but we accept him
now because he corrected his mistake. Thank you. [Applause.]

                           FREE CONDOMS DEFECTIVE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The Health department’s
inability to provide the South African public with condoms that meet SABS
standards is not only a serious threat to the health and wellbeing of the
millions of South Africans who depend on these condoms, but also to South
Africa’s collective fight against HIV/Aids.
The Department of Health yesterday announced that it would, for the second
time in two months, recall a consignment of defective condoms. A few points
are worth making.

Firstly, millions of South Africans rely on the free condoms that
government provides. Government is failing them by distributing defective
condoms, thereby endangering the lives of the people who use them.
Secondly, two of the seven companies awarded government tenders to produce
free condoms have now failed in their task to do so.

It is of the utmost importance that the Health department realises that the
responsibility lies solely with it to ensure that the condoms that reach
the South African public are of the highest standard.

The Health Minister has said that the two incidents should not be allowed
to impact negatively on the progress made to promote condom use in our
country. The fact of the matter, however, is that it does.

The Health Minister must understand that, if the perception develops that
it does not make a difference whether you use a condom or not, we run a
very real risk that many people will simply choose not to continue to use
them. I thank you.

                           NAMES OF NATIONAL TEAMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Thank you, Acting Speaker. In the wake of the
splendid victory by the Springboks in winning the Rugby World Cup of 2007
there should be general agreement with President Thabo Mbeki that the name
Bafana Bafana is not a fitting name for the national soccer team. Likewise,
the names Banyana Banyana, Amagluglug and Amakrokokroko have simply become
meaningless when it comes to expressing the national consciousness.

There are plenty of African symbols, including birds and animals, which the
nation can choose from to induce an all-encompassing national pride. The
problem with the current names is that they impress on us a near-permanent
state of immaturity, weakness, uncertainty, lack of confidence and
indecisiveness.

The names Bafana Bafana, Banyana Banyana, Amagluglug and Amakrokokroko may
initially have given the nation, reeling from the effects of apartheid,
something to embrace and hold onto. However, nothing could instil and
enhance a continuous national pride and commitment like cherished and
revered national symbols. Even boys and girls grow up to become men and
women.

The IFP joins the rest of the nation in celebrating the Springbok victory.
I thank you.

                             NATIONAL CREDIT ACT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz P TSHWETE (ANC): Somlomo, amashishini asebenza ngemali kufuneka adlale
indima enkulu ekukhuthazeni uhlumo loqoqosho notyalo-mali, nasekwakhiweni
kwenkqubo efanelekileyo yobolekiso ngemali nenendlela elula yokubuyisa
imali.

Iqumrhu elijongene nentengo yetyala kuzwelonke lifikelele kwisigqibo
sokwandisa ulwazi loluntu ngokubanzi malunga nendlela osebenza ngayo
uMthetho omtsha oLawula iNtengo yeTyala, okanye i-National Credit Act,
ngesilungu. Eli phulo lijoliswe ikakhulu kubantu abanqwenela ukwenza imali-
mboleko, ababolekisi kunye namagosa eenkundla zomthetho.

Lo mthetho ulawula intengo yetyala, kwaye ukwajoliswe ekukhuseleni
abathengi nasekukhuthazeni urhwebo ngemali olungakhethi bala. Enye
yeenjongo eziphambili ngalo mthetho kukuqinisekisa ukuba abantu bakuthi
abawavinjwa amathuba kuba benamatyala abawenza bengaphangeli okanye
bengazange bakwazi ukuwahlawula kuba bengaphangeli.

Lo mthetho ujoliswe kanye kwabo bantu banjalo. Umbutho wesizwe i-ANC uhlaba
ikhwelo ebantwini, lokuba amatyala esiwenzayo masiwenze ngobunono bekati.
Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement
follows.)

[Mrs P TSHWETE (ANC): Speaker, financial institutions should play a big
role in economic development, investment, building a good money-lending
programme and creating an easy way of paying off debts.

The National Credit Regulator has decided to promote the new National
Credit Act amongst the people. This initiative is especially aimed at
consumers, credit providers and court officials.

This Act regulates credit, and is also aimed at protecting consumers and
promoting fair credit transactions. One of the other main objectives of
this Act is to ensure that our people are not blacklisted on the basis of
debts they could not pay because of unemployment.

This Act is aimed at exactly those people. The ANC is appealing to all the
people, that we should approach credit with extra care.]

               PARENTS HAVE GOD-GIVEN RIGHT TO RAISE CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Deputy Speaker, the ACDP wishes to thank members
of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development for accepting the ACDP’s
proposal to separate section 139 from the Children’s Amendment Bill. This
decision is in line with the beliefs of most South Africans, including
members of this Parliament. We are grateful that members of the committee
did not succumb to pressure from those leading the international campaign
to stop the spanking of children whenever necessary.

The ACDP believes that parents have a God-given responsibility to raise and
train their children, and that the state should not undermine parental
authority and responsibility in the home. Targeting and sensationalising
parental spanking will not address abuse, which is an entirely different
matter and must be dealt with as such.

The so-called experts calling for the banning of corporal correction fail
to provide effective alternatives. Children need guidance and correction,
and need to be taught what is right and what is wrong. This is the
jurisdiction of parents, and not the state.

Vehement protest from the public has postponed a situation where the
defence of reasonable chastisement would have been abolished, resulting in
serious consequences for parents for even the most minor smack, and that is
why the ACDP is grateful to the portfolio committee. Thank you. [Applause.]

                              SPRINGBOK VICTORY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M H HOOSEN (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, as the ID we would also like to
add our voice to the chorus of congratulations to the Springbok rugby team,
not only on the sterling performance in winning the World Cup, but also for
the significant contribution towards uniting South Africa. It was truly
humbling to see the people of our country uniting together behind our boys
across all racial, religious and economic boundaries.

In 1995 Madiba stood on the podium with the trophy in his hand and
celebrated the joy of our land in full view of the world. Twelve years
later, the legend continues as South Africa triumphs again.

We would therefore like to call on government to make a more significant
investment in developing more young South Africans from previously
disadvantaged backgrounds. This includes investments in sports fields,
development programmes, nutritional and training programmes and interschool
mentoring programmes.

Let us use this victory as a catalyst for bridging the divides in South
African sport. Clearly, this is testimony that when we stand together, we
shall all win together. Thank you.

                  INTEGRATION AND SOUTH-SOUTH CO-OPERATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, globalisation has, amongst other
things, resulted in the growing interdependence between countries. This has
created space for Africa, the developing world and the poor across the
globe, to advance progressive demands and perspectives for new forms of
global partnerships, co-operation and solidarity.

The ANC has noted with great appreciation the deepening co-operation
between Angola and Brazil. These countries of the South have so much in
common, apart from the fact that they were colonised by Portugal. In the
past few days, the two countries met in bilateral co-operation talks aimed
at deepening co-operation in the areas of economics, scientific and
technical education.

The ANC welcomes the efforts by countries of the South aimed at improving
integration and South-South co-operation. I thank you.

                          “US” AND “THEM” IN SPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M MDLALOSE (Nadeco): Madam Speaker, as the festivities of South
Africa’s victory in France continue throughout the country, it is important
for us to take a moment to reflect upon certain observations: Firstly,
South Africans across all racial, political and religious divisions were
united in anticipation and, finally, in jubilation.

The first lesson to be learnt is that we as a country need to do away with
the concept of “us” and “them” that begins by being comfortable with the
self and carving a national identity. The second lesson to be learnt is
that it is an open secret that, in preparation for the upcoming World Cup,
these concepts of “us” and “them” will pop up once again.

Pessimism is rife and it is fuelled by racial undertones. We as politicians
have the platform to ensure that this spirit of euphoria is able to
continue in preparation for the second World Cup.

The third lesson is that healthy and constructive interventions from
government are needed to ensure that sport is not categorised along racial
lines, whereby the youth in the townships are not exposed to rugby and
their only exposure is through the media.

We as Nadeco pose a challenge to the Department of Sport and Recreation to
ensure that the Siyadlala mass participation programme redoubles its
efforts in creating access for previously disadvantaged groups to rugby and
other sports that are racially categorised. Thank you.

                      RIGHT AND ACCESS TO POTABLE WATER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R B BHOOLA (MF): Madam Speaker, transition in the arena of human rights
has woken us up to the reality of the harsh and inhuman nature of solitary
confinement. Correctional Services has shifted to having an inmate serve
time in a single holding cell, alone instead.

It is well known that all life needs water to survive and it is troubling
to note that apart from people around the country still waiting patiently
for access to potable water, in the event that those who have access to
running water in their homes are unable to keep up with payments, their
water supply is cut off until payment is made.

Furthermore, the time period of 48 hours is sometimes a minimum and
sometimes a maximum waiting period for reconnection. Also, in the Western
Cape, it is reported that while disconnections are made during the day,
reconnections only commence after 6pm daily.

We seriously feel that it is inhumane to expect any human to live without
water and that an alternative solution to addressing late payment needs to
be found. We also suggest that the timeframe for reconnections should be
seriously addressed, as 48 hours is inhumane and not in line with our Bill
of Rights. Thank you.

        CLOSING OF DORINGBOS PRIMARY BY GAUTENG EDUCATION DEPARTMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A M DREYER (DA): Mev die Speaker, die Laerskool Doringbos by Hekpoort in
die munisipale gebied Mogale City gee onderrig aan 150 Setswana-sprekende
kinders. Die Laerskool Hekpoort in dieselfde omgewing gee onderrig in
Afrikaans aan sowat 130 leerders van alle rasSegroepe.

Sonder ‘n verduideliking maak die Gautengse onderwysdepartement die
Laerskool Doringbos toe, en sy leerders moet hulle nou by die Laerskool
Hekpoort inskryf. Terwyl daar ’n kritieke tekort aan skole en klaskamers in
Gauteng is, sal die Laerskool Doringbos volgende jaar leeg staan. Kinders
van die Laerskool Hekpoort, wat 5km van die skool in die Noordwes-provinsie
woon, mag nie verder daar skoolgaan nie en moet nou elders ’n heenkome
soek.

Kinders van albei skole word ontwrig. Daar was geen konsultasie met die
ouers van enige van die twee skole nie. Mev die Speaker, ’n massiewe
vaardigheidstekort staar Suid-Afrika in die gesig en onderwysstandaarde
versleg daagliks, maar die onderwysdepartement offer kinders se toekoms en
opvoeding op ter wille van politieke magsvertoon.(Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Ms A M DREYER (DA): Madam Speaker, the Doringbos Primary School at
Hekpoort in the Mogale City Municipal area is teaching 150 Setswana
speaking children. The Hekpoort Primary School in the same area is teaching
about 130 learners from all race groups in Afrikaans.

Without explanation the Gauteng Department of Education has closed down the
Doringbos Primary School and its learners will now have to enrol at the
Hekpoort Primary School. While there is a critical shortage of schools and
classrooms in Gauteng, Doringbos Primary School will stand empty next year.
Children from the Hekpoort Primary School, who live 5km from the school in
the North West Province, may no longer go to school there and will now have
to seek refuge elsewhere.

Children from both schools are being disrupted. There was no consultation
with the parents of either of the two schools. Madam Speaker, South Africa
is facing a massive skills shortage and the standard of education is
deteriorating by the day, but the department of education is sacrificing
children’s futures and education for the sake of a political display of
power.]

          NEGATIVE IMPACT OF GLOBALISATION ON DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T E LISHIVHA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, globalisation has produced
both opportunities and constraints. Rich nations have benefited, whereas
poor nations have not. Social disparities have been deepened between and
within the countries.

Africa and the rest of the developing world has become the training ground
for developed nations in areas such as engineering, teaching, health
services and the financial sectors. Developed Western countries, in their
quest to save and minimise cost and maximise returns, are producing too few
engineers, doctors and nurses even to meet their own demands. As a result,
they are plundering developing countries for the skills that they have
failed to create and are making it more difficult, or impossible, for
developing countries to reduce poverty and attend to their developmental
goals.

This process of immigrant professionals, who leave their countries of
origin in pursuit of higher wages in the developed countries, is
contributing to large disparities between rich and poor countries. The ANC
believes that the process of globalisation should be understood as
compromising a positive future and we should work for the deepening of
understanding of this globalisation phenomenon. Thank you.

    CONGRATULATING SADESMO ON ITS STUDENT REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL VICTORY
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S P LEBENYA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP would like to
congratulate the SA Democratic Student Movement, Sadesmo, on winning yet
another student representative council election.

Last week the IFP congratulated Sadesmo on winning all the seats on the
student representative council at the University of Zululand. We also said
that the victory might be an indication of things to come and a wake-up
call to all those who thought that they would rule until Jesus comes back.
The IFP was correct in making this judgment.

This week we want to congratulate Sadesmo on winning the student
representative council elections, securing nine out of twelve seats, at the
Mangosuthu Technikon in Durban. [Interjections.] This fantastic victory
once again affirms that Sadesmo is an organisation steeped in a culture of
good governance and an organisation that is committed to the battle for
proper and stable education at all tertiary institutions.

The IFP wishes Sadesmo well and we know that this definitely wasn’t the
last victory for them. We know that they will build on these successes and
go from strength to strength, from here. I thank you. [Applause.]

                             OPENING OF NEW ROAD
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu T L MAHLABA (ANC): Phini likaSomlomo, umzabalazo wokwakha umnotho lapho
bonke abantu bakithi beyobamba iqhaza uyaqhubeka. Kulo Mgqibelo esisuka
kuwo uNgqongqoshe Wezokuthutha uvule umgwaqo obizwa ngeNkodibe Interchange,
oxhumanisa i-Richards Bay kanye neGauteng. Ukwakhiwa kwalo mgwaqo kuqhubele
phambili izinjongo zikahulumeni we-ANC zokuvulela imiphakathi amathuba
emisebenzi kanye nokulekelela abamnyama ukuba babambe iqhaza kwezomnotho.

Ngokuvula amathuba emisebenzi kanye namathuba kosomabhizinisi abancane, lo
mgwaqo uzolekelela ekwenzeni ngcono izimpilo zabantu bakithi.
SinguKhongolose, siyayincoma imisebenzi emihle kahulumeni waleli zwe
yokwakha ikusasa eliqhakazile, elinokuthula, inqubekelaphambili kanye
nobuntu. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr T L MAHLABA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the struggle to build an economy in
which our people will participate continues. This past Saturday saw the
Minister of Transport opening a road called Nkodibe Interchange, which
links Richards Bay and Gauteng. The building of this road has furthered the
aims of the ANC-led government regarding the creation of job opportunities
for communities and assisting black people to take part in the economy.

By creating jobs and opportunities for entrepreneurs, this road will assist
in improving the lives of our people. As the ANC, we commend the good work
done by the government of this country in building a prosperous and
peaceful future that is based on development and ubuntu. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

                   ELECTION OF SRC AT UNIVERSITY OF VENDA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mev D VAN DER WALT (DA): Adjunkspeaker, die winde van verandering is
duidelik besig om in ons land te waai, ook by die Universiteit van Venda in
Limpopo. Die onlangse verkiesing van die nuwe studenteraad by dié
universiteit, wat aan die DA sy eerste setel besorg het – dis ook
interessant dat die ANC net een setel kon inpalm – is bewys dat die jeug
van Suid-Afrika deel wil wees van ’n werklik demokratiese bestel wat ’n oop
gemeenskap en gelyke geleenthede aan almal wil bied. Baie geluk aan
Humphrey en sy span! (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Deputy Speaker, the winds of change are
definitely blowing in our country; also at the University of Venda in
Limpopo. The recent election of the new SRC at this university, which
presented the DA with its first seat – it is also interesting that the ANC
could only secure one seat – is proof that the youth of South Africa want
to be part of a truly democratic dispensation that seeks to present an open
society and equal opportunities to all. Congratulations to Humphrey and his
team!]

                      THE IMPORTANCE OF BLACK WEDNESDAY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M NTULI (ANC): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The ANC notes that 19
October 2007 marked the commemoration of the 30th anniversary of what was
called Black Wednesday, the weekend on which newspapers, individuals and
political organisations were banned. We also note that individuals like
Percy Qoboza, Pearl Luthuli, Thami Mazwai and Aggrey Klaaste made a very
important contribution. The banning took place on 19 October 1977 as the
then apartheid regime attempted in vain to repress freedom of expression
and the press in general.

The 19th of October presents us with an opportunity to affirm the
democratic values enshrined in our Constitution, to evaluate the progress
we have made, to realise the fundamental right of freedom of expression and
to identify the challenges that stand in the way of freedom of expression,
multiplicity of voice and freedom of the press. Those among the commercial
and public media who have the space to express themselves need to
understand that this current vibrant and dynamic, profitable industry of
the commercial and public media has been made possible by millions of
people who made sacrifices and in some cases the ultimate sacrifice.
We need to encourage both the SABC and the SA National Editors’ Forum,
Sanef, to implement recommendations to give a voice to the voiceless, who
are the majority of our people. We also wish to see a speedy process of
transformation of the media. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

    CHALLENGES FACING SOUTH AFRICA SEEN IN LIGHT OF SPRINGBOK RUGBY TEAM
                        WINNING 2007 RUGBY WORLD CUP

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Speaker, firstly, I want to
congratulate the Chief Whip of the Majority Party for remembering the
stalwart Papwa “Sewsunker” Sewgolum, of whom many members of the House have
seemingly never heard. We have praise for Gary Player, but Papwa Sewgolum
beat the very same Gary Player twice in the South African Open! It was not
for the first victory that they gave him that trophy on a rainy Saturday
afternoon. Hon Chief Whip, we thank you very much. I am sure Papwa’s
friends and relatives will be very pleased to hear that this august House
remembers him.

I also want to align our department with the congratulations that have come
from different members, and indeed from this House, to the Springbok team
that won the 2007 Rugby World Cup in France. We had, contrary to all
others, anticipated this victory, precisely because we not only analysed
their performance; we also analysed the various pools in which the teams
played. Of course, witnessing them play on Saturday night, there was no
doubt in our minds that our team would win.

We want to repeat what we have said to the media: This victory has
galvanised the people of South Africa much more than the one in 1995 did.
There were no disruptive flags and, indeed, those people who did not agree
with the event simply stayed at home and avoided the insults that we saw in
Goodwood that afternoon.

We must agree that this World Cup opens yet another window, nay, it opens a
door, to what South Africa is capable of becoming. We have squandered that
opportunity since 1995; I hope we’ll not squander it now in 2007! Indeed, I
hope that the people of South Africa, who this morning occupied every inch
that was available at OR Tambo International Airport, will not let go of
the prize that they have reclaimed – the sport of rugby football. This
sport has been enjoyed by our people in this country for more than a
hundred years.

Of course, the younger generation, who continue to say that it must be
introduced in the townships, will not remember that history. They will not
have been part of that experience. Indeed, they will not be part of the
development programmes that are taking place in various parts of this
country. I have not visited one province where people who are in
disadvantaged positions are not being introduced to rugby football and are
not playing rugby football.

The last place I visited after Ladysmith was Durban City itself, where 500
schoolchildren from the black communities were playing rugby - from primary-
school level right up to high-school level. This happened last month and
this was not a unique occasion; it is something that you will see wherever
you go, in the villages and townships, wherever the people that no camera
will follow can be found.

The challenges, which are socioeconomic in nature, and indeed also relate
to the providing of infrastructure, are not going to go away just because
we have won a World Cup today. These challenges need a serious will on the
part of the people of South Africa to address these issues. These are the
dietary issues in our communities, the challenges that are dietary in
nature and the challenges that are physiological in nature.

You are not going to get a very good rugby-playing child from Qamdobowa or
Qingolo. Such a child will never play in the Springbok side, no matter how
good he is. He has to be exposed to the food and the gym and the other
physiological things that will improve not only his cardiovascular
performance, but will also enhance his opportunities to be seen by the
media in order to be exposed to those who must take decisions on these
things.
Last, but not least, the economic and business houses of this country, who
continue to be in charge of our sport, must also come out of their cocoons
and make these resources available, irrespective of race, colour or creed.
Without that these children the hon speaker referred to, are not going to
get anywhere, no matter how much they like the game of rugby. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, Minister. You will come
back for other questions. You have really dealt sufficiently with that one.
Can I give other Ministers an opportunity and then you can come back?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Thank you. [Applause.]

                      RIGHT AND ACCESS TO POTABLE WATER

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I’d like to
respond very briefly to the statement made by member Bhoola of the MF.

Firstly, I’d like to thank the member for recognising the transformative
work and the paradigm shift that the Department of Correctional Services
has embarked on since 2004.

Secondly, I’d like to remind members of this House that 2005 saw the
adoption of the White Paper on Corrections, also a milestone in the history
of the Department of Correctional Services. The White Paper on Corrections
places a responsibility on all of us, the Department of Correctional
Services, community members and NGOs, to focus on the issue of correcting
offending behaviour, rehabilitating and successfully reintegrating ex-
offenders or former inmates back into their communities and their families.

Thirdly, as the Department of Correctional Services we also recognise and
will not compromise the human rights of all those in our care, including
the provision of basic services such as food, water and medical care. Of
course, we do all of this in partnership with our sister government
departments. Thank you.

                       NAMES OF NATIONAL SPORTS TEAMS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, the last question I want
to respond to is the one raised by the hon Skosana on the names of the
national teams. I know that he quipped on some of them, but not on all of
them.

I agree with him that there is a desperate need for a proper process of
giving names to South African teams, rather than this anecdotal approach:

“What are you called?”

“No, we played so well we think we should be called the Springboks.”

That was in 1896.

“What are these boys called?”

“No, Abafana bafana; Amaglugglug – Sasol’s brand Amaglugglug –
Amakrokokroko...” which I think is very insulting to people with
disabilities.

I think we should have a more structured way of discussing and agreeing,
consensually, on what our national teams should be called. [Applause.]

  FILLING OF VACANCY ON COUNCIL OF INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF
                                SOUTH AFRICA

     (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Communications)

There was no debate.

Declarations of vote:

Mr R L PADAYACHIE: Chairperson, a vacancy occurred in the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa as a result of the resignation of
a councillor. The Portfolio Committee on Communications invited the public
to nominate candidates for this particular position. The committee received
a total of 29 applications across the spectrum, different professions, etc.
We eventually short-listed six people for interviews. Those interviews were
conducted a few days ago, and we are pleased to nominate two persons for
this particular vacancy. It is up to the Minister to choose one of them.

The first person that we are recommending to the House for possible
appointment is Ms Refiloe Msiza. She is a lawyer by profession, comes from
Gauteng and has an extremely strong personality with extensive legal
experience, which we think is important for Icasa.

The other person is Mr Thembekile Ndlovu, a former member of the Department
of Communications. He had resigned voluntarily two years ago. He has
extensive experience in the media, both as a practitioner and as a policy
shaper. He is very experienced, very mature and a very balanced person.

The ANC is pleased to announce and I am pleased to recommend these two
names for consideration by the House and their eventual adoption. We also
want to thank the opposition parties for supporting both these names. Thank
you.

Ms M SMUTS: We will support these recommendations, but there is something
that is worth saying. There is only one vacancy at Icasa, but under the
Icasa Act, as amended after that very long drawn-out battle in 2006, which
included the President sending the Bill back to the NA, we have to send the
Minister one and a half times the number of names needed, therefore in this
case two names. In other words she is given a discretion and it is worth
saying that this is not how appointments to the independent institutions
should work.

The Ad Hoc Committee on the Review of State Institutions Supporting
Constitutional Democracy has made clear its view that the roles given to
Ministers in the appointment processes at Icasa, but also at the Cultural
Commission and at PanSALB, are a cause for concern. This ministerial role
can be seen as infringing on the independence of the institutions and these
are institutions which are structurally independent, and as such, it is
inappropriate.

As the ad hoc committee noted in its report, Ministers should play no role.
The same applies, in fact, to the hon President. Until now, he has been the
person who appointed the Icasa councillors and he does the same thing in
the case of the other Chapter 9 bodies.

It is a point that Parliament should understand clearly, sir. I quote from
the Chapter 9 report, because there is clearly so much misunderstanding:


  The President’s powers are nondiscretionary; in the sense that provided
  the correct procedure has been followed, he may not refuse to make the
  appointment. The people that Parliament chooses are the people who should
  go and serve on these bodies. The President’s role is to carry out the
  National Assembly’s recommendations.

In this case we support the portfolio committee’s selection, because the
best candidate is included and we can therefore hardly vote against it. But
we do urge the revision of the Icasa Act in the light of this situation and
the recommendations.

May I just say to my hon colleagues, the members, we would dearly like to
see the publication of that Chapter 9 review, because it includes other
recommendations members would be interested in, for example, the matter of
the registration of voters in South Africa into which the Independent
Electoral Commission and all political parties put so much work. There is a
recommendation that the registration of voters should occur automatically
from the other documents in the possession of the state. It is something we
recommend strongly. We would also like to recommend the publication of the
Chapter 9 review.
Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, when appointing new councillors it is imperative
that the independence of Icasa is safeguarded. It must be able to function
without any commercial or political interference. The fact that Icasa is
underresourced places more pressure on councillors and the Icasa Amendment
Act has also added additional functions requiring councillors to conduct
investigation, monitoring and enforcement functions.

In view of the further fact that each of the core functions of Icasa has
been devolved to one or more councillors, depending on their area of
expertise, it is imperative that the candidate who is to fill the vacancy
should be suitably qualified. Twenty-nine applications were received and
six applicants were short-listed for interviews, and we understand that the
final list contains the candidates that were suitably experienced and that
the opposition’s candidate, Mr Cupido, also had experience in state-owned
enterprises.

The ACDP notes that the chairperson indicated that at the end of the day it
was a very difficult choice as to which names should be put forward. Mr
Ndlovu and Ms Msiza were the candidates put forward. We are satisfied that
a transparent process was conducted in finalising a short list of
candidates, but regret that at least one name recommended by the opposition
was not put forward. This would have allayed concerns, whether perceived or
real, that Icasa’s independence was being compromised by having only the
majority party’s nominees forwarded to the Minister.

It is also regrettable that the Minister should have the discretion to
finalise appointments to this independent body. However, having said this,
the ACDP will support the short list of candidates. Thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD has no doubt that the candidates short-
listed to fill the post in Icasa are equally capable to fill the position
with ease. The selection process has been free and fair and whoever is
finally selected would know that they have been up against stiff
competition.

The person who is selected would possibly be aware of the challenges that
will still face Icasa and the position requires someone who can meet the
delivery objectives of the council.

A key responsibility of the incumbent will be to work towards instilling
confidence in the communications industry that Icasa is committed to the
reduction of any backlogs in licences in the shortest possible time. One of
the major tasks that must be fast-tracked is the provision of communication
services to the underserviced communities.

The underserviced areas licensees are struggling to roll out services as
they are struggling to attain their licences. The person that fills the
position must be performance driven, goal orientated, able to understand
the demands of the developmental state, have the skill of a good
administrator and not have personal gain as the primary focus for getting
the position.

Finally, we trust that whoever is placed in the position is there because
of having the required competencies and wish that person every success in
the new post. Thank you.

Question put: That the names of Ms R Msiza and Mr T Ndlovu be submitted to
the Minister of Communications for consideration for appointment to the
Council of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa.

Question agreed to.

The names of Ms R Msiza and Mr T Ndlovu accordingly to be submitted to the
Minister of Communications for consideration for appointment to the Council
of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa.


                    INDIA, BRAZIL AND SOUTH AFRICA SUMMIT

     (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs)

Dr A N LUTHULI: Chairperson, I’m presenting the Report of the Portfolio
Committee on Foreign Affairs on the India, Brazil and South Africa Summit
held on 13 September 2006. The report is well-outlined in the ATCs. I will
give the background to the contents of the report.

Globalisation, which penetrates every country and every sector of the
economy, has been advanced through complex and shifting combinations of
direct operation of economic market forces. This was achieved through
exertion of economic and political pressures, the utilisation of
technological and ideological instruments.

These dimensions have received the attention of critical analysts and
progressive forces, particularly on the blatant unilateralism and
aggressive militarism of the current global superpower, the United States
of America. While global institutions of governance have been established,
there is a systematic sidelining or subordination, and even displacing of
these global institutions.

South-South relations started when the more informed and proactive
developing countries initiated discussions and dialogue on their common
problems and then created informal working alliances to deal with such
problems. It started with the earliest initiative that was known as the
Like Minded Group, LMG, bringing together some 15 governments of the
developing countries. Depending on the issue of focus in the forum, the LMG
at various points included other developing countries from across the
world.

However, this LMG grouping was later superseded by the participation of
most developing countries in formally constituted groupings, which include
among others the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade – GATT - and the
World Trade Organisation - WTO. From the start, India played a proactive
role in both the GATT and the WTO and became a leading participant in many
of the initiatives of the developing countries.

However, South Africa and Brazil were not participants in the informal
groupings of the proactive developing countries in the WTO. Instead, from
the start it publicly joined the Cairns group, consisting of large and
developed agricultural exporting countries such as Chile, Argentina, New
Zealand and Australia, which dominated the grouping.

However, long before the formation of groupings of developing countries
within the WTO, countries of the South had joined together in many
international alliances. For instance, in the context of anti-colonial
struggles and post-independence neo-colonialism in the South, and in the
face of imperialism by the North, the common objective of the countries of
Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean was to protect and promote
their common interests. The ANC stated and reaffirmed that:
   South Africa stands firmly as a country of the South. We are therefore
   deeply conscious of the importance of developing and sustaining
   multilateral forums which address the interests of the South. A
   democratic South Africa will play an active role in the development and
   strengthening of multilateral fora which empower the nations of the
   South, hence the India, Brazil and South Africa alliance.


In fact, the overall global balance of economic, political and military
power, and the fundamental distortions and dangers posed by the current
domination of the world, require new countervailing alliances of the
countries of the South. It is within this context that considerable
significance should be attached to the alliance between India, Brazil and
South Africa. The distinctive character of this alliance is the fact that
it is based on only three of the largest emerging economies of the South,
which are established democracies that claim to share certain political
affinities.

Although the interactions between India, Brazil and South Africa started
long before the relationship between these three countries was formalised
with the adoption of the Brasilia Declaration on 6 June 2006, this alliance
exists to promote South-South dialogue and co-operation and develop common
positions on issues of international importance. In particular, it seeks to
promote trade and investment opportunities between these three regions and
to alleviate international poverty.
The summit of 13 September 2006 was preceded by academics and business
people who held discussions the day before the actual summit of the heads
of state, governments and ministers. Their discussion is well-outlined in
the report itself. I would advise hon members to read the report.

The academic summit mainly focused on science and technology, innovation
and economic development and co-operation, public policies and social
development, democracy and cultural diversity. They stressed closer
relations and co-operation between the three countries.

When the heads of state met they discussed the issues that had been raised
by the academic and business summit’s discussions. Those are also well
outlined in the report. The views of the chief executive officers can be
summarised and they are well summarised in the report.

The Ministers signed agreements and even those I can allude to briefly: the
IBSA Action Plan on Trade Facilitation for Standards, Technical Regulations
and Conformity Assessment, Memorandum of Understanding on Biofuels,
Memorandum of Understanding on Trilateral Co-operation on Agriculture and
Allied Fields, the IBSA Trilateral Agreement Concerning Merchant Shipping
and other Marine Transport Related Matters and the IBSA Framework of Co-
operation on Information Society. At the end, the heads of state and
leaders of government made a joint press statement, which is long and well
outlined in the report.

After the report was considered by the Foreign Affairs Committee they
recommended: Firstly, that the Minister of Foreign Affairs brief the
Committee within six months to discuss the implementation of the MOUs and
trilateral agreements signed by the respective heads of state and of
government; and, secondly, that the Department of Foreign Affairs brief the
Committee on a quarterly basis on outstanding matters relating to India,
Brazil and South Africa, IBSA - the Dialogue Forum.

The committee further recommended that, in light of the success of the IBSA
summit, the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs would like to recommend
that the House, through its relevant forums, gives consideration to
establishing a multilateral parliamentary forum with the parliaments of
India and Brazil to oversee the implementation of agreements and MOUs of
the IBSA Dialogue Forum of 13 September 2006, which was held in Brazil. Of
course, we all know now that there has already been another summit in 2007.
It has already taken place.

Chairperson, I ask this hon House to adopt this report. I thank you.

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 15:06.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

      1) The Minister of Housing


          a) Wetsontwerp op Maatskaplike Behuising  [W 29 – 2007] (National
             Assembly– sec 76).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Social
         Housing Bill [B 29 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76).

          b) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Huurbehuising  [W 30 – 2007] (National
             Assembly– sec 76).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Rental
         Housing Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1     Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on the study tour
    to Algeria, dated 18 September 2007:

    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence having undertaken a study tour
    to the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria from 26 November to 1
    December 2006, reports as follows:

 1. Background: Algeria


            Algeria, in northwest Africa on the Mediterranean coast, is the
            second largest country in Africa after Sudan. The Sahara covers
            more than four-fifths of its territory, where the inhabitants
            are concentrated in oases. More than 90 percent of Algerians
            live along the Mediterranean coastlands on only 12 percent of
            the country’s land.
            Since antiquity Algeria has enticed settlers- Phoenicians,
            Romans, Arabs, Turks- and, in the 19th century, French farmers.
            The French organized Algeria into departments and
            disenfranchised native Arabs and Berbers. In 1954 Algerians
            rebelled. The war that followed took a million lives before
            independence in 1962 and a million French colonists left. This
            conflict forged a deep rooted sense of Algerian national
            identity. The Front Liberation Nationale (FLN), who led the
            liberation struggle against France, became Algeria’s only legal
            political party at independence (1962) resulting in Algeria
            becoming a socialist single-party state under the FLN.


    1.1    Relations with South Africa.


            Algeria remains SA’s strategic partner in North Africa based on
            economic and political criteria. Synergy at the executive level
            in terms of the AU and NEPAD has resulted in a Presidential Bi-
            national Commission. Bilateral trade and business links have
            developed slowly due to a difficult business environment and
            weak direct links between the two countries. Growing relations
            exist in the sectors of military technical and military
            industrial co-operation.
            Bilaterally, South Africa and Algeria have developed close co-
            operation in the field of defence and intelligence. South
            African defence companies are continuing projects with Algeria
            and tendering for new contracts. The second Joint Committee in
            charge of co-operation in the field of Defence was held in March
            2006 where it was agreed to extend a range of interactions such
            as training programmes, joint exercises, technology transfer and
            exploring military production capabilities and partnerships.
    2.     Composition of JSCD Delegation.

       • Mr S D Montsitsi, (ANC), Chairperson and Leader of the Delegation
       • Mr  M A Mzizi (IFP)
       • Ms M D Nxumalo (ANC)
       • Mr J Schippers (ANC) and
       • Mr J Ramrock (Committee Secretary)

    3.     Objectives of the visit


            The objective of the visit was to study how Algeria was able to
            introduce a successful pension scheme system, including,
            programmes and projects that assisted and alleviated the plight
            of their military veterans. Algeria is also one of few countries
            on the continent leading with respect to creating and improving
            the best conditions for exit mechanism for military veterans.


   4. Findings.


    4.1    Meeting with Conseil de la Nation (Upper House of Parliament).

            The delegation was met and welcomed by the Acting Chair of the
            Committee on Defence, General A Cheloufi and other Committee
            members. General Cheloufi spoke of the warm relations between
            Algeria and South Africa and the common historical background
            (colonisation) shared by the two countries. Algeria fought a
            long and bitter war of liberation against France. Various
            military factions combined to form the National Liberation Front
            (FLN). Liberation forces were not paid a salary but were very
            committed. Dedicated former combatants were deployed into
            various governing positions after liberation. Patriotism played
            a major unity role including the move from a liberation army to
            a national army. Political involvement by defence force members
            was discouraged and those that wanted to participate in politic
            were asked to leave the army and join political parties of their
            choice. Transforming the army into a professional army became a
            big problem initially, but this was overcome later. A Ministry
            of Veteran Affairs was later formed.

 2. Meeting with Assembly National Populaire (Lower House of Parliament).


            Mr Mouhamed Dif, Chairperson of the Committee on Defence, and
            other members of the Committee in the Lower House, addressed the
            delegation on the history of the Algerian Parliament including
            the different political parties and number of seats held by
            them.
            Pension payments are regulated by legislation that included in
            it the modernization of the Algerian army
            The Ministry of Defence was responsible for the pension payment
            of liberation fighters who remained in the barracks after the
            war. There were two categories of fighters: those that fought in
            the bush and those that fought outside the bush. War veterans,
            including widows of war veterans, all received pension benefits.
            The number of years fought in the struggle is doubled for
            counting the number of years as experience.
            Priority was given to the setting up of centers for benefit
            payments to war veterans and, in particular, war orphans.
            Statistics were collected countrywide, one year after
            liberation, on the number of war orphans, including the sons and
            daughters of martyrs. They received free education, health and
            other social benefits. Females were assisted until they marry
            and those who stay un-married were provided with pension for
            life.

    4.3    Meeting with the South African Ambassador.
            The delegation met the South African Ambassador to Algeria, Mr R
            S Moloi, and his officials for a briefing session. The
            Ambassador reminded the delegation of the historical close ties
            South Africa shares with Algeria and what steps are in place to
            try and strengthen those ties. Algeria is a founding member of
            NEPAD and continues to give active support to the NEPAD
            Secretariat. President Bouteflika wants to be associated with
            South Africa, and believes that if the two countries are seen as
            close allies within the continent and beyond, it will assist him
            in driving his African and global vision domestically.
            The Algerian market holds substantial potential for South
            African investors. Hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals,
            infrastructural construction, the financial and manufacturing
            sectors offer lucrative opportunities. An incomplete
            transformation to a market economy in Algeria, limits the
            potential for Algerian direct investment and private sector
            involvement in South Africa.
            Algeria is also experiencing a serious security challenge in the
            east, where Islamic insurgents have staged frequent attacks
            targeting government buildings.


    4.4    Meeting with the Secretary – General of the Ministry of
            Moudjahidine (War Veterans)


            The Secretary – General of the Ministry of Moudjahidine (War
            Veterans) briefed the delegation on the historical reasons for
            the establishment of the Ministry. The war of liberation was
            very costly, in terms of lost of lives and other casualties.
            Over one million Algerians were killed and some 700,000
            disabled. The first task of the Ministry of Moudjahidine was to
            identify and create files of those who died and those that were
            disabled. So, a file existed for each person in that category.
            All provinces in the country have special departments with full
            data on all martyrs and their beneficiaries. The disabled and
            the families of those that were killed were given preference on
            social and other state benefits. The widows and children of
            martyrs were provided with full pension payments, the same with
            the disabled depending on the severity of the injury. Medical
            coverage, including prosthetics at all military and state
            hospitals was free for all beneficiaries, the same with medicine
            from pharmacies. They were also provided with discounts on state
            transport, including sea, air, road and rail. Those with severe
            handicaps travelled free. Discount on house renting were also
            provided. Beneficiaries received physiotherapy and free
            accommodation at guest houses, including spas. Projects on land
            and agriculture, and mining exploration, were also availed to
            veterans.
            The 40th anniversary of Algerian independence (2002) became the
            cut-off date for registration of claims.

            4.4.1 Department of Heritage.


                  The delegation also visited the Department of Heritage,
                  responsible for the collecting, writing and distribution
                  of reading and printing of books, documents and other
                  materials, including films on the revolution.


            4.4.2 Data and filing section.


                  The data and filing section contained case documents on
                  each and every individual registered for benefits, some 7
                  km of material.
                  Each beneficiary received an amount of 10,000 Lira
                  (R1,000) every three (3) months. This is paid out at
                  specific centers including post offices. Monitoring is
                  done through the issuing of “living certificates” each
                  year to beneficiaries that provide certified forms.
                  The pension of parents who died is transferred to their
                  children until they reach the age of 18 years or 21 years
                  if attending school/college/university.
                  The budget for the Ministry of Veteran Affairs is the
                  fourth largest of their National Budget.


            4.4.3 Cultural and Historical Heritage Directorate.


                  The Cultural and Historical Heritage Directorate works
                  very closely with the Department of Heritage. It also
                  deals with the caption and recording of events related to
                  the revolution. It is also responsible for the protection
                  and maintenance of monuments and the grave sites of
                  martyrs. This is in partnership with NGO’s in the various
                  provinces, who also oversee museums. The Directorate is
                  also responsible for the servicing of the National Wall of
                  Remembrance situated in the capital, Algiers. The Wall
                  contains the names of all martyrs and is commemorated each
                  year. The Algerian calendar provides for nine different
                  days to celebrate the Revolution.


 5. Meeting with Officials from the Ministry of Defence


            The delegation met with officials from the Ministry of Defence
            who re-iterated the views expressed earlier by other officials,
            on the system on pension and social security. When people within
            the Defence force retire they are provided with three months
            salary in advance. Pension is calculated according to the
            minimum national wage. The amount a person gets depends on the
            number of service years he/she has, for example. an ordinary
            soldier qualifies only after 15 years of service; someone with
            25 years of service can receive a pension immediately.
            The pension retirement age for ordinary soldiers is 40 and for
            officers 60.
            Veteran’s pension payment depends on rank and number of service
            years. The revolutionary period is regarded as service years.
            Military service is compulsory to every citizen.
            Treasury has special agreements with commercial banks to stand
            as guarantors for military veterans when loans are sought,
            although granting a loan is not automatic.
            The Military Pension Act is going through review at the moment
            to fit the current situation and concerns of pensioners.
            There is also legislation in place that forbids any discharged
            military person from joining any security related company for at
            least five years.

    5.1     Visit to the Central Museum of the Army.


            Members of the delegation were also able to visit the Central
            Museum of the Army, which was created by a decree of the
            Ministry of National Defence and was inaugurated 1 November ,
            1984, the thirtieth anniversary of the Algerian Revolution.
            The Museum is a military institution managed by the Directory of
            Communication, Information and Orientation.
            The museum houses more than 3000 objects and works, including
            over 2000 books, thousands of documents and archives that were
            collected in a decade. Through the history that it exposed, the
            museum is a vivid institution in which an attractive and
            spectacular evolution is exhibited, and also serves as a library
            for historical research.
            It periodically organizes exhibitions showing the different
            historical periods such as the different battles (naval and
            land) fought earlier.


    6.     Conclusion.
            The delegation believes that it met its objectives with the
            study tour. The experience of the Algerian experiment in
            assisting their Military Veterans with sustainable and viable
            social security benefits is strongly recommended as a model to
            other African countries.
            South Africa has an opportunity to try and address and correct
            some of the challenges experienced by Military Veterans in the
            Republic of South Africa. The sacrifices made by these brave men
            and women of our country, beg for nothing more and nothing less.
            The Committee wishes to thank our Ambassador, Mr R S Moloi, for
            his hospitality and assistance to the delegation and for
            availing his officials, in particular Ms Roshan Dadoo, who
            played a sterling part in making the visit a success.


                           MONDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2007


TABLINGS

National Assembly

The Speaker

Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals


    (1)     The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker in accordance with Rule 234:

        (a)      Legislative Proposal Regarding Expunction of Criminal
             Records from Apartheid Laws (Mr J Selfe).


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
         Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.



