---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-03-13
---

TUESDAY, 13 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give
notice that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House      joins the UN and the EU in condemning the human
   rights violations, the police brutality and the arrest of Mr Morgan
   Tsvangirai at the instance of the Zimbabwe government because, if it
   fails to do so, it would mean that South Africa is complicit before,
   during and after the shocking situation in Zimbabwe.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That this House urgently debates South Africa’s response to the shocking
   human rights abuses taking place in Zimbabwe as the Zimbabwean government
   continues to ban all public gatherings, including prayer meetings, and
   brutally attacks and imprisons opposition leaders in the run up to the
   2008 elections.

Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House ... [Interjections.]

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a
point of order, we have not been given any notice ... [Interjections.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: No, you have.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: No, we haven’t, and I thought
there was an agreement amongst Whips that we wouldn’t be moving motions
today.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Mrs Dudley, let me say there hasn’t been
sufficient consultation. So, I think that we may do so and still have that
motion without notice tomorrow, if you are comfortable with that.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – APPROPRIATION
                         BILL 2007-8 NATIONAL BUDGET

There was no debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:
That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE - 2007-8 NATIONAL BUDGET

There was no debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:
That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.
Report accordingly adopted.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Mr N M NENE: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the online voice of the
ANC, commonly known as “ANC Today”, Volume 7 of 23 February 2007, in the
letter from the President carried an eloquent analysis of the 2007 Budget
and the theme chosen by the Minister of Finance, “Human life has equal
worth.” It is in this context that, as we debate this Appropriation Bill,
we reflect on the state of affairs as they have unfolded since the advent
of our democracy in 1994.

In his address the Minister posed the question whether we have done enough
to give practical effect in South Africa today to our shared humanity, and
if we have acted in a manner that shows that human life has equal worth. He
also questioned whether we still live in a society where the shadow of
history dominates the opportunities of an open society. He concludes this
point with these words: “Without a powerful countervailing, the shadow of
history will dictate opportunities, entitlements and outcomes.”

In the analysis I have referred to, the President’s letter identifies the
Budget as occupying a critical place among the major annual statements as
it allocates public sector resources to address the objectives stated in
the statement of 8 January, and the state of the nation address of this
year.

According to this analysis, the Budget also impacts on how the private
sector and civil society respond to the national challenges and, therefore,
it is important to understand the broad policy framework that informs any
budget.

It goes on to refer to the Budget Review that outlines the Medium-Term
Strategic Framework that defines the main priorities over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework. This framework seeks to enhance the social and
economic welfare of all South Africans as reflected in the following key
objectives. The first is that of accelerating the pace of economic growth;
the rate of investment in productive capacity; advancing the participation
of the marginalised in economic activity through expanded job creation and
the promotion of sustainable livelihoods. It also seeks to maintain and
expand a progressive social security net, alongside investment in community
services and human development. It also seeks to improve the capacity and
effectiveness of the state, including combating crime and promoting service-
oriented public administration, and finally, building regional and
international partnerships for growth and development.

These objectives, as stated in the Budget Review, constitute an important
part of our response to the task of enhancing social and economic welfare
of all South Africans and to achieve the goal of a better life for all. In
line with the central task of our national democratic revolution of
constructing a people-centred society that in practice demonstrates that it
values every human being on an equal basis, determined that each should
enjoy a life of dignity, regardless of race, colour, gender, age and
belief, this Budget focuses on those objectives.

What apartheid and colonialism bestowed upon us over the years continues to
haunt us to this day. Poverty and high levels of unemployment largely
affect unskilled black people with low levels of education. Gross
imbalances exist in the distribution of wealth, income and opportunities
along structural fault lines of race, gender and geographic space.

The state machinery that we had was constructed to serve the minority of
the population and repress the majority which was incapable of playing a
significant role as an instrument for the all-round development of society
as a whole. The system of public finances was structurally designed to
serve the purposes of a discriminatory and repressive state machinery and,
finally, the purposes of an economy that was incapable of achieving
significant growth, competing in the global markets and creating jobs.

All these and other socioeconomic challenges have occupied the centre stage
in the ANC-led government’s agenda since 1994. The trust placed by the
masses of our people in this movement is a great source of inspiration and
continues to drive our government to the realisation of the fundamental
goal of the national democratic revolution of building a nonracial,
nonsexist, democratic and prosperous society.

Driven by this ideal, we continue to see resources being deployed where it
matters most - on infrastructure and poverty alleviation.

Phini Lika Somlomo kanye NeNdlu ehloniphekileyo, awungivumele nje ngisho
ukuthi lo hulumeni oholwa yi ANC impela uyinkomo esengwa iviyo, noma- ke
singathi umfazi omabele made ngoba ukwazi ngisho nokuncelisa ingane
isemhlane. Ngisho lokhu ngoba phela umkhankaso wokulwa nomashayandawonye
usewukhathule kwaze kwabona ngisho ingane ekhasayo.

Isabelo sezimali salo nyaka siwuphawu olusobala lwalokhu engikushoyo. B,
bheka nje ngoba ukuzinza komnotho nje kunikeza ithuba lokuthi kuqiniswe
ukwakha amathuba emisebenzi kuphiende futhi kuqinise nezakhiwo
zemiphakathi, kuye kudlule kuqinise ngisho ukulethwa kwezidingo ngqangi
kubantu bakithi ikakhulukazi labo abadla imbuya ngothi.

Sizwile- ke futhi nokuthi labo abahola imali kadekle bona neyabantwana
bakhushulelwe. Kanjalo nalabo abahola eyokugula noma ukukhubazeka nabo
bathi ngcingci kamjoli. Into nje okumele siyenze emiphakathini yethu,
ukukhuza umkhonyovu kulabo abahola kungafanele ngoba siyabazi futhi sihlala
nabo. Uma bengawuyeki lo mkhuba, nazo ezikaDdalawane phezu kwabo,
bayohlangana nemamba iphunga umhluzi.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Deputy Madam Speaker and this august House, allow me to say that this ANC-
led government is like a cow milked by many and it can also be likened to a
woman with ample breasts, one who can breast-feed a child whilst carrying
her on her back. I say this because this government has gallantly fought
the frontiers of poverty to an extent that even a crawling child can
testify to this.

This year’s Budget debate is a clear indication of what I am saying. The
stability of the economy affords the chance to strengthen job creation
opportunities and the community structures. It goes on to intensify the
delivery of services to our people, especially those who are poverty-
stricken.

We also heard about the increment of the old age pension and the child
support grant. And those who get disability grants are also happy. What we
must do now in our communities is to expose those who get these grants
fraudulently because we know them and we live with them. And if they do not
stop this habit, they will be arrested, and they will get into serious
trouble.]

At the macroeconomic level, the committee, after the tabling of the Budget,
listened to the economists, academics, business and civil society. As the
committee’s report states, which we adopted here a few minutes ago, there
was general agreement amongst panellists that South Africa is currently
enjoying the longest sustained period of economic growth, with the current
upswing in the business cycle in its seventh year.

It is on this sound and prudent macroeconomic stability that this year’s
Budget builds. This enables the Budget to provide for further channelling
of the benefits of economic expansion to increase savings, economic and
employment growth, and it contributes to transformation and poverty
alleviation.

There was also consensus amongst the panellists that the Budget identified
the need for stronger export performance through the development of a
growth-oriented trade and industrial policy as it seeks to address the
constraints of higher economic growth.

Global conditions also continue to be favourable and supportive of our
strong economic outlook. The consolidation and expansion of economic growth
through fiscal policy that mitigates the boom and bust of the past business
cycles was equally welcomed. However, the global imbalance and reliance on
short-term capital inflows accompanied by a growing current account deficit
were mentioned as possible challenges to achieving the projected economic
growth.
On domestic economic outlook, allow me again to refer to some observations
by our panellists. According to Mr Maia of the Industrial Development
Corporation, although the pace of growth by the manufacturing sector was
below the economic average, it recorded substantial improvement in growth
performance with an average of 3% per annum versus 5% in the preceding
years.

The key driver behind the tertiary sector’s performance is the strong
domestic demand, more particularly in construction, electricity and
telecommunications. Panellists agreed that the primary sector’s
contribution to the gross domestic product has been substantially reduced
with National Treasury arguing that if one excludes this sector, the
economy would be growing at more than the 6% projected for 2010.

However, in the pre-Budget sessions that the committee held with various
sectors, it emerged that even though the primary sector is on the decline,
its contribution to the other sectors through forward and backward linkages
cannot be underestimated. This augurs well for job creation and subsequent
reduction of poverty.

Inflation remains the more pronounced focus of monetary policy and has been
under control for at least the past 41 consecutive months with the Consumer
Price Index averaging 4,6% in 2006 - well within the target range of 3% to
6%. Whilst the panellists did not enter the debate whether interest rates
are the best tool for controlling inflation, there was general consensus
that co-ordination between fiscal policy and monetary policy is yielding
positive results. Whilst this development was welcomed, warnings by the
Central Bank of impending risks in this regard should also not be
underestimated.

The current account deficit, as mentioned earlier, remains cause for
concern as it is a result of domestic spending on imports over the past two
years against poor export performance over the same period. Again, some
economists argue that, as long as these imports are capital goods, it will
have a positive effect in the long run. The other argument is that the
current account deficit not only reflects an imbalance between investment
and savings, but is also symptomatic of a country that is consuming more
than it produces.

The scenario I have painted is a clear indication of an economy that is
poised to deliver on its objective of poverty alleviation and acceleration
of economic development and, ultimately, guarantee a better life for all. I
thank you, Chairperson. I yield the rest of my minutes to the other
speakers. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, once again, the Minister has
presented this House with the Budget that has, as its mark, prudent
macroeconomic policies, which give us an excellent base for economic growth
going forward.

Let us acknowledge that 5% GDP growth is a good base from which to work. It
is a base, which brings us within striking distance of the 6% growth rate
set by the Deputy President’s growth initiative Asgisa, but let us remind
ourselves what our real challenge is, and that is to reduce unemployment to
below 15% and to halve the poverty rate in our country. Is 6% enough? Is 5%
sustainable?

The underlying problem in the South African economy is that growth has been
generated by the demand side, more particularly in a nontradeable sector of
the economy with this supply side remaining fairly muted.

As a nation we are consuming more than we are producing. The balance has to
be imported and this is manifesting itself in the growth of our current
account deficit. While household consumption demand may be levelling off,
the infrastructural roll-out, as envisioned by Asgisa and upon which the
government relies for the generation of growth, reinforces the demand side
with its high import content, which further boosts an already high import
bill.

So yes, we have GDP growth, but it is unbalanced growth. Gross domestic
expenditure is growing and continues to grow faster than gross domestic
product and imports are growing faster than exports. Import volumes for the
first nine months of 2006 rose 14,2%, an increase on the 12,1% growth for
the same period last year, while exports for the same period grew by only
2,2%, which is down on the 3,9% growth of the previous five years.

If we look at the contribution of sectors to GDP growth in real terms over
the 2002-06 period, where do we see the growth? It’s again mostly on the
demand side in the nontradeable sectors of the economy. Construction,
finance and business services, transport and communication, together with
wholesale and retail, were our strong growth sectors, while the tradeable
supply side sectors such as mining and manufacturing produced below average
growth and the agricultural, forestry and fishing sectors recorded negative
growth.

While it is acknowledged that growth in fixed investment has reached 12,5%
in the third quarter of 2006 and as a percentage of GDP improved to over
18%, this is still well short of the 25% growth figure required to reach
6%.

The government’s R415 billion infrastructural roll-out will push this
figure higher, yet as the Harvard economists point out, this “capital
deepening” is not where the key to growth acceleration lies. While, of
course, we acknowledge the need for, and are supportive of higher spending
on the infrastructural side in order to create and support an environment
in which the economy can grow, we also know that capital deepening at most
explains about a third of growth accelerations.

But, we have 5% growth, which together with good tax compliance and an
excellent connection service has enabled the government to grow its revenue
strongly. Indeed, revenue as a percentage of GDP has grown from 22,5%, when
the Minister first took office in 1996, to 28% in the present budget.

While the government has used these increased revenues laudably to bring
down debt, improve infrastructure and give personal tax relief, for Asgisa
to succeed, the government needs to stimulate the supply side rather than
boost demand. This need is all the more urgent in the light of strong
revenue flows, which will be needed in order to support the proposed social
security plan estimated to cost the fiscus between R20 to R30 billion a
year.

Yet, does this Budget address this need? In respect of fiscal policy, we
see the government yet again in this budget massaging the demand side with
personal income tax relief for individuals amounting to R8,4 billion. While
we clearly welcome this relief, we would have liked to see this accompanied
by strong supply side incentives, which the government clearly had the
fiscal space to do.

The decision to phase out STC, secondary tax on companies, and replace it
with a dividend tax is a modest stimulus to the supply side. While the
reduction of the rate from 12,5% to 10% will only result in the fiscus
sacrificing R2 billion in revenue, it will translate into a welcome decline
in effective company tax rate to 35,4%.

STC was never popular with foreign investors, a point made repeatedly by
ourselves. I cannot help but smile at this point in time, as I still have
the Minister’s rebuff to our own suggestion in 2005 that STC be scrapped
ringing in my ears. He responded to me in this House by saying: “It won’t
disappear for as long as the ANC is in government. Of that I give the
assurance.”

The proposal to introduce a wage subsidy to reduce the cost of doing
business by reducing the direct costs of employment and thereby alleviating
the high rate of joblessness is also welcomed by the DA. While this
proposal, which is also linked to the proposed social security reform
process, is still in its concept stage, I cannot help but reflect that when
the DA proposed the wage subsidy two years ago, I was accused by the
Minister of having a colonial mind as was told categorically by the
Minister that that would not happen.

What the Minister’s speech does raise however, is the prospect of a very
clear disincentive to the supply side, namely a possible tax on windfall
gains in the synthetic fuels industry. While countries like Qatar, India,
Australia and the USA are busy incentivising Sasol to utilise its
technology in their countries in order to reduce their oil import bill and
save foreign exchange, we threaten to slap an extra tax on them with a view
to limiting the extent to which the company can maximise their return on
investment.

Similarly, concerning the imminent imposition of a royalty tax on the
mining industry, on an industry that has since 2002 registered negative
growth, has since 1987 shed 383 000 jobs and now only contributes directly
6,3% to GDP, I would have thought the Minister would have been looking to
stimulate this sector of the economy, not slap a further tax on it.

Indeed, from a fiscal stance, ever since 2004 we have seen R33,1 billion
pumped into the demand side by way of tax relief to individuals as opposed
to a mere R9,1 billion by way of tax relief on the supply side.

Little wonder there is upward pressure on interest rates. Little wonder
also that the growth of our economy has been unbalanced.

Turning to the spending side, the DA welcomes the increased budget
allocations to a number of key departments. Increases to safety and
security, health, education and housing are particularly welcome. There is
one caveat however to this approval and that is, firstly, the money is
spent; and secondly, it is spent effectively and efficiently.

The point has to be made that the amounts voted are just budgeted amounts
and in this respect it has to be noted that certain departments have been
voted healthy increases in their budgets, notwithstanding the fact that
according to the statement of expenditure of departments issued by the
Treasury for the period ending 31 January 2001, they remain well short of
their expenditure budgets for the present financial year.

Safety and security had by 31 January 2007 spent only 80% of their budget,
namely R26 billion of R32,5 billion originally voted and are now with a new
budget of R35,9 being given an effective 37% increase on the amounts spent
as at 31 January 2007.

Justice had only spent 69% of their budget. It would have been given 61%
increase on their expenditure as at 31 January 2007. Housing, likewise, had
spent 79% of R5,8 billion and its effective increase would be 52% on
expenditure at that date. Health’s calculated in the same vein would be an
increase of 36% and Transport’s 43%.

Noticeable is Land Affairs that had spent 74% of its budget, that’s R2,7
billion of R3,7 billion, but with the new budget of R5,6 billion is getting
a whopping 104% increase on expenditure at that date, and the provincial
and local government, which had spent 59% of its budget - R15 billion of
R25,4 billion – would, with the new budget of R28,8 billion, be getting an
effective 91% increase.

The question is whether the Minister is concerned at the capacity of
departments to spend exiting budgets without fiscal dumping taking place,
let alone spend the increased budgets for 2007-08. Voting for money is one
thing, having the ability to spend it is another.

Clearly what we are speaking about here is the whole question of the weak
capacity of the state to deliver, which speaks about both management and
skills shortages.

But also what has to be addressed here is the efficiency and effectiveness
of the spending. To give but a few examples, in respect to education, while
spending has increased 35% over the past three years, and while the number
of learners and educators has increased, the number of schools has
declined, the pupil-teacher ratio has slipped and the average pass rate
fallen.

In respect of health, while spending has increased 48% over a three-year
period, our infant mortality rate has increased from 53 per 1000 in 2004 to
60 in 2006. Our life expectancy decreased from 46 years to 42 years. The
number of doctors per 100 000 of population decreased to about 77.

In respect of Safety and Security, the amount voted increased 43% over the
three-year period, yet I don’t think anybody here could honestly believe
that there has been 43% reduction in crime. So, the efficiency and
effectiveness of the expenditure has to be interrogated more closely.
Throwing more money at the problem is not the entire solution.

In closing, let me say that the DA welcomes the steps the Minister has
taken in respect of the reform of the retirement industry, as it will not
only provide a framework for individuals to adequately provide for their
retirement, but also actively promote savings and so add greater resources
for the country to invest.

We will monitor and positively contribute to the debate, particularly as it
relates to the role to be allocated to the private sector in respect of the
administration of the relevant funds as well as the underpinning of the
asset allocations.
In conclusion, the DA supports the Budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just before you address us, hon member, there are too
many meetings taking place in the House, and I think that we need to ask
some members to continue with their meetings elsewhere.

It won’t be polite when your name is called for you to excuse yourself from
the House, because it’s very difficult for us to follow the debates.

We are appealing to you to please give us an opportunity to follow the
debates. If the debate is not very appealing to you, there is a lot of work
for you to do in the office and nobody will actually have anything against
you for doing so.

But let us allow those people, including the presiding officers, to follow
the debates so that when points are raised, they are able to give the
correct judgement on that.

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP has welcomed the Budget as
presented by the hon Minister of Finance. It is a well-constructed Budget
and we applaud him for that. Also, they had the privilege of looking at a
tremendous amount of money that was oversupplied technically by means of
the income side.

We in the IFP were, however, critical about the underexpenditure of certain
departments, as this means that critical services had not been rendered.
The IFP, however, was delighted that the shortfall originally planned for
ended up in a surplus of R6 billion.

We want to congratulate the SA Revenue Services, which was the jewel in the
Minister’s crown, for coming up again with a tremendous amount of taxation.

We would, however, look at the lowering of corporate and company tax as
well as personal tax, which have moved quite high in terms - if you would
take into consideration the fiscal brag with this. In this regard, the IFP
would suggest that the time is ripe for a taxation summit. We have also
been very delighted on the pension fund side with the abolishment of tax on
all pension funds. We also trust that this tax relief will end up in the
pockets of the pensioners and not in the pockets of the companies.

With regard to the existing 5% growth, which we are grateful about, we
believe that we shall take the government’s hand as well and that we see if
we can move it even higher than the present 5% in order to assist with what
is necessary in our country.

We recognise that the Expanded Public Works Programme as well as the
National Youth Service will create substantial temporary jobs. But, it is
important to note that only the private sector can create permanent jobs
and this is what this country needs.

We also appreciated that when the Minister said that red tape should be
eliminated in business. And particularly in this regard, we will give him
all the support we can.

I would also like to refer to the Cross-Border Road Transport Agency as an
example. This agency is supposed to create income. Yet, we found that the
total expenditure - the cost of having this agency - is more than the total
income that it has produced.

The cost factor to business, the lack of their profitability and the
revenue should actually be looked upon by the Minister of Finance and
Minister of Transport to give serious attention to closing down the agency
and transferring and streamlining its functions into the Department of
Transport, for instance, or better transfer the staff to customs and
provincial traffic authorities.

The IFP must also take issue with the red tape apparently in the South
African mining sector. Despite assurances from the Department of Mineral
and Energy Affairs, we still find that investors do not at the end get what
they really want. Just last week, it was reported that an international
investment group was planning to sue the government for hundreds of
millions of Euros because, in their opinion, our new minerals legislation
is in breach of a large number of international treaties.

The IFP does not necessarily share the latter view of this international
companies, but it is of great concern that investment uncertainties still
exists.

Turning to some of the detailed allocations, education - particularly
school development - is of fundamental importance to South Africa. The
Minister made a concerted effort with regard to the additional moneys
regarding HIV/Aids, and this is definitely a step in the right direction.

The IFP applauds the extension and improvement of the system of welfare
grants and the future introduction of the subsidy for low-income earners
together with the improvement of other social grants and the introductions
of a form of a compulsory saving scheme or even call it a core kind of
government pension scheme.

The IFP will, however, study the details, as we are apprehensive of the
creation of a “honey pot” which can be creamed off by corrupt politicians
and civil servants.

The IFP believes that whether Minister Manuel believes it or not, we are
indeed slowly-slowly moving towards the gradual introduction of a basic
income grant as proposed in the Taylor Report. Madam Deputy Speaker, that
is as far as economics are concerned. Politically, two recent developments
underlined the fact that the ANC is scratching in places where there is no
itch. The first is the obvious vendetta that the ANC has launched against
Afrikaans-medium schools. The IFP will never tolerate a situation where
Afrikaans-medium schools cater exclusively to white children. We will not
tolerate that! But it is completely ridiculous to try and recolonise that
school to an English-medium school or a parallel-medium school.

Secondly, the mad rush to change place names just for the sake of change.
If I look at my old alma mater, why would you want to change Potchefstroom
to “die bokke se Tlokwe”? Even worse, the ANC in eThekwini has now
apparently decided that its new soccer stadium should be named after the
comrade to satisfy the incessant barking of the leftists.
Why this person’s name rather than a generally-accepted name like the
proposed original name of the historically revered figure King
Senzangakhona of the Zulus? [Laughter.] Particularly in this case, the
principle should be addressed whether the renaming should focus on party-
political figures instead of culturally significant persons. Please, do not
scratch where there are phantom itches.

The deplorable events of the past few days in Zimbabwe also put a spotlight
on our government’s policy of silent diplomacy. Is it not ironic that the
ANC’s policy of “No sanctions against Robert Mugabe and his dictatorship”
is based on the argument that sanctions will not hurt the leader or the
regime but the ordinary people of Zimbabwe, especially the poor?

We in the IFP, of course, agree with this notion, but this was exactly what
you said with regard to Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi at that time. Thank
you. [Time expired.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Speaker, in January 1957 the bus company Putco
announced a one-penny fare increase for the trip from Alexandra to
Johannesburg. The response of Alexandra residents was immediate. From the
date of the fare increase, which was 7 January, for three months all the
way till the end of March 1957, 15 000 Alexandrans walked, daily, the 9 km
to work and 9 km back from work, to cries of, “Azikhwelwa!” and
“Asinamali!” – “We won’t ride!” and “We don’t have money!”
The Alexandra bus boycott, whose 50th anniversary we commemorate this year,
was in fact not confided to Alexandra. Residents from Sophia Town and from
the Pretoria townships also boycotted the buses. Some 60 000 people in all
stopped using the green Putco buses for those three months.

This most celebrated bus boycott was not the first of its period, and nor
was it to be the last. In the early 1940s the bus company had tried three
times to increase the Alexandra bus fare by one penny and each time it was
forced down by resolute boycotters.

Now it’s a measure of the desperation of township households in the 1940s
and 1950s that a one-penny fare increase could provoke such determined
resistance. But with 80% of African families living on incomes below what
was then called the minimum essential expenditure level, a one-penny fare
increase was often the proverbial final straw.

We often say now that apartheid excluded the black majority and that is
true enough. But apartheid was not just about excluding black people; it
was also about including them, but of course on inferior terms, as
exploited factory operatives, as underpaid municipal cleaners, as menial
domestic workers in white suburbs and as consumers in white-owned shops.

Public transport was the raw nerve at the centre of this contradictory push-
pull situation of racial exclusion and simultaneous racial inferior
inclusion.

Successive white minority regimes did the bare minimum to ensure that black
workers got to work and indeed during the height of apartheid in the mid-
1950s and early 1960s public transport was in fact rolled out so to speak.
There was delivery. In the case of commuter rail this was the last time
that there was a halfway serious effort to construct rail infrastructure to
townships which is why the average age of a Metrorail coach is now 45 years
because it dates back to that time.

Often, also as a direct result of bus boycotts and other popular
mobilisation, white minority governments with the support of local chambers
of commerce also had begun to provide limited public subsidies to bus
operations in this period.

But none of the so called roll-out was motivated, of course, by concern for
township dwellers. Overwhelmingly, black communities were compelled to pay
for their own forcible exclusion to distant localities and then also for
their inferior inclusion by way of long, and for them costly, daily
commutes.

Much has, of course, changed, especially over the past 13 years since the
1994 democratic breakthrough. But working class and poor communities are
still overwhelmingly located in distant peri-urban dormitory townships or
stranded in even more marginalised dirt poor rural townships and villages.

Today, some 10 million South Africans commute into work on public
transport. The buses, the trains and the now predominant minibuses that
they use generally offer trips that are not noticeably safer, more
dignified or more affordable than the public transport of earlier decades.

Still today, transport is typically the second largest expense item after
food for a majority of poor households. They spend more than 10% and in
many cases more than 20% of pitiful household incomes on transport costs.

That is the reality and that is the weight of history that bears down on
this Budget 2007-08.

I am pleased to say that, perhaps for the first time substantially since
1994, there is now the beginning of a focused attention on public
transport, not just on extending by a few kilometres a railway line here or
maintaining bus subsidies there, or on upgrading 45-year-old Metro coaches.
We obviously do need to do running repairs. We do need to do these things,
but we cannot afford to remain locked simply into an upgrade, maintain,
recapitalise and extend mode. If we do that, we will never break out of the
cycle of exclusion and costly, unsatisfactory inclusion to which the
majority of South Africans are condemned.

We have to actively transform the past that is still very much with us in
the present. This is a question of money, to be sure. But it is not just
money. In fact we are already spending enormous amounts of budget on public
transport – over R5 billion a year on bus and train operating subsidies. A
proposed R7,7 billion will be spent on taxi recapitalisation and, dare I
say, R23 billion on the Gautrain - my G-spot! [Laughter.] And R10 billion
is now set aside for 2010 World Cup public transport.

In his Budget Speech, Minister Manuel quite correctly located the question
of public transport within the broader context of mobility, access and,
above all, the spatial character of our built environment. He noted that
since 2001 the government has channelled an ever greater share of our
resources into capital spending and that one of the key pillars in this
regard is the transformation of the built environment, he said, I quote:

   These programmes seek to change the landscape across both urban and rural
   areas, to turn barren, dusty land into places that people feel proud to
   live in.


This is the context from within which we must approach the challenges of
public transport. It doesn’t help if we built RDP houses in one direction
and recapitalise taxis or subsidise bus and rail operations somewhere else.
If we are to transform our reality we have to integrate our planning and
our implementation, especially at the local level.

There are, of course, many national challenges, for instance in 2010,
Minister of Finance, we will be transporting something like 150 000 fans
every three or four days in the first week of that event, from one city to
another. Currently we only have 500 quality luxury buses and a very
inadequate national rail system to do that, so I don’t think we’ve quite
got our minds around the magnitude of the national public transport
challenges. But it is especially at the local level that we shall either
succeed or fail in getting public transport and the built environment
generally right.

Therefore this means that as national and provincial spheres of government,
we have to have the courage and confidence to devolve planning and
implementation, particularly of public transport, as much as possible to
the municipal, and particularly, if we are talking about capacity and large
volume commuting, to the metro sphere.

It is for this reason that we particularly welcome Minister Trevor Manuel’s
Budget Speech observation that:

   The impetus that the World Cup provided has resulted in something of a
   revolution in municipal planning for public transport and forward
   thinking about urban development.


We agree with this observation, of course, and we have also conducted
oversight with many of the metro governments. It is true that there is
imaginative planning, but often it’s wonderful PowerPoint presentations and
beautiful maps, and the implementation issue is still one which I think
needs to be looked at seriously. But we’ve noticed these encouraging
developments. They are also often stymied by a range of institutional
counter-pressures from diverse quarters and a mismatch between plans and
actual funding flows for implementation. Sometimes major projects, which
are multi-year projects, as most these are, are treated as if you only
approve one a year, and it often leaves the planning and implementation a
little bit stranded.

We believe that the Department of Transport and the Treasury should be
alert to these challenges and play, as they have been generally, an active
and facilitating role.

Minister Manuel went on to say in his Budget Speech:


   The city 2010 bids that we have seen are impressive in terms of knitting
   together communities with places of work, recreation and leisure.
He mentioned, in particular, the development of bus rapid transit schemes
which offer exciting opportunities to improve municipal public transport
systems.

Again we agree. As Minister of Transport, Comrade Jeff Radebe has said that
we must use 2010 to do the things that we have to do on the transport front
in any case. But we need now to move very quickly with operational planning
and implementation of catalytic rapid public transport networks. Time is
quite short.

We‘ve heard from some experts that we are already too late to spend all of
the R9 billion to R10 billion set aside before early 2010. But let us use
the next three years to begin to implement these integrated rapid public
transport systems as a key component of transforming the way our towns and
cities work. We owe it to the many guests that we will be receiving in
2010, we owe it to the 10 million South Africans who are still commuting in
unsafe, unreliable and often costly public transport modes.

And on this 50th anniversary of the Alexandra bus boycott we owe it to the
memory of the 15 000 Alexandrans who marched 18 km daily for three months
against a one-penny fare increase.

With this budget, we can no longer say as they said then: Asinamali - we
don’t have money. We do have money. The challenge now is to use it wisely,
effectively and with determined transformational intent. Thank you.

Mr J BICI: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the Minister delivered a
good Budget and this Bill presents the fruits of yet another year where
revenue collection exceeded focus.

The years of austerity that had to deliver these revenues have prolonged
the hardship of many. So it is only right that now this benefit must be
ploughed back into socially responsible programmes. The UDM is therefore,
pleased with the promised increases in the salaries of teachers, medical
workers and members of the police force.

As we have indicated earlier, these core groups of the civil service
represent the backbone of building a caring democratic society. Similarly
we welcome the social grant increases, but we are still content that these
increases are from a relatively small base.

The UDM contends that the government could have done much better than the
revenue expected to be at its disposal. The Social Development Net can and
should be expanded, and similarly the government can and should enhance its
efforts to fight HIV/Aids. It is our conviction that the revenue at the
government’s disposal could be used to lower the threshold of ARV treatment
by, for example, commencing treatment at a higher CD4 count than currently.
It would mean that we would save many more lives.

The current policy correctly seeks to distribute the bulk of revenue to the
lower spheres of government, because resources must necessarily be devolved
downward to be as close as possible to the people who require the delivery.
However, the capacity of provincial and local government to correctly
utilise the revenue remains suspect.

A combination of insufficient skills, the failure to adhere to the PFMA and
related audit requirements, as well as critical staff vacancies, continue
to bedevil many provinces and municipalities. Even national departments
such as Justice and Constitutional Development and Home Affairs, both of
them critical service delivery conduits, have dismal track record on
spending and management.

The additional revenue at government’s disposal must be used to fill the
obvious scales and capacity shortages and gaps. It is inexcusable that the
money to uplift the poor cannot be spent because we are not willing to
spend a fraction of it on appointing people who will ensure delivery. The
UDM supports the Bill. Thank you.

Mr A HARDING: Chair, the Budget for 2007 is tabled at a time when the South
African economy has been growing in a sustained and possibly accelerating
fashion. The government has been able, through an administratively
efficient tax system, to collect increased tax revenues as a result of the
trend. Thus, whilst the fundamental resource constraint remains applicable,
the context of Budget 2007 is also framed by the question of how one budget
does in a time of plenty.

There are encouraging features in the 2007 Budget that suggest a higher
allocation to programmes aimed at eradicating poverty. The allocations for
housing subsidies and land reform grants show significant increases over
the MTF period even after discounting inflation. Housing increased by 15%
and land by 80% in real terms. Moreover, the maintenance of the tax to GDP
ratio above 27% is significant given pressure from the private sector to
reduce expenditure. Furthermore, the adjustments for the MTF show a
significant focus on supporting jobs in education and social work. These
are important steps in dealing with poverty in our society.

The ID, however, believes that there is little in Budget 2007 to make
significant inroads into appalling levels of unemployment, poverty and
hunger, which still scar our country. There is good evidence to suggest
that the budget will be more supportive of business and the poor. There is
also little in a budget for unemployed people, especially young adults. Yet
unemployment is the most important problem in our country.

Similarly, the adoption of a fiscal surplus of 0,6% for the current
financial year is aimed at reducing inflation, and is in turn an attempt to
keep interest rates low. The ultimate aim is to keep the cost of borrowing
down in the hopes of continuing the economic growth of South Africa. The
problem is that the current levels of economic growth support the creation
of low-paying casual jobs - thus increasing the ranks of the working poor.
Overall, the government can do more to address poverty.

Using the Budget to target poverty and inequality more effectively is,
however, complex but not an unattainable policy objective. Reducing
inequality in our society is important for ethical reasons if, in the
Minister’s words: “Human life does have equal worth.” However, it is also
important to support long run economic growth. Tackling inequality is good
for economic growth in that it supports a longer run of economic growth
but, more importantly, it ensures that the poor benefit from growth.

Breaking inequality in our society requires significant transfers of
resources to the poor. Despite welcome increases in housing and land the
budget lacks a measure redistributive mechanism such as the basic income
grant. The Public Service must be improved because building an effective
Public Service is a long-term project.

World Cup 2010 presents a good opportunity for local economic development
but serious political will is critical.
Implementation of these ideas cannot be undertaken without a comprehensive
development plan. This is a responsibility of government to drive. In
conclusion, the ID supports the budget. [Time expired.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, a budget remains just figures on paper and it
only becomes of value once action and service follow the amount that was
budgeted and allocated, and it is in light of this that I want to address
specifically the issue of safety and security in the Budget.

Under the headline, “Crime - Where Facts, Politics and Emotions Clash” the
political commentator and analyst, J P Landman, refers to the intensity of
feelings around crime. He describes it as a “combustible combination”. He
says South Africans have never felt as “vulnerable and fearful of crime as
now”. The conclusion, he says is clear: “Citizens’ perceptions of crime are
that it has deteriorated -matters got worse.

The second point he makes, as an empirical fact, is that several categories
of crime have declined. Here he makes use of figures provided by the SA
Institute of Race Relations, an organisation that, even the opposition
would agree, cannot be considered a friend of the ANC government.

The SA Institute of Race Relations reported that 8 out of 12 categories of
crime have declined over the period 1994-2005 to 2005-06. These are
confirmed with victim surveys. For those of us that might not know, in
victim surveys, official statistics are ignored and a sample of the
population is asked if they experienced crime, what types, how often and so
on. Interestingly, these independent victims’ surveys confirm the official
statistics of the SAPS, on which the opposition tries so very hard to cast
suspicion.

According to these surveys, crimes that have decreased include murder by
41%, attempted murder by 36,5%, car theft by 32,8% and commercial crime by
28,9%. In light of this you correctly ask then why citizens still feel
unsafe. He offers that an increase in the number and violent nature of
housebreakings might be a factor. After all, our houses are suppose to be
our safe haven.

’n Populêre en baie gevaarlike stelling wat gemaak word, meestal vir
korttermyn politieke gewin, is dat misdaad ’n poging is om van blankes
ontslae te raak. Die einste slagoffermarkopname wys dan ook dat blankes en
Indiërs onveiliger voel as swart en bruin Suid-Afrikaners. Landman haal dan
interessante statistiese gegewens van Johnny Steinbeck aan: blankes maak
een elke 11 mense in die bevolking uit - net meer as 9% - maar slegs een
uit elke 33 moordslagoffers. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[A popular and very dangerous statement that is mostly made for short-term
political gain is that crime is an attempt to get rid of whites. The same
victim’s market survey also shows that whites and Indians feel more unsafe
than black and brown South Africans.

Landman quotes interesting statistical data from Johnny Steinberg: whites
constitute one out of every 11 people in the population - just more than 9%-
 but only one out of every 33 murder victims.]

What Jonny Steinberg, a sociologist, is saying is that even though whites
constitute one out of 11 of the population, they are only one in 33 murder
victims. You have a far better chance in South Africa to die a violent,
crime-related death if you are young, black and male.

This dangerous spreading of lies by some in politics and many on the
political fringes, posing as labour organisations, agricultural bodies and
yes, even cultural bodies, need to stop. It is creating a fear that is
clearly unfounded and devoid of all truth, but has the capacity to lead to
paralysing fear and unjustified action.

In the past the Minister has referred to the fact that in 81% of murder
cases, the murderer knew the victim. In rapes, 76% and in serious assault
89,5% of assaulters were known to the victim.

In the last two weeks, the country was shocked and outraged by the murder
of two young and innocent girls, Sheldean Human and Annastacia Wiese. Both
of them were murdered by someone they trusted, a close family friend. Why
does this happen? Since when do we treat people that we know and are
suppose to care for in such a violent manner? What is wrong with a nation’s
social fibre and morals when four young white males with their future ahead
of them pass the time by beating an unknown homeless person to death, like
the so-called “Waterkloof Four” did? Or what drives a 23-year-old like the
murderer of David Rattray to commit such a senseless act?

These are questions that we believe need to be asked. We need to get
answers and implement solutions and only then will we be able to address
crime effectively.

Landman makes a couple of suggestions himself. Firstly, he says that just
to talk about police efficiency and political accountability is not the
answer: “People do not change their values and behaviour because
politicians ask them nicely to do so.” The ANC believes that we need a
concerted effort by all the role-players in society, organised civil
society, and family units. In all of this, the government must play a
leading role.

Secondly, he suggests that we need to rebuild the social capital of our
nation unlike the West Germans after the Second World War. We need a
concerted effort to counter our own legacy of apartheid. We should counter
nepotism and corruption, take action against incompetence, but very
importantly, we should avoid cynicism.

He ends his article by challenging the government to ask what we are going
to do to change the feelings about crime. His question is one of service
delivery and the quality of that service.

In an effort to answer Mr Landman’s question, I would like to raise a few
points from this Budget and the SAPS strategy that clearly illustrates what
it is that the government is doing not only to address the feelings about
crime but its commitment in fighting crime. This budget allows the
Department of Safety and Security to implement their strategy without any
budgetary constraint whatsoever.

Over the past seven years expenditure in the Safety and Security Vote
increased significantly. In 2003-04 it was R22,7 billion. Today, in 2007-08
it stands at R35,9 billion. It is 44% of the total allocation for the
justice and protection services clusters. It is expected to reach R43,6
billion by 2009-10. The question that we as parliamentarians and selected
leaders of the community should start asking is not one of more money or
resources, but one of value added to the budget made available.

The strong growth in expenditure reflects the employment of large numbers
of additional police officers; investment in capital infrastructure and
improvement of conditions of service. In other words, this budget reflects
a robust increase in resources, both human and capital, directed towards
the fight against crime.

The ANC government is increasing visible policing by increasing the number
of such personnel. By the end of March 2007 we should have an establishment
of 163 000 members. By the end of 2009-10 this number should have to
increase to 193 000. It is now the responsibility of the SAPS management
and us as Parliament to oversee that, to develop and implement an
operational deployment plan to make ultimate use of these increased numbers
on the streets to do visible policing.

The increased presence of SAPS members on our streets and in our
communities will contribute greatly towards a feeling of safety.

With rapidly growing personnel numbers as replacements and additions, the
all important aspect of training comes to the fore-front. Vast numbers of
people are trained; from annual enlistments to detectives and station
commissioners. It is of utmost importance that the qualitative elements of
training programmes be ascertained as to enhance the capabilities of the
human resources we have. We cannot be naïve and think that with increased
numbers to be catered for and a shift in focus towards community
involvement and sector policing, we can simply expect that our training
capacity and modules can remain as is.

Experience indicates to us that many station commissioners were not up to
the task despite their training and it resulted in the transfer of skills
to stations that we now see. Like in the training of any other occupation
or careers, the training of our members in the SAPS should be cutting edge.

Funding was made available to implement an automated vehicle location
system for SAPS vehicles with the focus on improved service delivery. This
system, if properly used and managed, will bring to an end the abuse of
police vehicles for private use and will allow for rapid and more effective
deployment of vehicles and members to incidents of reported crimes. They
should mean quicker reaction time and should also boost the confidence of
the citizens.

On January 13 in Witbank in Mpumalanga, the President said:

   The Police Service and government agencies cannot fight crime alone. It
   requires the involvement and active participation of all communities and
   all sectors of society.

The Minister of Safety and Security a month later on 13 February 2007
reminded us about this. He went further to say that effective policing was
not dependent on huge police numbers, but on better police community
relations. He highlighted two main aspects required for that to happen. The
police must be rooted in and very importantly accountable to the community
in whose name they do policing.

As government and as elected leaders, irrespective of our political
affiliation, we share a responsibility to mobilise our communities, to be
in partnership with the police, to prevent and combat crime. Government has
the added responsibility to lead that process. The SAPS’ responsibility is
to treat the communities they serve with the necessary respect and be
accountable to them.

We are not going to strengthen our police-community relationships when,
like happened in Pretoria just last week, a business across the street from
a police station is robbed. The case is reported and no one arrives to
investigate. We are not going to get our communities involved if after
hours of waiting the owner of that business walks over to the station and
then, in very rude terms, is chased out of the station.

Our communities will not get involved when the SAPS spokesperson’s comments
on radio was that the aggrieved complainant must go back to the station and
report the matter to the station manager. This kind of action undermines
the strategy and the budget that supports it.

Die Minister het ook in sy toespraak op 13 Februarie aangekondig dat
gemeenskapspolisiëringsforums onafhanklike liggame gemaak moet word,
verantwoordelik aan die gemeenskappe wat hulle dien. In dié verband sal die
portefeuljekomitee die begroting in die toekoms fyn dophou om toe te sien
dat wanneer dit realiseer dit wel geïmplementeer kan word.

In die lig hiervan wil die ANC op die vele anti-misdaad burgerlike groepe
wat hulle ontstaan toeskryf aan die misdaad in die land ’n beroep doen: as
julle ernstig is om ’n verskil aan die misdaadsituasie te maak, sluit aan,
en moedig julle ondersteuners om hulle aan te sluit, by julle plaaslike
gemeenskapspolisiëringsforums. Dit is die enigste plek waar werklik ’n
verskil aan misdaad gemaak kan word, waar ’n impak gemaak kan word. Dit is
hier waar woorde en emosie omgesit kan word in aksie, waar goeie voornemens
daadwerklike optrede word, nie op verhoë saam met sangers nie. Dit ís die
verantwoordelike ding om te doen. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[On 13 February the Minister also announced in his speech that community
policing forums must be declared independent bodies, responsible to the
communities they serve. In this regard, the portfolio committee will keep a
close eye on the budget in future to ensure that when it is realised, it
will be implemented.

In light of this the ANC wants to make an appeal to the many anti-crime
civil groups in the country that attribute their existence to the crime in
the country: if you are serious  about making a difference to the crime
situation, join and encourage your supporters to join your local community
policing forums. It is the only place where a real difference to crime can
be made, where an impact can be made. It is here where words and emotion
can be put into action, where good intentions become real actions, not on
stages with singers. It is the responsible thing to do.]

The resources are available. The budget has been committed, what we now
need is the will and action to make these plans a reality. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Voorsitter, Minister Manuel se begroting vanjaar skenk
nie genoeg aandag aan ekonomiese groei nie. Die ekonomiese groeikoers word
jaarliks opwaarts aangepas, maar die werkloosheidskoers staan steeds op
39%, so in werklikheid het Suid-Afrika ’n werklose ekonomiese groei, want
die vraag na werk groei vinniger as die aanbod van werksgeleenthede.

Die gevolge van die 8 miljoen werklose mense is armoede en misdaad, en dit
het ’n verdere negatiewe effek op ekonomiese ontwikkeling, wat werkloosheid
net verder vererger.

Wat armoede betref, leef 53% van die bevolking in armoede en ’n groot
persentasie daarvan oorleef op staatstoelaes. Armoede kan verlig word met
sosiale welvaartstoelaes solank die ekonomie dit toelaat, maar mense wat
afhanklik is van toelaes dra nie produktief by tot die skepping van werk of
welvaart nie. Hulle raak afhanklik van die staat vir ekonomiese oorlewing.
In plaas dat meer werk geskep word sodat die ekonomie self armoede kan
verlig, kruip daar jaarliks meer mense onder hierdie veiligheidsnet van
sosiale sekuriteit in, want uitgawes aan sosiale welvaartstoelaes groei
vinniger as enige ander vorm van openbare besteding en beloop tans
R89 miljard van die nasionale Begroting.

Daar word dus ’n groter las op die bestaande werkersklas geplaas om ’n
persentasie van die bevolking te onderhou. Belastingbetalers het toegeneem
met 85% sedert 2000, terwyl die ontvangers van welsynstoelaes toegeneem het
met 295%, en om genoeg geld vir die staatskas te vorder, het die totale
belastinglas as persentasie van die BBP vanaf 2003 tot nou toe van 23% tot
28% gestyg.

Die vraag is hoe lank Suid-Afrika se ekonomie die gevolge van bakhandstaan
sal kan dra. Die ekonomie moet eerder bevorder word sodat mense hulself kan
bemagtig.

Wat misdaad betref, rem dit ekonomiese ontwikkeling, dit rem ook ekonomiese
groei, produktiwiteit en werkskepping, en ek wil graag na faktore verwys
wat die koste en ekonomiese opoffering van misdaad reflekteer.

Eerstens, die ``brain drain’’. Business Against Crime se navorsing wys
daarop dat 30% van alle besigheidsmislukkings aan misdaad toegeskryf kan
word en dat 26% mense in Suid-Afrika nie ’n besigheid plaaslik sal begin
nie, as gevolg van misdaadvrees. Kundiges verlaat nou die land terwyl die
ekonomie ’n tekort aan geskooldheid ervaar.

Tweedens sê die SA Versekeringsvereniging dat motordiefstal en kapings die
versekeringsbedryf R2,5 miljard per jaar kos. Die koste daarvan in terme
van verhoogde versekeringspremies word ook op verbruikers afgewentel en dit
is ook geld wat andersins meer ekonomies spandeer kon word aan
welvaartsverhoging.

Wat betref gesteelde goedere soos motors, voorraad en toerusting moet die
verbruikers by die vervanging daarvan weer BTW betaal – ook geld wat
andersins direk in produksie teruggeploeg kon word. Maar aan die ander kant
vind Minister Manuel hierdie miljarde rande belastinginkomste gerieflik.
Miskien is dit een van die redes hoekom die regering so traag is met
misdaadbekamping.

Derdens kan die indirekte koste van misdaad nie gemeet word nie. Die waarde
van produktiwiteitsverlies as gevolg van menslike trauma is onmeetbaar. Ons
lees dat die gemiddelde Suid-Afrikaner ’n stresvlak ervaar wat 80% hoër is
as die wêreldgemiddeld, as gevolg van onder andere misdaad.

In hierdie verband verwys die internasionale ouditfirma Grant Thornton se
internasionale sakeverslag dat 65% sakeondernemings in Suid-Afrika erken
dat misdaad hul werkers se produktiwiteit en motivering ondermyn; 41%
sakeondernemings sê dit verlaag werkers se kreatiwiteit en vindingrykheid,
terwyl 32% sakeondernemings beweer dat hulle werkers verloor as gevolg van
misdaad.

In die vierde plek wys die Grant Thornton-verslag ook daarop dat 84%
private sakeondernemers in Suid-Afrika self, óf ’n gesinslid óf van hul
werkers, verlede jaar ’n slagoffer van misdaad was en 88% van hierdie sake-
eienaars sê dat hulle steeds groter uitgawes moet aangaan vir beveiliging.

In die vyfde plek kelder misdaad toerisme. Volgens die bedryfstydskrif
Southern African Tourism Update beweer 85% toeroperateurs dat misdaad die
grootste hindernis is om die getal buitelandse besoekers op te stoot.
Bykans 75% oorsese groothandelaars in toerisme sê hulle sal die aantal
besoekers na Suid-Afrika met 50% verhoog as dit nie vir die hoë misdaad was
nie, en gegewe dat elke agt buitelandse besoekers aan Suid-Afrika kan lei
tot die skepping van een werkgeleentheid, beteken dit dat 125 000 ekstra
werkgeleenthede hierdeur geskep sou kon word.

In die sesde plek beperk misdaad ook buitelandse beleggings en investering
in Suid-Afrika. Frankryk, Brittanje, Kanada en Australië waarsku reeds
hulle landsburgers op webtuistes om twee keer te dink voordat Suid-Afrika
oorweeg word. ’n Onlangse peiling wat deur die kamers van groothandel van
Brittanje, Duitsland, Italië en Swede gedoen is, toon dat 69% respondente
pessimisties is oor misdaad in Suid-Afrika, en miljarde rande se beleggings
heroorweeg.
In die sewende plek absorbeer onwettige immigrante Suid-Afrika se
werkgeleenthede. Sake Rapport verwys na bevindings van ’n verslag wat deur
ekonome saamgestel is wat daarop dui dat onwettige immigrante tot
2,8 miljoen werkgeleenthede van Suid-Afrikaners ontneem.

In die agste plek is veediefstal ’n bron van groot kommer. Volgens
Landbouweekblad is daar in net drie maande vanaf Julie tot September
verlede jaar 60 000 beeste en 109 000 skape en bokke met ’n waarde van
R89 miljoen gesteel. Enersyds is dit vee wat bemark kon word, met laer
verbruikerspryse as resultaat, en andersyds bring boerderyverliese mee dat
werkers afgedank word in plaas daarvan dat groter winsgewendheid meer
indiensneming meebring.

In die negende plek maak baie geskoolde persone deel uit van die meer as
100 000 mense wat sedert 2001 vermoor is. As in ag geneem word dat een
hoogsgeskoolde persoon volgens ’n ekonoom van Barlow World agt verdere
werkgeleenthede sou kon skep, het derduisende werkgeleenthede verlore
gegaan as gevolg van dié moorde.

Laastens sit Suid-Afrika met die grootste tronkbevolking in Afrika -
154 000 gevangenes. Van hierdie mense is ook reeds opgelei en sou andersins
meer voordelig in die ekonomie aangewend kan word, in plaas daarvan dat dit
die belastingbetaler nou meer as R18 miljoen per dag kos om hulle in tronke
te onderhou.

Wat is dan die probleem? Volgens die Instituut vir Strategiese Studies
spandeer Suid-Afrika reeds twee keer meer as die wêreldgemiddeld per
persoon aan veiligheid en te min op wat misdaad veroorsaak, naamlik
werkloosheid, ongeletterheid, behuising en maatskaplike dienslewering.

Minister Manuel slaag baie goed daarin om die gehoor in die Parlement se
steun te kry met gewilde aanhalings wat dit vir kritici moeilik maak, maar
ongelukkig praat die harde werklikheid van die ekonomie anders. Armoede en
werkloosheid kan nie verder verskans word nie.

U sê ook in die Begrotingsrede dat die regering ’n voorbeeld vir Suid-
Afrika stel met die begrotingsoorskot. Minister, met alle respek, ’n
begrotingsoorskot is verkeerd. ’n Oorskotbegroting in Suid-Afrika se
omstandighede is ’n skande en vir ’n ontwikkelende land is dit uiters
ongehoord. Verder ook, in die lig van ons openbare hospitalekrisis,
onderwys en opleidingskrisis, werkloosheid en behuisingskrisis en
agterstand in maatskaplike dienste, kan dit nie bekostig word nie.

Die DA wil graag sien dat u die begrotingsoorskot terugploeg en voldoende
begroot vir agterstande in hierdie verwaarloosde dienslewering sodat die
oorsake van misdaad en armoede bekamp kan word. Suid-Afrika se lae
staatskuld aan die een kant en ruimte vir ’n 2% begrote tekort van die BBP
aan die ander kant gee vir die Tesourie daardie fiskale geleentheid.

Alternatiewelik, gegewe die staat se kapasiteitsprobleme, moet ons daaraan
begin dink om meer fiskale aansporings in terme van korporatiewe subsidies
en belastingverligtings aan die privaatsektor toe te staan, om investering
te bevorder, werk te skep en selfs tradisionele staatsdienste op kontrak te
lewer.

Ons moet dus die ekonomie bevorder om meer werk te skep, gepaardgaande met
voldoende owerheidsdienslewering sodat die oorsake van armoede en misdaad
eerste aangespreek kan word. Dankie, Voorsitter. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Chairperson, Minister Manuel’s budget this year does
not pay enough attention to economic growth. The economic growth rate is
adjusted upwards annually, but the unemployment rate remains on 39%. In
reality South Africa has jobless economic growth, because the demand for
employment grows faster than the supply of employment opportunities.

The results of having 8 million unemployed people are poverty and crime,
and this has a further negative effect on economic development, which
further increases unemployment.

Regarding poverty, 53% of the population are poverty-stricken and a large
percentage of them survive on government grants. Poverty can be alleviated
with social welfare grants for as long as the economy permits it, but
people who are dependent on grants do not contribute productively to job
creation or prosperity. They depend on the government for their economic
survival. Instead of more jobs being created so that the economy by itself
can alleviate poverty, more people are annually making use of the safety
net of social security, because expenditure on social welfare grants is
growing faster than any other form of state expenditure and at the moment
it amounts to R89 billion of the national Budget.

Thus a greater burden is placed on the existing working class to support a
percentage of the population. Taxpayers have increased by 85% since 2000,
while those that receive welfare grants have increased by 295%, and in
order to collect enough revenue for the Treasury, the total tax burden as a
percentage of GDP has increased from 23% since 2003 to the present 28%.

The question is how long South Africa’s economy will be able to bear the
results of this begging. The economy should rather be stimulated so that
people can empower themselves.

Regarding crime, it inhibits economic development, it also retards economic
growth, productivity and job creation, and I would like to refer to factors
that reflect the cost and economic sacrifices of crime.

Firstly, the “brain drain”. Business Against Crime’s research shows that
30% of all business failures can be attributed to crime and that 26% of
people in South Africa will not start a business locally as a consequence
of fearing crime. Experts are leaving the country while the economy
experiences a skills shortage.

Secondly, the SA Insurance Association says that motor vehicle theft and
hijackings costs the insurance industry R2,5 billion per year. The cost of
this in terms of higher insurance premiums is also devolved to the consumer
and this money could otherwise also have been utilized more economically to
improve prosperity.

Concerning stolen goods like motor vehicles, stock and equipment, consumers
have to pay VAT again when they replace the stolen items– money that could
otherwise also have been directly ploughed back into production. But on the
other hand Minister Manuel finds these billions of rands in tax revenue
convenient. This might be one of the reasons why the government is so slow
to combat crime.

Thirdly, the indirect cost of crime cannot be calculated. The value in loss
of productivity as a result of human trauma is incalculable. We read that
the stress levels experienced by the average South African are 80% higher
than the global average, as a result of, inter alia, crime.

In this context the international audit firm Grant Thornton’s international
business report refers to 65% of South African business enterprises that
acknowledge that crime undermines their workers productivity and
motivation; 41% of business enterprises say that it reduces workers
creativity and ingenuity, while 32% of business enterprises allege that
they lose workers as a result of crime.

In the fourth instance the Grant Thornton report also refers to the fact
that 84% of private entrepreneurs in South Africa were themselves, or a
family member or some of their workers, victims of crime last year and 88%
of these business owners say that they have to continue to increase their
expenditure on security.

In the fifth instance crime hampers tourism. According to the business
periodical Southern African Tourism Update 85% of tour operators claims
that crime is the biggest obstacle to increasing the number of foreign
visitors. Almost 75% of overseas wholesale-merchants in tourism say that
they would increase the number of visitors to South Africa by 50% were it
not for the high crime rate, and given that every eight foreign visitors to
South Africa can lead to the creation of one job, it means that 125 000
extra employment opportunities can be created in this way.
In the sixth instance crime limits foreign investments and investing in
South Africa. France, Britain, Canada and Australia are already warning
their citizens on websites to think twice before considering South Africa.
A recent survey by the chambers of wholesaletrade of Britain, Germany,
Italy and Sweden, shows that 69% of respondents are pessimistic about crime
in South Africa, and are reconsidering investments worth billions of rand.

In the seventh instance illegal immigrants are absorbing South Africa’s job
opportunities. Sake Rapport refers to the findings of a report compiled by
economists which show that illegal immigrants deprive South Africans of up
to 2,8 million job opportunities.

In the eighth instance theft of livestock is a great source of distress.
According to Landbouweekblad - in only three months from July to September
last year 60 000 cattle and 109 000 sheep and goats were stolen worth R89
million. On the one hand it is livestock that could have been marketed
resulting in lower consumer prices, and on the other hand farming losses
bring about retrenchment of workers instead of higher profit yields
bringing about more employment.

In the ninth instance many skilled people form part of the more than 100
000 people who have been murdered since 2001. If it is considered that one
highly skilled person can according to an economist from Barlow World
create a further eight jobs, then thousands of job opportunities were lost
as a result of these murders.

Lastly South Africa has the largest prison population in Africa - 154 000
prisoners. Some of these people are already trained and would otherwise
have been utilized more profitably in the economy, instead of it costing
the taxpayer more than R18 million per day to provide for them in prison.

What is the problem? According to the Institute for Strategic Studies South
Africa is already spending double the global average per person on security
and too little on the causes of crime, namely unemployment, illiteracy,
housing and delivery of social services.

Minister Manuel succeeds very well in gaining the support of the audience
in Parliament with popular quotations that makes it difficult for the
critics, but unfortunately the hard reality of the economy tells a
different story. Poverty and unemployment cannot be entrenched any further.

In your budget speech you also say that the government sets an example for
South Africa with the budget surplus. Minister, respectfully, a budget
surplus is wrong. A surplus budget in South Africa’s situation is a shame
and for a developing country it is utterly unheard of. Further more, in the
light of our state hospital crisis, education and training crisis,
unemployment and housing crisis and the backlog in social services, it can
be ill afforded.

The DA would like to see the budget surplus being ploughed back and that
sufficient funds are allocated in the budget for the backlog in this
neglected area of service delivery so that the causes of crime and poverty
can be combated. South Africa’s low public debt on the one hand and room
for a 2% budget deficit from the GDP on the other hand lends the Treasury
this fiscal opportunity.

Alternatively, given the government’s capacity problems, we must think
along the lines of more fiscal incentives in the form of corporate
subsidies and the granting of tax relief to the private sector, promoting
investment, job creation and even delivering traditional public services on
contract.

Thus we have to stimulate the economy to create more jobs, coupled with
adequate service delivery by local government so that the causes of poverty
and crime can be addressed first. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, this is indeed a watershed Budget
with the first ever budgeted surplus, an ambitious social security pension
plan, scrapping of retirement fund tax and huge infrastructure spending to
encourage faster economic growth. Individuals are to receive a cut in
personal tax and companies are aided by the phasing out of STC and
loosening of foreign exchange controls. Our cup indeed runneth over, for
which we should be grateful.

We are now committed to becoming a welfare state which is undoubtedly
necessary in the short-term to address widespread unemployment and poverty.
Human life does have equal worth and citizens should enjoy equal
opportunities. Certain questions do however arise as to the sustainability
of a welfare state in the long run. Does the danger not exist in the long
run of focusing too much on fiscal redistribution to raise living standards
through welfare rather than job creation? Is it further compatible with the
concept of a developmental state?

However one looks at it, fiscal restraint has enabled funding for growing
social reform, and to lift an estimated half of our population out of dire
poverty, which is commendable and which the ACDP supports.

The reduction in and the eventual phasing out of STC is to be welcomed. We
trust that this step will also stimulate the supply side of the economy and
encourage an investor-friendly economy where growth is not driven by
consumer spending on imports.

Additional government spending will also help raise economic growth to the
projected level of 6%. The critical question remains whether the government
can spend capital budget effectively. Capacity constraints must be
addressed.

In view of the unacceptably high crime rate, fighting crime and ensuring
personal safety remains a paramount concern and needs to be addressed.
South Africans would, we believe, even forgo tax cuts if they were assured
of personal safety. The ACDP, therefore, welcomes the additional amounts to
be spent on providing resources to fight crime.

There is also a huge need for more and better paid social workers to assist
families and strengthen families struggling with unemployment, poverty and
HIV/Aids. The ACDP believes that strong families result in strong
communities and thus welcomes the announcement of a bursary scheme and
better salaries for social workers.

The agricultural sector is a potential area for huge job creation,
particularly if accompanied by possible wage subsidy. Successful models of
job creation in the agricultural sector should be copied and rolled out
nationally.

Hon Minister, you have attempted to allay concerns regarding the growing
current account deficit. Should we not be concerned, particularly in view
of the recent market jitters which may affect capital inflows used to cover
the shortfall?
To conclude, the critical issue is whether the increased budget addresses
unemployment and poverty, whilst stimulating economic growth and
development in a safe and secure environment.

The ACDP will support today’s Budget Vote. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon members, please lower
your voices.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman, the FF Plus congratulates the Minister on a
good news Budget – a Budget according to which huge amounts of money are
going to be spent on education, crime and infrastructure.

Meneer, ons het vir 89 maande in Suid-Afrika nou volgehoue groei gehad en
dit is beslis ’n nuwe rekord. Ek dink die vorige rekord was 44 maande. Die
harde ekonomiese werklikheid is dit kan nie altyd so aanhou nie, en miskien
moet die Minister tog maar in die Bybel gaan lees van Josef in Egipte en
die sewe vet jare en die sewe maer jare en dat ons ook vir die sewe maer
jare moet voorbereiding tref. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Sir, we have had sustained growth in South-Africa for 89 months and this
indeed is a new record. I think the previous record was 44 months. The
harsh economic reality is that it cannot always continue like this, and
maybe the Minister should go read in the Bible about Joseph in Egypt and
the seven years of abundance and the seven years of famine and that we
should also make provision for the seven years of famine.]

The problem is that this is the seventh year of continued growth and of
this kind of good news Budget without the results being visible on ground
level. Somewhere there is a hole in the bucket - dear Trevor, but I don’t
know where it is - which causes that the good news which is announced in
Parliament every year do not always filter through to ground level.

The capacity problem of the provinces and local management at present
places a definite restriction on the capability of the government to make
use in full of the continued growth.

It is very important that the country in years of growth uses its surplus
for capital projects which in more difficult years will help to stimulate
tax incomes. Against this backdrop, it is important that the billions of
rands which have been budgeted for the 2010 Soccer World Cup are created in
a practical manner and will still be available after the tournament.

The FF Plus has for a number of years been asking that tax on pension funds
be abolished as it is an extra burden on the finances of people who try to
provide for retirement. We welcome the fact that the Minister has listened
to our request and abolished this tax.
Die regering gee toe dat misdaad baie ernstige afmetings aanneem. As deel
van die oplossing stel die Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit voor dat
die gemeenskap moet help om misdaad te bekamp. Die VF Plus vra reeds sedert
2001 dat die agb Minister van Finansies moet kyk in watter mate
belastingtoegewings moontlik is vir die groot bedrae wat gewone
landsburgers tans moet spandeer vir hulle eie veiligheid.

Die Begroting is soos die aankondiging van die Springbok-rugbyspan of soos
Bafana Bafana. As die name aangekondig word hier in die Raad, dan klink dit
baie goed en ons is baie tevrede omdat ons al die goeie goed hoor. Maar as
jy die volgende dag in die koerant lees wie nie die span gehaal het nie, is
jy ongelukkig, want jy het nie besef wat die Minister eintlik nié gesê het
nie. Dit is met die Begroting dieselfde.

Die Minister het hier in die Raad gepraat van belastingverligting van
R8,4 miljard vir ons mense. Dit klink baie goed en ons het dit verwelkom.
Volgens my somme word die belastinglas op individue net elke jaar al
groter. Een rede hiervoor is dat die fiskale sleuring, oftewel belasting
weens inflasie, nie werklik uitgeskakel word nie.

Die belofte was dat die staatskas nooit meer as 25% van BBP behoort te
beloop nie. Hierdie jaar beloop dit reeds 27%. Met ander woorde, die staat
het te veel geld wat dit van ons vat en vashou aan hierdie kant, wat groei
kon gestimuleer het. As ons ook provinsiale belastings bytel, dan trek dit
by 30% van BBP.

Ons kan nie voortgaan om ’n klein klompie belastingbetalers op ’n subtiele
manier ál meer en meer te belas en steeds dink die koei gaan nie lateraan
leeg gemelk word nie. Ons moet die belastingbasis uitbou, anders gaan ons
vorentoe probleme hê. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The government acknowledges that crime is reaching alarming proportions.
As part of the solution the Minister of Safety and Security proposes that
the community assists in the fight against crime. Since 2001 the FF Plus
has been asking that the hon Minister of Finance should see to what extent
tax concessions are possible for the big amounts that ordinary citizens are
currently spending on their own safety.

The Budget is like the announcement of the Springbok rugby team or like
Bafana Bafana. When the names are announced in the House, it sounds very
good and we are very satisfied because we hear all the good things. But if
you read in the newspapers the following day about who did not make the
team, you are unhappy, because you did not realise what the Minister
actually did not say. It is the same with the Budget.

The Minister spoke here in this House about tax relief of R8,4 billion for
our people. It sounds very good and we welcomed it. According to my
calculations the tax burden on individuals just increases every year. One
reason is that the fiscal drag, that is tax due to inflation, is not really
eliminated.

The promise was that Treasury should never amount to more than 25% of the
GDP. It already amounts to 27% for this year. In other words, the
government has too much money that they take from us and hold onto on this
side, which could have stimulated growth. If we also add provincial tax, it
will add up to 30% of GDP.

We cannot continue to subtly burden a few taxpayers more and more and think
that the cow will not be milked dry at the end of the day. We must expand
the tax base otherwise we will have problems in future. I thank you.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Chairperson, the Minister of Finance in introducing the
Budget, quoted Will Hutton’s book on China and globalisation, as follows:

   The foundation of human association is the idea that human life has equal
   worth and that human beings are equally entitled to political, economic
   and social rights which allow them to choose a life they have resolved,
   they have reason to live.

The idea that human life has equal worth and that is the core value that
unites us, invites us to ask whether we have done enough to give practical
effect in South Africa today to our shared humanity. Have we acted in a
manner that shows that human life has equal worth or do we still live in a
society where the shadow of history dominates over the opportunities of an
open society?

As our young nation enters its 13th year, we have much to be proud of. We
are building a society founded on the principles of equality, nonracialism
and nonsexism. We have built institutions of democracy, creating an open
society founded on the rule of law. After stabilising the economy and the
public finances we have created the conditions of rapid economic growth,
job creation and the broadening of opportunities.

We in the ANC, therefore, take great pride that this Budget puts, once
again, emphasis on the stated goals of the ANC, that is, the value of
shared humanity. We are, therefore, pleased that in eliminating the
backlogs in social services delivery, including improved salaries for the
health professionals and people in the educational and social development
sectors, as well as increasing the numbers of these professionals in the
public sector, is one of the five key social and economic development
policy objectives of the next three years, as prioritised by our Minister
of Finance. We say so, because we know that there is a direct link between
people’s health and their social conditions and their ability to contribute
to the betterment of society. It is, therefore, clearly in the interests of
all of us that we strengthen social services within this country, as
largely provided for by the state.

For us, when it comes to health, we would like to state the most important
elements in the Budget. The real growth in the Health budget is about R3-R4
billion per annum. The main areas emphasized in the Budget are the
following: Firstly, the conditional grants, and here in particular we refer
to grants for the fight against HIV and Aids, are estimated to be R1,68
billion over the next three years. There is also the modernisation of
hospitals and the hospital revitalisation programme.

Secondly, there is the area of equitable shares that would allow new
ambulances, better and improved communication in the ambulance system as a
whole, as well as improvement in the air ambulances service that would
better prepare South Africa for 2010. The third area deals with the new
wage deals that are put forth here and lastly, there is the area of the
additional health personnel that will go up to about 30 000 over the MTEF
period, at about         R5,3 billion over the said period.

To give effect to these policy imperatives, it is particularly taken into
account in the Budget that the public health sector serves 80% of the
population of South Africa. We, therefore, welcome the increased allocation
in the MTEF period in 2007-08 Budget and in particular we welcome the
hospital allocations, the modernisation of tertiary services, the
allocation for HIV and Aids is also welcomed, and these are all additional
resources. We are of the view that we will see a marked improvement in the
delivery of better health services in our country.

It should also be emphasized here that whilst these are indeed large
amounts of new funding for the health sector, the public sector requires
significantly more resources to meet the needs of the population. We have
already seen, for instance, in terms of the national strategic plan that is
being unveiled by the government, that more demands to give effect to this
particular plan will be required from us in order to meet the demands in
future. Besides the conditional grants referred to, there are also the
hospital revitalisation programme and the comprehensive HIV and Aids
allocations, the increased allocation for human resources for health, as
well as emergency medical services and medical equipment that are all
allocated through the equitable share to provinces. It is critical that
these increases are indeed passed on to the Department of Health.

The National Treasury and the national Department of Health are therefore
called upon to work together under the political guidance of the respective
Ministers to ensure that these funds are indeed channelled to improving the
public health sectors in each of our provinces.
Finally, we call on the political heads as well as the management of the
public health sector to work hard to ensure that all the resources provided
for by this government are utilised efficiently and effectively. Even as we
request additional funding to strengthen the national health system, we
must ensure optimal use of existing resources.

As this House knows, the national health system also comprises the private
health sector in our country. We are all aware that it is indeed disturbing
that this sector has not been able to curb the cost increases. We are aware
that even though this sector provides care to only 20% of the population,
yet if you compare it to what is actually spent in the public sector, it
comes to much more. This inequity itself requires the need to be addressed.
Indeed one might add that this level of greed by elements within the
private health sector cannot be left unchallenged. We must, as we continue
to support this Budget, call upon the government to review the expenditure
in the private health sector, with a view to firstly contain the cost
increases in this sector and, secondly,.we need to ensure that the
implementation of the Health Charter is actually an instrument that will
assist us to achieve these results. We therefore hope that the finalisation
of the Health Charter will be implemented with greater speed and haste.

Chairperson, may I also take this opportunity to wish our Minister of
Health well and a speed recovery. [Applause.] I am aware that there are
those who have displayed and behaved in a manner so insensitive and perhaps
reflective of their uncouth upbringing and whose values for human life are
found to be despicable and objectionable. Perhaps it is very easy for them,
even as we speak here at this podium today, whilst perhaps the bulk of our
population listens attentively, they have got the temerity to howl and
scowl, rather than to take an interest in the debates at hand. This is a
character perhaps that has actually characterised the party on my left
here. [Interjections.] It is indeed important in the ANC to state the
following. There is a song that we sing in the ANC. [Interjections.]
Umthetho wakho awunambeko. Abantu abadala akubazi. [You are known to be
disrespectful towards elderly people.]

Whilst therefore the Minister of Health was lying in her sickbed, the
villains who have no regard for or respect the quality of black life,
danced on the floor, praying for her removal from office. [Interjections.]

Yet, on Sunday, they may declare themselves Christians and servants of God,
but their behaviour reflects the opposite and they are perhaps servants of
Lucifer. [Interjections.] We who have known the Minister for years and have
been with her long before the luxuries of government were even in our
thoughts, and we have no doubt about her commitment to her profession and
her responsibility. We must therefore know that as she lies in her bed
reflecting on her work and life, that we in the ANC value her so much and
wish her a speedy and complete recovery. [Applause.]

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, thank you very much for this first
opportunity to address this House. It is an honour and a privilege for me
as a proud South African. I am looking forward to my constructive
involvement in the future.

Ek is ’n trotse lid van die DA en dankbaar teenoor my partyleierskap hier
en in die Wes-Kaap vir die vertroue in my gestel om hierdie amp te vul; ook
aan my politieke mentor, die agb King, vir sy leiding en advies. My dank
aan my gade en vir die wonderlike steun van my gesin en my kiesafdeling,
Helderberg, en vir hulle teenwoordigheid hier.

Ek het passies in die lewe en is dit ’n voorreg om dit te kan uitleef. Ek
moet satisfaksie daaruit put. Ek moet met konstruktiewe kritiek ’n
noemenswaardige bydrae maak en erkenning gee waar dit regverdig is. Ek gee
graag aan Minister Manuel erkenning vir die fiskale disipline van sy
departement en ook die rol wat die portefeuljekomitee daarin speel.

Een van my ander passies is om gestremdes te verteenwoordig. Dit is vir my
lekker om vandag van my gestremde vriende, al die pad van Worcester af op
die galery saam met ons te hê. Minister Manuel, hulle is die kwesbaarste
van die kwesbares en is baie dankbaar vir die verhoogde toelaag wat hulle
kry. Wie min het, vir hulle is elke rand baie welkom.

Tog is dit so dat my vriend, Desmond de Koker, en sy vrou albei van
elektriese rolstoele gebruik moet maak wat elk R20 000 kos. Die beoefening
van sport is vir hulle almal baie belangrik. Verskillende rolstoele is
nodig vir rolstoelbasketbal, rolstoelrugby, rolbal, marathon, ens, teen
ongeveer R12 000 per stoel per sport. Verder betaal hulle hul huishuur,
munisipale kostes en moet hulle hul skoolgaande kinders onderhou. U sal met
my saamstem dat dit nie met die R870 per maand gedoen kan word nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I am a proud member of the DA and grateful to my party leadership here and
in the Western Cape for the trust they have placed in me to take up this
office; also to my political mentor, the hon King, for his guidance and
advice. My gratitude to my spouse and for the wonderful support from my
family and my constituency, Helderberg and for their presence here.

I have passions in my life and it is a privilege to live them. I must get
satisfaction from them. I must make a significant contribution by means of
constructive criticism and give recognition where it is due. I gladly give
credit to Mr Manuel for the fiscal discipline of his department as well as
the role that the portfolio committee plays.
One of my other passions is to represent persons with disabilities. It is
my pleasure to have my disabled friends here with us today in the gallery,
all the way from Worcester. Minister Manuel, they are the most vulnerable
of those at risk and they are grateful for the increased grant which they
receive. Those that have little welcome every rand that they receive.

Yet it is so that my friend, Desmond de Koker, and his wife both have to
make use of electric wheelchairs which cost R20 000 each. The practice of
sport is very important to them all. Various wheelchairs are needed for
wheelchair basketball, wheelchair rugby, bowls, marathon, etc, at
approximately R12 000 a chair per sport. Furthermore they pay their rent,
municipal costs and they must support their school-going children. You will
agree with me that it cannot be done with R870 per month.]

I want to challenge Mr Manuel with the following, especially if again
Budget surpluses materialise, when considering the Mid-term and the Main
Budget of next year: bigger allocations to benefit the disabled in the roll-
out of the new social security scheme, meaningful contributions directly
benefiting the disabled practising sport, both on developmental as well as
high performance levels. This will result in more Paralympic medals and
bigger representation of PDIs in Team South Africa, grants to ensure the
improved accessibility of facilities in our communities and implementation
of mechanisms to ensure that the targeted employment of persons with a
disability is reached.

Soos dit elkeen se plig is om na oueres en siekes om te sien, is dit ons
morele plig om te verseker dat ons gestremdes alle moontlike hulp van die
regering kry, sodat dit as ’n gelykmakende faktor vir hulle kan dien. Ek
dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Just like it is everyone’s duty to look after the frail and aged, we have
a moral duty to ensure that our disabled persons get all the help they can
from the government, in order for it to serve as an equalising factor. I
thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr G G WOODS: Chairperson, we don’t have any serious difficulties with the
Budget at all. We think it’s a Budget that’s well harmonised, has the right
emphasis and has a set of priorities which we think represent the national
reality. It’s a very credible plan of what we need to do in our country to
take our country and its people forward. So the issues I would rather spend
my time on in the few minutes I have are the issues that a lot of the other
members have referred to in passing, where they talked about the lack of
capacity, poor implementation, poor execution and those sorts of problems.
I would rather not just do that in passing, I think those problems are far
more serious than we give voice to.

Perhaps, I should start off by talking about some well-known Harvard
research that shows that even the world’s most successful businesses, which
are very adequately resourced and which work in very fiercely contested
industries, often produce up to 80% value for money return on their
budgets. In other words, 20% of their resources is poorly used. So,
deriving from that, we must ask ourselves: What percentage might there be
for an undermanaged government bureaucracy that doesn’t have any
competitive forces driving its efforts? In other words, what social or
other returns do we or does the taxpayer actually get back for our budget
each year?

I think we only have to look at areas of faltering service delivery and one
could name health, education, the criminal justice system - to name some.
We only have to look at the rather regular incidence of wasteful spending,
underspending and dishonest or corrupt spending to see that we do have
something of a problem.

To us, it all gets back to the same thing: The quality of management across
the administrative structures is generally poor, where many of the
management positions are filled with people with insufficient capabilities;
and then, indeed, many of the positions not filled at all, and some filled
by lesser bureaucrats.

Without being melodramatic, we would see this as a crisis of substantial
proportions. It’s a crisis which costs the country so much and which in
many instances makes the very good intentions of a fine budget somewhat
farcical. So why, might we ask, is the problem not being adequately dealt
with? And it is a problem which we have watched and spoken about as it grew
and grew over the years. Each year, Minister Fraser-Moleketi appears before
the House, where she seems to have a new range of ideas and a new range of
assurances. But with respect, these do not seem to demonstrate a full
enough understanding of what is causing this crisis and how to fix it.

I have even seen now that Samdi, who have been with us for so many years,
have now come forward with their, probably, 54th plan which is about to go
before Cabinet on their latest ideas, but what happened to all the other
plans? Surely, we cannot go on simply dabbling with the problem.

It is a crisis, a very central and costly crisis, and one which requires
big thinking and a comprehensive plan. Mr Minister, we think we have
developed such a plan, which we would like to discuss with you. It is a
plan which we feel could do justice to the important intentions of the
budget and the money it provides. Thank you.

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chairperson, hon Ministers and colleagues ...

... mangikhumbuze aMalungu ePhalamende ukuthi uhulumeni ngeke akwazi ukuthi
afeze izethembiso ngaphandle kokuthi thina singabantu sikhokhe intela
...[... let me remind the Members of Parliament that the government cannot
fulfil the promises if we, as the people, do not pay tax ...]

... because such resources do not come from anywhere else but from us, as
citizens; unless government policy would need to be dictated by whoever
foots the bill to implement government policy. Thus taxation is the main
source of government revenue. The question then is: How much tax should
citizens, individuals or corporates pay? This brings us to the tax
proposals outlined by the Minister in his Budget Speech two weeks ago.

Personal income tax or individual tax has been greatly reduced since 1994,
when the ANC government took over. This has put more money in the pockets
of individuals to make their lives a little bit easier or a little bit
better. This year another R8,4 billion will be taken back to the taxpayer
in order to improve their lives. The majority of the taxpayers who will
benefit from these mostly are from those who earn less than R3 583 per
month, as they no longer have to pay any tax from their salaries or wages.
According to the retirement fund industry, more than R50 billion was
collected by the SA Revenue Service over the 11-year period; that is money
which should have gone to the beneficiaries.

Doing away with retirement fund tax means less burden for individuals and
better benefits when one retires. We, however, should ensure that those
benefits do reach the intended beneficiaries. We should guard against fund
managers who would like to make a quick buck through the misery of the poor
and ignorant people. Incidents such as Fidentia, illegal or secret profits
through bulking by the likes of Alexander Forbes, Glenrand-MIB and others
should come to a stop. We cannot be complacent and expect that the
Financial Services Board will effectively arrest such incidents as it has
to oversee more than 13 000 retirement funds.

Ngakho-ke kufuneka siqiniseke ukuthi abantu esibakhethayo abazoba yiso
nezindlebe zethu ezigungwini zokuqhuba le zikhwama zezimpesheni bangabantu
abanolwazi noma abanekhono ngalolu daba. Kungenjalo, kufuneka thina
siyizinyonyana noma singabantu nje siqinisekise ukuthi banolwazi
olufanelekile ukuze babhekane nalezi zimo. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Therefore we need to ensure that people that we elect, who will be our
eyes and ears in the Financial Services Board are people with knowledge and
the necessary skills. If not so, we as unions or ordinary people need to
ensure that they have appropriate knowledge in order to face these
situations.]

The argument by the business fraternity at the public hearings and mostly
from our colleagues, the DA, is that personal income tax in South Africa is
too high. When you look at developing countries, South Africa is among the
countries with the lowest personal income tax. For instance, when you look
at Brazil, personal income tax ranges from 15% to 27%, which is one of the
lowest. But when you look at Egypt, it ranges from 20% to 40%; and with
Morocco it’s from 0% to 41,5%. Therefore, it is not really true that South
Africa has the highest personal income tax when compared to developing
countries. If you look at developed countries such as Sweden, you will find
that it’s up to 51,1%.

We cannot run away from globalisation. We have to, from time to time,
adjust our policies to capitalise on opportunities that come with it. Doing
away with secondary tax for companies is not yielding to pressure from the
DA or its lobbyist group, but it’s because it is the right time to do so
and in order to broaden our tax base.

South Africa is also one of the developing countries with the lowest rate
when it comes to income tax on companies. Although investors would like to
see returns at the end of the day on their investments, it is not tax rates
that keep investors away. During our visit to the US recently, the Africa
Commission informed us that most companies or individuals would like to
invest in South Africa, not because there is low tax but because of
financial and political stability, and macroeconomic and sound
macroeconomic principles. Therefore, South Africa is one of the countries
that enjoys such confidence.

The remaining budget proposals are actually mainly the yearly improvements
that are there on a year to year basis. For instance, sin tax is basically
aimed at changing our behaviour in society. The increase on tobacco, wine
and spirits is a way of trying to ensure that other health principles are
adhered to, and that policies that we pass as Parliament are adhered to by
the citizens. These changes are on a yearly basis therefore they are not
such a problem.

Regarding the percentage of investment to GDP, it is proposed by Treasury
that 25% of investment be made to the GDP so that the 6% growth rate can be
reached, as envisaged. It’s not a principle that’s cast in stone because
that is an economic model and, therefore, every economic model, as I
usually say, has a percentage error that needs to be accommodated. The
emphasis by our friends or colleagues that we have to make sure that ...

... noma kanjani i-25% iba yingxenye yezimali ezitshalwa eNingizimu Afrika
ukuze sithole ukukhula komnotho ngama-6% akulona iqiniso. Sithanda-ke
ukwazisa wonke umuntu emakhaya nanoma ikuphi lapho bekhona ukuthi
baqaphelisise ukuthi imali yabo iyakhula, ikakhulukazi njengoba
sesiwususile lo mthetho wokuthi impesheni yabo ibanjelwe intela uma umuntu
esethatha umhlalaphansi. Uma singakuqaphelisisi lokho, izinkampani ezifana
nabo-Fidentia, Alexander Forbes zizoqhubeka nokuthi zithathe imali
okufuneka ifinyelele kubantu okudingeka bahlomule kulokho. Ngiyabonga,
Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... exactly 25% of GDP is made of our domestic savings rate so that we can
have economic growth of 6% is not true. We therefore like to inform
everybody at home, wherever they may be, that they must be aware that their
money is growing, especially now that we have scrapped the law that states
that retirement funds should be taxed when one is retiring. If we are not
alert about these things, companies like the Fidentia Group and Alexander
Forbes will go on taking monies that need to reach people who must be
compensated. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr B E PULE: Chairperson, the UCDP congratulates the Minister of Finance,
hon Trevor Manuel, for the comprehensive budgets he presents to this House.
The 2007 Appropriation Bill was tabled in order to allocate money to the
different national government departments in terms of section 213(2) of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, that makes provision
that money may be withdrawn from the National Revenue Fund only in terms of
an appropriation by an Act of Parliament. To this end the Appropriation
Bill divides R299 billion of the National Revenue Fund among departments.
This is 11,04% higher than the previous year’s national allocation of R266
billion.

I have indicated and, of course deliberately, that this appropriation is in
terms of an Act of Parliament. In the same breath allow me to remind
government departments that an Act of Parliament cannot and shall not be
compromised in the use of these monies.

The UCDP would like to draw the attention of both executive authorities and
accounting officers to section 63(1)(a) and (b) and 63(2) and section 2,
and sections 38 – 41 of the Public Finance Management Act, No 1 of 1999
respectively, about their financial responsibilities.

Of paramount importance is section 38 1(a) of the Act. I quote:

   The accounting officer for a department trading entity or constitutional
   institution must ensure that the department trading entity or
   constitutional institution has and maintains an effective, efficient and
   transparent system of financial and risk management and internal control.

This, without compromise, is a sine qua non in the appropriation of state
funds. I am happy to indicate that the UCDP is supporting the Bill and not
noncompliance with financial regulations. The UCDP supports the Bill
and not unauthorised wasteful and fruitless expenditure. The UCDP supports
the Bill, and not emphasis of matters. The UCDP supports the Bill, and not
qualifications, disclaimers or adverse opinions.

It must further be explicitly clear that this institution, Parliament, must
also account for monies it receives. Parliament must not wait for big guns,
as suggested by weekend’s newspapers ... [Time expired.]

Mr T M MASUTHA: Mutshami wa xitulu, ndzi tlakuka ndzi seketela ku
avanyisiwa ka timali leti nga endliwa lembe leri hi murhangeri wa hina,
Holobye Trevor Manuel. Hi khensa swinene marito ya yena lama ya nge: Vutomi
bya vanhu hinkwavo bya ringana. [Chairperson, I rise to support the
appropriation of money which was done this year by our leader, Minister
Trevor Manuel. We are very grateful for his words that went: “The lives of
all the people are equal.”]

At its 50th national conference held at Mafikeng in December 1997, the ANC,
having noted that the government inherited a system of social security
which was fragmented, unco-ordinated and based on past policies of
discrimination, inequality and inaccessibility to beneficiaries,
acknowledged and supported the present process in government to transform
the social security system into a co-ordinated and comprehensive policy.

In addition and in pursuance of this objective, the government appointed a
commission, which I am most privileged to have been part of, led by Prof
Vivienne Taylor, to investigate the possibilities of developing a
comprehensive social security policy.

At its 51st national conference, December 2002 in Stellenbosch, the ANC
acknowledged the Taylor report presented to the government that year as
providing a basis for the development of such a social security policy and
affirmed the need to strengthen the implementation and to expand the reach
of existing policies whilst finding new ways to close existing gaps which
leave certain people still vulnerable. It also called on the government to
continue with plans towards a comprehensive social security system through
the consolidation and ongoing review of all existing social security
measures.

Allow me, before I proceed, to express my sincere gratitude to the Minister
of Social Development, Dr Zola Skweyiya, who in 2000 invited a number of us
from the Portfolio Committee on Social Development and the Taylor committee
to join him on a visit to Berlin to study the German social security
system, commonly known as the Bismarck System -forgive Bismarck for all his
ills; at least he produced something positive - famous for its tenacity and
having endured for more than 100 years, survived two world wars and a few
economic depressions, and continues to give the German people a common
sense of nationhood and social solidarity till this day.

A question may well be asked, legitimately so, as to what is wrong with our
current arrangements given the proverbial rhetorical question: Why fix it
if it is not broken? The current arrangements after all seem to be working
and millions of people benefit from them. The problem, however, is that in
1994 South Africa inherited splinters of both publicly and privately
managed social security schemes be they contributory in that they are
funded by members of the respective schemes or noncontributory in that they
are publicly funded through the general tax system.

The only thing that was common amongst these schemes was that they were not
bound together by any common thread other than to address white poverty and
income security and to deal with the rest of the population incidentally as
an afterthought. It thus did not afford equal access and protection to all
citizens, irrespective of race, gender or social class, so as to secure all
from such contingencies as the loss of a breadwinner, or loss of income due
to unemployment, retirement, ill-health or disability.

Before 1994, for instance, the maintenance grant provided by the apartheid
government was only available to poor white children and a few black
children – mainly coloured children in the Western Cape. All this has since
changed and today over 7 million children of all races from poor households
are receiving the grant. [Applause.]

The UIF, until recently, did not include domestic and farmworkers and
because of poor regulation and lack of proper auditing and management, many
employees were often left out in the cold when after years of working they
discovered that their employer was dodging contributions to UIF or Codia.
The fault principle applicable to the motor vehicle system, which is
currently applicable, means that motorists, commuters and pedestrians alike
have no claim to any social benefits under that scheme, unless they can
prove fault on the part of the other party – proof which is often near
impossible to adduce.

Oft-times, insurers will repudiate claims because of the failure of the
policy holder to disclose certain information, citing the common law
principle that an insurance agreement is a contract uberima fides, that is,
of utmost good faith. Given the low literacy levels, language difficulties
and other challenges, many of us do know that a lot does go wrong,
resulting in many beneficiaries being left out in the cold.

Then there is the problem of the poverty trap. Whilst citizens, especially
those at the lower end of the income distribution ladder, are strongly
encouraged to save up for their retirement, their meagre resources work
against them when they retire, because at a certain point those meagre
resources are taken into account when consideration is made as to whether
they qualify for state social assistance or not. [Interjections.] I will
retire some years after you. [Laughter.] For this reason and others, many
who worked their entire lives often find themselves retiring in poverty,
with limited hope of recovery in their lifetime.

What then is the primary objective of the respective comprehensive social
security system that is being envisaged? This is to ensure the human
wellbeing of all through measures that address income poverty through
adequate incomes throughout a person’s life cycle, including efficiency of
benefits.

The Taylor committee distinguishes between income replacement measures, as
the area on which social security is largely focused on the one hand, and
the broader area of social protection which takes a more holistic view of
social policy and the various social interventions aimed at protecting
people from exclusion from participation in the social life of society, or
protection against social exclusion on the other.

A distinction is drawn between income poverty, asset and/or capability
poverty – which relates to a lack of access to such assets, whether
tangible or otherwise – including skills necessary to enable one to
participate in productive or gainful activity or for their general
wellbeing; and poverty relating to access to basic services such as water,
sanitation, electricity, etc, matters for which this Budget has adequately
or significantly made provision.

With regard to the development of a system of comprehensive social
security, the President, in his state of the nation address this year, had
the following announcement to make:

   In order to improve on the social programmes that we have implemented
   over the years, we aim this year to complete the work already started to
   reform our system of social security so that phased implementation can
   start as early as possible. A critical part of this reform will be the
   task of repairing a defect identified in the 2002 report of the Committee
   of Inquiry into a Comprehensive System of Social Security in South
   Africa. This is that the contributory earnings-related pillar of our
   social security system is missing or unreliable for large numbers of our
   working people. The principle guiding this approach is that, over and
   above social assistance provided through the government budget, we need
   to explore the introduction of an earnings–related contributory social
   security system that is informed by the principle of social solidarity.

Key recommendations emanating from the Taylor report include: Mandatory
insurance cover for all in formal employment and their dependants;
voluntary contributions to social insurance for those who cannot
realistically be covered by mandatory arrangements; adoption of an official
poverty line and improved data and research on poverty and human
development; a phased and measured introduction of a comprehensive system
of incomer support, on the strength of improvements over time in fiscal and
administrative capacity – something which all of us will agree, has been
showing significant improvements; continued active labour market and job
creation policies alongside the extension of social insurance to all
workers; special attention to the needs of children, particularly those in
child-headed households – in this regard I think we have seen a significant
rise in the uptake of the foster care grant which signifies that a lot more
orphaned children are actually being covered in that safety; a phased
reform of health care financing towards mandatory, universal coverage –
these are matters that my colleague, hon Ngculu, has dealt with to some
length; an integrated approach to retirement provision based on mandatory
participation, preservation and benefits, improved fund administration and
governance, simplification of the tax structure and improved consumer
protection; and last but not least, improved disability insurance and
compensation, for occupational injury and diseases, as well as reform of
road accident benefits, as part of a new insurance framework. The ANC
supports the Budget. [Time expired.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, let me start by saluting the President of
Zimbabwe, his Excellency Robert Mugabe of Zanu-PF in protecting the
legitimate people of Zimbabwe. We want to assure you, Comrade President,
that you have our full support in the defence of the people of Zimbabwe’s
hard-fought liberation and freedom. Soldier on until the whole continent of
Africa is totally emancipated from the bondages of neo-colonialism.

Coming to the topic at hand, hon Minister, this Budget has some elements of
capitalism in it, as in its outlook it speaks too little about the plight
of the downtrodden and poorest masses of our people – the unemployed,
illiterate and landless Africans.

This Budget, as it stands, will find it difficult to address the scourge of
abject poverty, inequalities and the suffering facing the Africans. Some
pensioners die in the long queues of the pension payout points. Many school-
going children become dropouts at high school level due to hunger as the
crafters of the school-feeding schemes pretend that only children at the
primary schools come from poor families.

The Budget speaks about envisaged subsidy remuneration of the working
people, whilst many unemployed people are denied an unemployment allowance.
Students who pass their matric for university entrance are unable to
register due to the high costs of tertiary education fees. The African
small businessmen only hear about millions of rands reserved for small,
medium and micro enterprises for economic development, and none or very
little filters down to the prospective beneficiaries.

The projected 9,2% economic growth over three years will have little
significance if the present much-publicised 5% growth is mum about the
plight of the homeless persons, people who live under bridges, the street
kids who sleep on empty stomachs and our schools that are without science
laboratory accessories and equipment, and the schools that have hospitality
classes without the necessary equipment.

Hon Minister, the bottom line of capitalism is that the poor should remain
poor whilst the rich become richer. The first thing to do in our country is
to uncompromisingly fight capitalism as the evil that will keep us slaves
forever.

The PAC finally wishes to put it in clear terms that the budget for the
poor and the downtrodden masses of our people should in principle address
the issue of equitable distribution of land and wealth. It must speak to
the issues pertaining to free medication, free education, stopping the
privatisation of strategic assets and the protection of its citizens. It
must speak to the effective and efficient delivery of much-sought-after
services and create permanent jobs. The PAC supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon members and
comrades, I want to invite hon Likotsi to a meeting where the sports and
recreation committee is dealing with the 2010 Special Measures Bill, and to
see the location of those downtrodden people he is talking about. These are
deliberate efforts created by the Department of Trade and Industry in
collaboration with Treasury to make sure that the ordinary people at home
are going to be the beneficiaries of that.

The 30% that is requested there that should deliberately go to the poorest
of the poor, MaMkhize, I think is something that the hon Likotsi is
supposed to applaud and he probably knows that. If he doesn’t know, I am
prepared to show him the 2010 Special Measures Bill.

Hon members, we are ready to kick off. If today, Minister, it could be said
we must stage the Confederation Cup of Nations, South Africa would do that,
and in a better way and in its own unique way. So, it is not that we are
not ready. We are ready to do that. Winning the bid to host the 2010 Soccer
World Cup is more than a national triumph. It has immense financial
benefits for Africa and South Africa. It will change the lives of millions
of people.

After and before the 2010 Soccer World Cup, South Africa will never be the
same, both in terms of infrastructure and international exposure. South
African tourism will boom forever because of this important occasion that
the country is going to host.

Can you think what is going to happen to the gross domestic product of this
country? Think of the increase in direct foreign investment in this
country. Think of the marketing opportunities that this country is posed to
have for the nations of the world. It cannot be something that we think is
just not going to benefit the people of this country forever. I think it is
something that is going to last for decades in this country.
Minister, you spoke about the very important aspect of the tax incentives
for federations that are going to have a development programme. I think
this is the most important thing that federations have been expecting to
get. Time and again, they say: “We are not getting tax incentives even if
we are doing the developmental programme.” This is one of the most
important things that has happened to the federations.

Minister, we want to keep our eye on the ball. This incentive that you are
giving to the federations must really be an incentive that is biased
towards the development of the athletes.

We have a proposal that you must introduce another challenging incentive in
that even those that are rural-based – completely rural-based in terms of
development - must be told as to what they can come and have so that the
people in Limpopo and down at Dlangezwe in KwaZulu-Natal must also be able
to get this. That should be one of the most inspiring incentives that those
people could get.

Regarding those that want to put facilities in areas like those, and
regarding those who want to engage in social responsibility issues, the
Minister must look into that, saying that it is a good thing for them to
do, and he must look into incentivising those who are biased towards the
rural areas and those who are responsible for the social responsibility
programmes. This will strengthen the partnership between the government and
the federations so that they advance community participation in sport all
over the country.

On the question of 2010, Comrade Jeremy, whilst you are having nightmares,
I think in as far as game play is concerned, South Africa can play a game
now. So, unfortunately, you are having those nightmares, but in as far as
playing the game goes, we can play the game at any time as South Africans.

Minister, the R8,4 billion appropriation for the building of five new
stadiums and also the upgrading or renovation of the stadiums is something
that we welcome. By 2008, which is the target date for the final inspection
of the stadiums by the Fifa delegation, we shall have met that target.

With regard to the new stadiums - completely new - that we have gone around
to see, when you look at their underground parking, there is not a single
indoor facility. I do not think it is the intention of the government to
put up stadiums that are not multipurpose, and are only meant for rugby and
soccer. So, our input, Minister, is that a certain little space should be
provided for an indoor sports centre where people can go and enjoy
themselves.

In 2008, the construction of the stadiums for the confederation will be
completed. By December 2009, the whole question of the 2010 stadiums and
the supporting infrastructure will also be finalised, in spite of all other
things, and probably the worries that people have.

Minister, we have gone to the FNB Stadium; the nation is at work. We have
gone to KwaZulu-Natal to see the new stadium; the nation is at work. We
have gone to Mangaung; people are working there. We have gone to Nelson
Mandela Stadium in Port Elizabeth; people are working there.

One important feature that we have observed in the Nelson Mandela Stadium
and also in the KwaZulu-Natal Stadium is that, as we speak, people are
serious. They are working 16 hours per day trying to finish this work. By
June 2007, they are prepared in their plan to increase the work that is
going to be done. Therefore, they will be working 24 hours per day. I think
we need to applaud those people who are committed to their work in dealing
with those kinds of things. [Applause.] They are prepared to finish in
time.

The new upgrading of stadiums will really be a permanent feature for this
country and there will never be a legacy programme. According to the
business cases that were submitted by these hosting cities, it is clear
that, after the 2010 Soccer World Cup, those stadiums will remain a
commodity or entity that our people will enjoy forever, and they will be
owned by the people of this country.

When you stand there, in the Nelson Mandela Metropole you’ll see how the
city is working; you’ll see how the network, the upgrading of the roads
that converge on the old taxi rank and the work that is going on at the
taxi rank in preparation for this kind of work is progressing. Definitely,
the network there is a mind-blowing network. We are definitely sure that
this country will never be the same in as far as the flow of transport and
conducting of business is concerned, because all those that are entailed in
the plan of making this country efficient in the delivery of service and
also in conducting business.

We are urging the municipalities to have fiscal discipline in as far as the
funding of sport is concerned. Why do I say this, Minister? I can just give
you a brief outlook. From 2003 to 2005, when the Department of Sports and
Recreation had a programme called “The Building for Sports Programme”, it
built 189 basic facilities. With the advent of the municipal infrastructure
grant, it has had unintended consequences.

From 2005 to 2007, no basic facility has been built. It is a great loss,
from 189 down to nothing. It is a great loss. I think the municipal
infrastructure grant, as good as it is, has unintended consequences. I
think it has to be looked into how it could contribute deliberately to the
MIG. There is no problem with the MIG, but the problem lies with the
question of prioritising the sports facilities out of that MIG. I think the
municipalities need to be sensitive on the issue of sports facilities.

Municipalities do not prioritise the maintenance of the stadiums and all
that is related to those stadiums. I can tell you a very sad story. In
Montshiwa, the stadium was upgraded at a cost of R8 million, but if the
Minister were to go there now; because the municipality is very small, it
has no financial capacity, and that stadium has collapsed, because the
municipal infrastructure grant does not provide for to the maintenance of
that facility. We urge municipalities to really look at fiscal discipline
in as far as the MIG is concerned and also to look after those stadiums.
That is a very important thing that we need to look into.

As far as the legacy programme is concerned, having R312 million for legacy
projects in the community will also be wonderful. We were at the Orlando
Stadium, which people were saying is dilapidated. Orlando Stadium has
become the mecca of Soweto’s people, and this project is long overdue. They
applauded and said that they thought the 2010 Soccer World Cup and the
commitment of the government in making Orlando Stadium a home for the
people of Soweto again is something that is very commendable.

The school sports funding from the Minister, which refocuses on the funding
of school sports, is something very important because many times parents
say, ”We don’t have money for our children to go to such and such a place.”
Therefore, this time, we will not tax our parents heavily. You have created
relief for the parents to help their children to go and participate in this
freely.

Also, with regard to mass participation, that programme is booming. It is
like petrol being poured on the fire, but ... [Time expired.] Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mr M J J STEPHENS: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members, this Budget
presents us with a Minister at the end of his tether. His increasing
ability to collect revenue has finally caught up with his government’s
ability to spend it. Some countries have budget surpluses, some aspire to
have them, but I fear, this Minister has had a surplus thrust upon him.

Never has a balanced budget been advanced as a policy target, much less
than a surplus. The Minister’s conversion to the balanced budget lobby was
rather sudden. Hence, one finds the rationalisation that debt is a tax on
future generations rather disingenuous. He now finds himself in the
philosophical space occupied by far right American organisations, such as
the Cato Foundation. Developing countries without socio-economic backlogs
and challenges certainly cannot afford budget surpluses.

But the Minister clearly makes a virtue out of necessity. Debt is a tax on
future generations, but better a tax than a pox, an insufficiently
developed infrastructure and a legacy of unrelenting poverty. Future
generations will gain from present capital programmes at today’s prices;
why should they not assist in paying for them?

The Minister faces a dilemma. He cannot increase spending because the
public sector lacks capacity to spend fruitfully what they already have. He
will not lower taxes further for fear of soon having to raise them again.
So, he’s stuck with a surplus that might get worse but he prays that it
will disappear in a year or two.

Given this dilemma, dramatic steps to improve the civil service are
expected, but not proposed. Take a leaf out of the exemplary French
experience. France has a national network of 35 French civil service
training colleges. We have not a single one.

Without a competent, fully staffed civil service, excellence in service
delivery is impossible. I mention only two critical areas: Firstly,
provinces cannot transform hospitals efficiently. The government’s only
policy is to throw more money at them, yet chaos increases while hospital
budgets are actually cut. Secondly, our commuter transport system needs
urgent development. Taxi recapitalisation might give us more roadworthy
taxis but not more taxi-worthy roads. [Laughter.] Off-road rapid transit
commuter networks throughout South African urban areas are required.

When will we be able to attend to these and other chronic, yet urgent,
problems? We cannot start before we fix our civil service and we cannot win
before we innovate in socio-economic policy. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Madam Speaker, members of this House, comrades, colleagues, I
must say that I was a little nervous until I heard the wisecracking by the
hon Stephens. Thank you, that really relaxed, me. I enjoyed your jokes.

It’s quite clear that South Africa is facing a huge struggle in the
scarcity of skills. When I was told that this is going to be my topic to
speak on, it did worry me because it is such an incredible challenge. I
then decided to acquaint myself fully with what was happening in our
Budget. But also, whether they have problems like these overseas or is this
indeed unique to South Africa? I was actually quite taken aback when I read
the words of one writer: “There is a call to arms. We are in the midst of a
battle as we compete on a new fresh warfront for skills.”

Now, I must say that I don’t believe that because one recognises that there
is a global crisis, that this should in any way, reduce our own response.
And indeed it has not. If anything, I think we’ve shown them a thing or two
and we’ve also benefited their own services with our skills.

Madam Speaker, the department’s projected expenditure on infrastructure and
services as reflected in the Estimate of National Expenditure and the
Budget Review, underpin the scarcity of skills such as engineers,
scientists, technicians, artisans, managers and especially, project
managers, financial skills and IT competencies.

Yes, we do need skills development and corresponding programmes. And yes,
indeed, we need corresponding allocations. I am happy to say to those who
have already studied the Estimates of Expenditure, there have been
significant allocations in a number of departments in this regard.

Given the time that I have, I would highlight but a few of these to
illustrate my point. One of the things is the joint initiative on skills,
which will conduct job-matching guidance and placement, which will help
address the current irony around unemployed graduates in our country and
other skilled workers through to tracking down these individuals with
scarce skills. This, I believe, would go a long way to addressing the
urgent situation in our communities, which all of us as MPs find in our
constituencies. There are so many skilled technicians, qualified workers
who perhaps - perhaps I shouldn’t use the word “qualified” - they are
skilled workers with competencies but they don’t necessarily have a
recognised qualification.

This is just one major impediment, which must be urgently addressed. And
that is where skilled and or a professional person’s qualifications do not
satisfy some professional institution or someone who has the competency,
who simply requires this to be tested in order to be given the paper
recognition for it. We also need to consider and revise exactly what the
various qualification criteria guidelines are that are currently being used
as gates, quite often, to professional recognition to undertake a job.

We may think that it is a joke. We may think this is a new form of
affirmative action. I certainly don’t think I was affirmed anyway. But I
can remember that I would no sooner get an undergraduate degree. And if I
didn’t get my experience fast enough, I would learn that there was yet
another little qualification I would have to take because somehow I’d
missed one year and now I was no longer competent to be a clinical
physiologist. Oh dear, hell! I wonder what I’ve done to all those other
people I’ve been working with.

This is not a new thing, the problem is we in the past – believe you me
Afrikaners know this only too well - we followed the British system. We
said we would belong to the royal blah, blah, blah institution.

I know that you are going to say I should be talking about lowering skills.
I don’t need a bloody doctor on my table in the surgery that is not
qualified. Let’s not get ridiculous! Let’s not get ridiculous!

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order, Madam Speaker: The hon member uses some
interesting phrases and words, but I do think that she overstepped the
markers slightly there by referring to a certain word that begins with a
“b” and ends with a “y”. [Laughter.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Well, I thought in using it there would be semantic licence
because a theatre in a hospital is full of blood. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: A bit of colour here and there, especially when the hon member
is not really throwing it at any hon member’s face, is not, out of order.

Mr M J ELLIS: Is it not out of order?

The SPEAKER: She is not out of order.

Mr M J ELLIS: Well, that’s marvellous news. We look forward to using it
ourselves. Thank you very much.

Ms J L FUBBS: There’s a lot of poetic licence in my speeches, thank you.

Well, let’s just get back to the point. The point I’m making is that we
should not take anything to a ridiculous edge. And that’s not the case at
all. We do need both vertical and horizontal strategies, as indeed do the
Jipsa employees. We need to fast-track people’s skills within the country.
We need to identify skills that are outside the country and bring them in.
Some of them belong to our own South Africans, and we are busy doing that.

We also need to look within our own educational system - I know that we are
doing that – and to develop a solid foundation for the future so that we
breed a new generation of people whose development and skills match the
nature and the requirements of the developmental state we are working
towards achieving.

The first year of a three-year Medium-Term Expenditure Framework is, I
believe, making a serious attempt to do just that with some departments
showing more evidence than others.

Just to quickly note a few of these, what we have currently is the sum of
50 000 artisans - we recognise that – that have to be trained over the next
few years to meet the demands of our growing economy. And this budget
identifies a artisan development programmes aligned to the National Skills
Development Strategy, which is being conducted by the Department of Labour.
Again, more than 116 learners have been registered through the Sector
Education Training Authorities Systems.
Complementary to that, the Further Education Training Programme is a
programme to train the trainers in the national development of trade,
employment and labour assessment. And that is allocated    R47 million to
upgrade facilities and equipment. A further       R681 million has been
proposed for bursaries and curriculum development.

And the bursaries, incidentally, will target disadvantaged people so that
they too can benefit from FET colleges. But we should not divorce this from
previous allocations. In the previous budget, R2 billion, I think, was for
the recapitalisation of FET.

Scarce skills in the social sector have not been forgotten. They also
receive additional funding. Indeed, it would target the training of social
workers and educators.

An additional R700 million will go to prospective educators over this
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF. Some 13 000 students are expected
to benefit from this new bursary scheme.

This ANC government recognises that education is indeed the nurturing
process to cut the skills shortage and it thus receives  R6 billion, as a
pay progression for teachers. It is unfortunate that I don’t have the time
to go into those bursaries that target maths, science and other areas of
specialisation. An amount of R8 billion goes to education and support
staff, R5,3 billion to the health sector for increased remuneration of
existing staff but also to hire more staff. To ensure that we avoid the
donga of dependency, National Treasury has earmarked increasing funds
related to bursaries in this field.

The military skills development programme is one that has received
international acclaim. Really, what a far cry it is from what we were doing
in field 20 years back.

Skills begin with reading skills - and that gets R1 billion. Labour has
sharpened its skills strategy and is focusing on engineering, construction,
artisan development and infrastructure.

The World Cup by now has been spoken of. Perhaps I haven’t heard
sufficiently myself about farmers and chemical workers. They will also
benefit through the biofuels industry.

One thing I must raise in my last minute is my concern about the SITAS and
the mismanagement of funds. In the previous years they were underspending,
now they’ve gone on a spending spree. I don’t know what they are spending
it on. They are spending it so fast. They can’t even figure out what
investments to go to. We don’t need risky investments and a focus from
people who don’t know what they are doing and risky things such as
Fidentia.

In fact, what’s worrying me is that they have interpreted their autonomy as
a licence to abuse their mandate and their commitment has become liquefied
in the process rather than solidified as a clear commitment to the mandate.

The ANC supports this Budget, as indeed I do, and I believe that we are on
the right path to addressing the scarce skills challenge in our country.
[Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, as a democracy, the nation eagerly awaits
this time of the year when the Budget and the appropriations indicate the
government’s reaffirmed commitment to delivering and transforming South
Africa into an aspiring global entity with an affluent citizenry that works
together at advancing its aims and intentions. The Appropriation Bill gives
a clear breakdown of the government’s division of funds to the various
departments of the government to enable delivery of functions.

This year we have an increase of 11,04% in the allocation to the national
Budget. The MF takes this opportunity to once again, applaud our hon
Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, for a terrific job in managing state
affairs. Over the past two terms of this democracy that this portfolio has
been entrusted  to you, hon Minister, we have enjoyed great progress, and
overwhelming development as a nation.

Budget allocations award us insight into the government’s commitments for
the year ahead. It appears that, in line with the state of the nation
address of 2007 by our hon President and the Budget Speech of 2007, there
is a substantial increase in the budget for Sport and Recreation, Land
Affairs, Labour, Government Communication and Information Services, and
Foreign Affairs.

With the 2010 World Cup just three years away, we accredit the 69,6% to
Sport and Recreation to the government’s commitment to infrastructure
development, job creation, and preparing the nation for the 2010 Fifa World
Cup.

The Department of Land Affairs remains heavily backlogged with land
restitution and redistribution claims. The MF hopes that the 34,31%
increase in its budget for this financial term serves to endorse more
effective delivery and address the backlog.

With the loopholes in our bureaucracy, we welcome the 26,53% increase to
the Government Communication and Information Service with the hope that it
shall assist in co-operative governance and more efficient and effective
administration.

South Africa has built strong international ties and has entered into a
variety of global initiatives to our domestic benefit. With the
acknowledgement of this and the honorary seat we now fill on the UN
Security Council, we welcome the 21,11% increase to the Department of
Foreign Affairs’ budget for this year. Our growth as a fast-progressing
Third World country is a threat to the First World countries. We need to
cement strong relationships to ensure that we continue to grow, but as a
minimal threat.

Alarm is not raised noting the decrease in budget to Public Enterprises
since there had been a large increase in the department’s budget in the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill of 2006.

Furthermore, since Statistics SA has had much underspending over a number
of years, we agree with the decrease of its budget by 5,6% for the
financial year 2007-08.

In consideration of the fact that many departments such as Education and
Agriculture received the bulk of their funding from provincial government
funding, we accept the decrease of the Agriculture budget by 3,8%.

With the determination to eradicate poverty, government enforces a budget
that shall award each portfolio funding to facilitate a variety of projects
for the transformation of South Africa into a true democracy, free of the
shackles of poverty and progressing aggressively to take our rightful place
on this continent of Africa and globally.

The creation of jobs will save us from hunger and sickness. It will ensure
our children’s right to education, and give our nation a supply of skills
that shall enable economic growth, social cohesion and effective
advancement.

It is easy for us to point out shortfalls, because of the great need, but
we need to ensure equal opportunity by supporting policies that shy away
from an elite dominance. We once again call upon government to reassess our
policy of affirmative action, and whether we have a reversal of
discrimination.

The MF looks forward to effective governance in 2007. We support the
Appropriation Bill. Thank you.

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members, and the House
at large, on behalf of the ANC, let me first support this Budget on the day
when the NCOP, as part of this Parliament, visited my constituency in
Sedibeng under ``Masijule Ngengxoxo Mzansi’’ [Let us deepen the debate,
South Africa.].

In his state of the nation address, the President said:


  Fifty years before, as they prepared to convene the Congress of the
  People, which adopted the Freedom Charter, the patriots of the day had
  said, ‘Let us speak together, all of us together - African and European,
  Indian and Coloured ... all the people of South Africa ... let us speak
  together of freedom. And of the happiness that can come to men and women
  if they live in a land that is free.’


He said:


  We must today renew our pledge, to speak together of freedom, to act in
  partnership to realise the happiness for all that should come with
  liberty, to work together to build a South Africa defined by a common
  dream, to say, together in action - enough of everything that made our
  country to contain within it and represent much that is ugly and
  repulsive in human society!


He said:

   We must continue to respond to the perspective we spoke of as the present
   government began its term of office, fully conscious that ‘none of the
   great social problems we have to solve is capable of resolution outside
   the context of the creation of jobs and the alleviation and eradication
   of poverty’, and therefore that ‘the struggle to eradicate poverty has
   been and will continue to be a central part of the national effort to
   build the new South Africa’.

These words were quoted a month ago as we stand here today. This happened
at the time when communities in some areas had gone out marching and were
showing petitions as a gesture of expressing how they feel. As a democratic
country, we therefore call on all South Africans to utilise instruments of
dialogue that are at their disposal. Let me quote the President again, when
he was in the last opening of the NCOP in KwaZulu-Natal:

  ... that a central feature of the evolution of the South African
  government as close as possible to the people, to engage them in process
  of government and not allow gaps to appear between the governors and the
  governed.


He further emphasised, according to the oversight report, the importance of
entrenching the process of popular participation, and strengthening the
process of transformation, which is focused on the objective of ensuring a
better life for all. In these words, he was communicating to us a need to,
at all times, make sure that the tools of consultation, like the
independent development plans, are utilised.

These directives preceded the tabling of the Budget by Minister Trevor
Fowler ... Trevor Manuel on 22 February 2007. [Interjections.] I worked
with him; maybe that is the case. This included the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework. He says that this Budget, through the Division of Revenue Bill
of 2007, is a financial instrument that is used to ensure that the policy
programmes of the ANC-led government are brought into effect through the
provision of the necessary financial resources as this Budget represents
the legal division of revenue.

We must also note that he drew our attention to focus on an area where we
must awaken to the reality of capacitating municipalities, given the
deployment of such resources. The Minister of Finance further asserted that
the Budget allocations must reflect the priorities that the government had
set. He added that the huge increase in provincial and municipal coffers
was in recognition of the critical role that these spheres of government
played in the delivery of social and household services.

In addition, he said, municipalities received the bulk of the allocation
for stadiums and related infrastructure. The local government equitable
shares received a further R5 billion for the delivery of free basic
services, which now reach an average of about 80% of household services,
which then means that the transfers of local government will grow by 19%.

This then takes us to the total infrastructure transfer of R53 billion over
the next three years. This selective shift of resources, we must note, is
aimed at a targeted approach to maximise impact.

This is not a numbers game, but a challenge to all implementers and
beneficiaries as well as Parliament with all its oversight instruments.
Before we get excited by the deployment of such financial resources, let us
look back at where we have come from since 1994. We must remember that the
ANC-led government, at the attainment of its democratic dispensation, was
faced with the challenges that have been mentioned earlier, but amongst
these was the need for significant institutional transformation and the
introduction of new policies aligned to our new Constitution.

The Government had a task of dealing with the legacy of apartheid, as was
mentioned. We were faced also with the systematic dismantling of apartheid
social relations, and the creation of a democratic society based on
principles of equity, nonracialism and nonsexism. We are still faced with
backlogs and other developments that have been inherited from the apartheid
regime, as services in the past were not designed to reflect public
interest and expectations.

The ANC-led government in its 10-year review, and also in its analysis,
utilised the Human Sciences Research Council indexes, which included
infrastructure; quality of life; political participation, which I must
emphasize that has to do with the trust people have in institutions;
economic participation that has to do with quality of work and poverty
alleviation policies; safety and security; economic preparedness and social
inclusion.

In order for our government to champion the cause of transformation, it
introduced - this is very important for you to know - a national planning
framework to enhance integration in the areas of strategic policy
prioritisation, and improved policy decisions of government’s national
spatial development perspective. It also enhanced the facilitation of
dialogue between and within spheres about the country’s spatial priorities
regarding infrastructure investment and development.

We also have to be aware that for us not to lose focus, we should single
out areas of priority in our municipalities. Noting that, unlike provinces,
municipalities vary significantly in their revenue capacity like those we
have adopted from the TBVC states, rising from 97% in some metros that do
have capacity to 3% in the most rural municipalities, the national transfer
of municipalities takes account of fiscal capacity. It also complements own
revenue, and positions such municipalities to fulfil their developmental
role in terms of delivering on provision of free basic services,
progressive redressing of backlogs, job creation, and the enhancement of
service delivery. Another area, which I think remains a challenge to us is
the capacity of our municipalities, in institution and personnel terms.
Hence, through project management and financial management, these
municipalities will be capacitated to manage such a budget.

I also have to touch - before I pause – on the fact that the Minister for
Provincial and Local Government has been also involved, through his
department, and through Project Consolidate, which was aimed at evaluating
capacity shortcomings, in inculcating the hands-on approach; giving support
as required by the Constitution; deploying the technical expertise
required, and transferring skills to both institutions and personnel;
deepening democracy through monitoring and evaluation of IDPs; enforcing
the policy of an integrated approach and co-operative governance;
maximising popular community participation, and championing targeted
service delivery to the poor and marginalised areas that were in dire need
of basic services.

Before I close, it is important that one must also highlight to this House
that the role of women in local government has been accommodated, and we
urge all ...

... oomama ukuba bathabathe inxaxheba ngamaxesha onke kukho i-IDPS ukuze
bangathathelwa izigqibo ngootata. Imithetho efana neStructures Act, kunye
neSystems Act, yawiselwa ukwenzela ukuba kwiWard Committee, oomama bakwazi
ukuthetha ngezinto ezingqamene nabo. Kwakhona, kubalulekile ukuba uluntu
luthabathe inxaxheba kwindlela yobomi boomasipala banamhlanje. Laphela elaa
xesha lokuba amagosa oomasipala angabi nasizathu sokubeka iinyawo zawo
kwezinye zeendawo ezihlelekileyo ezifana namatyotyombe ukuya kunika
iinkonzo.

Inkqubo yophuhliso oludibeneyo (integrate an interg development) yenye
yeendlela zokuzisa ulawulo lwentando yesininzi nakwiiwadi ezisezantsi.
Ndiyabulela. [Ixesha liphelile.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)
[... women to participate at all times when IDP programmes take place, so
that men do not make decisions on their behalf. Acts like the Structures
and Municipal Systems Acts have been passed, so that women in ward
committees should talk freely about issues that affect them directly. Once
again, it is important that everybody should participate in the local
government programmes. Gone is the time when municipal officials could not
visit historically disadvantaged areas and informal settlements with the
intention of delivering services to these communities.

The Integrated Development Programme is one of the traditions of bringing
democracy to the wards. Thank you. [Time expired.]]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Somlomo neNdlu yakho ehloniphekile ... [Madam Speaker and
your august House ...]

... as a country, we spend the biggest chunk of money  on  learners  in  the
world. Our education budget takes the biggest slice of  the  entire  budget.
But despite all that money allocated we still have shortages  of  classrooms
and schools and thousands of our learners are being taught under the  trees.
Therefore, quality sometimes suffers and we must desist from doing so.

The IFP insists on more schools and better equipment  in  our  schools.  The
IFP demands better qualified teachers that are  not  allowed  to  strike  or
disrupt the teaching programmes. Therefore, the labour  relations  and  wage
negotiators for teachers should be streamlined to avoid any  possibility  of
having a strike within the period of learning.

While the departments in the cluster of justice, peace and security  receive
increase allocations every year, their spending is inadequate and the  large
sum of money is often utilised ineffectively. Therefore, the departments  of
Justice, Safety  and  Security  and  Correctional  Service  must  be  better
integrated and must share throughout the entire  criminal  justice  process,
from the arrest to, trial and incarceration.

The IFP does not accept that children should be incarcerated  together  with
dangerous criminals. Officials are easy to buy as we  know  from  the  Mathe
case, for example. Court officials  must  be  disciplined  and  work  longer
hours instead so that the awaiting-trial prisoners or people should  not  be
in the system for more than six months before their trials come to court.

EMnyangweni Wezokuxhumana, kubonakala sengathi  ngaso  sonke  isikhathi  uma
sishaya izincingo kuyadula  lapha  eNingizimu  Afrika  kunakwamanye  amazwe.
Ikakhulukazi kudinga kwenziwe umhlahlandlela wokuthi  kubhekisiswe  izindaba
zokuxhumana, ngamafuphi izincingo zokuxoxa,  ama-e  mail  ne-Internet  ngoba
kuyadula  kakhulu  ukukwenza  lokho  lapha  eNingizimu  Afrika  kunakwezinye
izindawo.    Ngakho-ke    uMnyango    Wezokuxhumana    kufanele     uqhamuke
nomhlahlandlela ongcono, ozokwazi  ukulekela  abantu  bakithi  abasemakhaya,
abantu bakithi  abasemadolobheni  nalaba  abahlala  ezindaweni  eziyizakhiwo
ezingahleliwe.

NePosi kufuneka  likwazi  ukusiza  bonke  abantu.  Makungabi  elezicwicwicwi
kuphela,  okungabantu   abakhuluma  isiNgisi,   abakhuluma   o-because   no-
although, kodwa abantu bakithi emakhaya bebe bengakucoshi lokho kusizakala.

ILUNGU ELIHLONIPHEKILE: Njengawe nje.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Yebo,  njengami  nje.  Ngakho-ke  kufuneka  kwehliswe  lokhu
kubiza kangaka kokuxoxisana ngoba kuzokwenza  abantu  bangakwazi  ukuxhumana
ngendlela abafanele baxhumane ngayo.

Siyathokoza mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe Wezezimali ukuthi  ukhiphe  imali  enkulu
kangaka ukulekelela imidlalo yezebhola  eza  lapha  eNingizimu  Afrika  ngo-
2010. Kuyasithokozisa kakhulu lokho. Siyabona-ke kodwa ukuthi engathi  uvele
wabeka iqatha  phezu  kogqoko  ngoba  sesibona  izinkampani  ezinkulu  zilwa
nezinkampani  ezincane  zibanga  lelo  qatha,   esingazi   ngempela   ukuthi
kuzogcina kwenzeke njani  ngoba  sibona  nokukhula  kokwakhiwa  kwezinkundla
kuthuthuka kakhulu manje, kanti kukhona abantu lapha  abangobhodweliyaconsa.
Lapho kukhona ngakhona imali bagijima bashayise bonke  abanye  abantu  ngoba
bengafuni ukuthi izinkampani ezincane zicoshe ukusebenza.

Sibona  kufanele   ukuthi   uMnyango   Wezasekhaya   noMnyango   ophathelene
nezohulumeni   basekhaya   yelekelelane   noMnyango   Wezemidlalo    ukwenza
isiqiniseko sokuthi nezimboni ezincane ziyakucosha ukuthi  zikwazi  ukuthola
izinkontileka zokwakha lezi  zinkundla  ukuze  konke  okwavunyelwana  ngakho
kwenzeke  kusenesikhathi,  futhi   nezimboni   ezincane   zikwazi   ukucosha
umsebenzi, kungadli izimboni ezinkulu kuphela.

Ukwakhiwa kwezinkundla  kufanele  kwenze  isiqiniseko  sokuthi  kuyalekelela
ekuqashweni kwabantu  bakithi  abangasebenzi,  kungatholi  abantu  abambalwa
kuphela.  Nezinkampani  eziqhamuka  ngaphandle   kufuneka   ziqashe   abantu
bakithi. Zingabuletha ubuchwepheshe babantu abathile kodwa maziqashe  abantu
bakithi  lapha  abazosebenza  ngaphakathi  ukuze  abantu   bakithi   bakwazi
ukucosha imisebenzi.

Thina siyakholelwa ukuthi maqondana nalezi zinkundla zonke  ezikade  zishiwo
umhlonishwa uKhompela, onguSihlalo Wekomiti Lezemidlalo Nokungcebeleka,  uma
bengase  baqashwe  bonke  abantu  bakithi,  imvamisa  kulezo  zindawo  lapho
zizokwakhiwa khona, kuyokwazeka ukuthi  bacoshe  imisebenzi  ukuze  ikati  l
ingalali eziko.

Siyakuthokozela-ke mhlonishwa  ukuthi,  akuthi  konke  kwenzeka  lokhu  kube
kukhona ingqalasizinda yokuqapha ukuthi izimali ezinikwe laba bantu  zokuthi
bakhe izinkundla zokudlala aziweli phansi, okungadala  ukuthi  kuze  kuphele
isikhathi  zingakhiwe  izinkundla  zo   kudlala.   Ngeke   kwalunga   ukuthi
siphuthelwe ukubukela  umdlalo  esiwuthandayo,  siyeke  ukuyohlala  emakhaya
lapho sibuka kumabonakude imidlalo esiwuthandayo.

Asincome-ke ukuthi iSabiwomali sakho sibe  sihle.  Siyathemba  ukuthi  thina
esihlala  emakhaya  sizokwazi  ukucosha  ukusizakala   kuso.   Ngiyathokoza.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The Department of Communications needs to look at the following.  It  seems
like it is still very expensive to make a phone call here  in  South  Africa
as compared to other countries. We need  to  have  the  policy  to  look  at
issues of communication, ie things like  telephones,  e-mails  and  Internet
because it is costly to use them in South Africa,  when  compared  to  other
countries. Therefore, the department must come up with a  better  guideline,
which will help our people in rural areas, urban areas and  those  who  live
in informal settlements.

The SA Post Office must help all people. It should not  be  for  a  selected
few of the elite who speak English, using big English words  like  “because”
and “although”, but it should also  cater  for  our  fellow  people  in  the
remote rural areas.

An HON MEMBER: Like you, for example.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Yes, like me. Therefore, we need to reduce  these  exorbitant
communication costs because they  will  make  it  hard  for  our  people  to
communicate the way they are supposed to.

We are pleased hon Minister of Finance that you have allocated such  a  huge
budget to support the 2010 Fifa World Cup that is coming  to  South  Africa.
That makes us joyful. We are, however, aware that  you  have  put  something
interesting on the table because the big companies are now  scrabbling  with
small companies for what you have put on the table. We really  do  not  know
what will finally happen because the reconstruction of stadia is  developing
fast now and there are  people  who  are  opportunists.  These  opportunists
would run to wherever there is money, in the process  pushing  away  whoever
stands in their way just because they don’t  want  small  companies  to  get
jobs.

We believe that the  Department  of  Home  Affairs  and  the  Department  of
Provincial and Local Government should co-operate  with  the  Department  of
Sport and  Recreation  to  see  to  it  that  small  companies  also  secure
contracts to build stadia so that what we agreed on  happens  on  time,  and
that small companies, like big companies, should also benefit.

Construction of stadia should make sure that it does help in the  employment
of our fellow countrymen who are unemployed,  not  to  benefit  only  a  few
people. Foreign companies should also employ our people. They can,  however,
bring in certain professionals and experts but they  must  also  employ  our
people to work under their supervision so that our people have jobs.

We believe that with regards to all these stadia that were mentioned by  hon
Khompela, who is the Chairperson of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Sport  and
Recreation, if they can employ  our  people,  particularly  in  those  areas
where construction is taking place, they would have  jobs,  and  they  would
not go to sleep hungry.

We would be happy, hon Minister, if by the time all this happens, we have  a
centre to monitor the allocated funds which are given  to  these  people  to
build stadia, to see that they are not mismanaged, which may jeopardise  the
chances of completing these stadia well on time. It  would  not  be  a  good
thing to miss a game that we like; but  refrain  from  just  watching  games
that we like on television.

Let us commend your Budget. It was good. We just hope that we who live in
the rural areas will get help from it. Thank you.]

Mr V G SMITH: Madam Speaker, comrades, hon members, the Budget allocation
is the primary tool available to the government to ensure that service
delivery is possible.

Almost 51 years ago there was the adoption of the historic manifesto of the
people of South Africa in Kliptown. We, the legitimate democratically
elected leaders of the people, have an obligation to implement the Freedom
Charter. In that document, we promise that the people shall share in the
country’s wealth. We further promise that the land shall be shared amongst
those who work it, and we further promise that there shall be work and
security.

The access to physical resources, particularly land, housing and community
infrastructure is critical to the transformation of the economy so that we
can confront the legacy and ultimately be victorious in the struggle
against poverty.

Public spending rose by an average of 9,2% a year over the last three
years. The consolidated Budget in the year 2003-04 stood at R375 billion.
In the year 2004-05, the Budget stood at R410 billion. The consolidated
Budget figure in the year 2005-06 stood at R466 billion, and the estimate
for the year 2006-07 stands at R529 billion.

The real concern, however, is the expected underspending of approximately
15% of the total Budget allocations for national departments in the current
year. This amounts to R42 billion in addition to R5 billion in the previous
year.

A simple calculation shows that, for whatever reason, underspending by
national departments over the past two years is a staggering R47 billion.
This is money that, we believe, with proper planning and management, would
have gone a long way in the struggle to improve the quality of life of the
citizens of South Africa. Parliament’s oversight and timely intervention in
ensuring maximum value for money spent must be improved upon, and indeed it
must be strengthened.

At the ANC conference in 2002, the movement noted with respect to financial
management in the Public Service that, one, staff do not have sufficient
skills; two, fraud, maladministration and corruption is often not detected;
three, financial management systems are not adequate to meet the
challenges, and four, state assets are not managed prudently.

We then resolved that the government must address the skills gap, and that
the government must develop and adopt appropriate financial management
systems.

As we speak, many departments have been called upon to account for the
unspent funds blamed on lack of skills. Another reason being offered in
mitigation of financial misconduct is a lack of financial and information
systems.

Those tasked with the responsibility for the implementation of government
policy must be made to understand that the consequence of their actions or
lack thereof results in a young child still being taught under a tree in
some parts of Limpopo. A child in the Eastern Cape, because of poor
financial management and corruption within the administration, must spend
its day at school hungry because the school is unable to provide a slice of
bread or a glass of milk. The mother in rural KwaZulu-Natal still battles
to feed her family due to the nonexistence of a reliable system of getting
child maintenance from an absent or distant husband - 13 years into our
democracy.

Section 55 of the Constitution demands that the National Assembly provide
mechanisms that ensure that the executive arm of government is accountable
to it, and also to exercise oversight over the national executive
authority.

In addition to the constitutional requirements, the ANC at its 51st
conference noted that, firstly, misconduct is widespread within the Public
Service; and secondly, a culture is evident where individuals lack
accountability and responsibility for their performance of their jobs. At
that conference, we resolved that such acts must be punished urgently and
appropriately.

The question that must be answered is: Does the National Assembly have the
mechanism demanded by the Constitution, and if so, does that mechanism work
effectively? We want to argue that the current practice of portfolio
committees focusing on policy and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
focusing on financial management only is not yielding the desired results.
We argue this point because Scopa interacts with departments as late as 18
months after the year-end, and in our view, accountability delayed is not
very useful. We suggest that because of the more regular interaction
between departments and portfolio committees, it makes sense that all
committees must engage departments on financial management as well as the
findings of the Auditor-General so that oversight is exercised, and
corrective action – where necessary – is effected immediately it is
detected.

To continue the practice of committees working as silos and not in an
integrated fashion, examining financial management and policy
simultaneously, can only result in the child in Limpopo continuing to be
taught under a tree, or the hardships that South Africans experience
because of a lack of services continuing.

The real tragedy is that this hardship experienced by the masses of our
people is not because of a lack of resources, but rather because of a lack
of accountability, a lack of a culture of Batho Pele, and a lack of
effective and efficient oversight by Parliament and other constitutional
institutions established to entrench the Bill of Rights as well as to
protect the benefits derived from our hard-fought democracy.

The strategy of departments spending aimlessly in March so that they are
not guilty of having unspent funds must be discouraged with all the vigour
that we can muster. Money is used for meaningless procurement of goods and
services at the expense of real investments that could contribute in
fighting poverty. [Interjections.]
In some instances, monies that must be returned to the National Revenue
Fund lie in uncleared suspense accounts instead of being deposited into the
National Revenue Fund and then rerouted by Treasury to more needy causes.

All of us must accept that, by its very nature, oversight means that there
will be inherent tensions between the legislature and the executive. All of
us, the executive and the legislature – at least the ANC component thereof
– must understand that, together, we are co-implementers of the ideals of
the Freedom Charter, and must not view each other as watchdogs or
opponents.

``A better life for all’’ is not just a slogan. It is an achievable
reality. Parliament, as the primary oversight arm of the state, dares not
fail in exercising its constitutional mandate because of fear or because of
favour.

HON MEMBERS: Hear, hear!

Mr V G SMITH: Oversight is not a Sunday morning picnic in the park or a
popularity contest. Oversight is about disturbing comfort zones. We have no
doubt that if our role of oversight is exercised diligently, this will have
a direct and meaningful impact on our meeting the obligations and
responsibilities entrusted to our generation by the Freedom Charter.

The struggle to eradicate poverty and its legacy is the responsibility of
all of us. This struggle is in recognition and in honour of the sacrifices
of the Chris Hanis, the Joe Slovos, the Solomon Mahlangus, the Steve Bikos,
the Robert Sobukwes, the Lillian Ngoyis and many other heroes and heroines
who went before us. Eventually we must succeed in pushing back the frontier
of poverty for the sake of our grandchildren and their grandchildren.

Daar is van hulle wat tussen ons is wat wil sê die stryd van die mense van
Suid-Afrika het geëindig op 27 April 1994. Feit is, die stryd om politieke
mag het miskien geëindig, maar dit was die begin van die stryd om die lewe
van alle Suid-Afrikaners, wit en swart, te verbeter. (Translation of the
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[There are some among us who would say that the struggle of the people of
South Africa ended on 27 April 1994. The fact is, the struggle for
political power might have ended, but it was also the beginning of the
struggle to improve the lives of all South Africans, white and black.]

We want to emphasise that the struggle, as some amongst us conveniently
believe, did not end on 27 April 1994. Comrade Trevor, like you, we believe
that the Budget must contribute towards ensuring that human life has equal
worth. Aluta continua. [The struggle continues.] [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, it is evident that the primary functions of the
Department of Finance are well-comprehended by its leadership, and are
complemented by sound utilisation of all the department’s human resources,
resulting in the delivery of sound annual national budgets. However, given
our unique national challenges, it is important that the department guards
against blind allocations.

Departmental financial needs should, rightly so, be a major consideration
for all allocated amounts. However, given the clear lack of financial and
other operational management skills, a department’s budget allocation
should also be determined by its ability to utilise its budget optimally
and for its intended purpose that is ensuring a better life for all South
Africans.

So byvoorbeeld blyk die Departemente van Gesondheid, Onderwys, Maatskaplike
Ontwikkeling, Binnelandse Sake asook die SA Polisiediens nie oor die vermoë
te beskik om verbeterde dienste te lewer ooreenkomstig hulle groter
finansiële toekenning nie. Hierdie feit word weerspieël in die posisie wat
Suid-Afrika op die Menslike Armoede-indeks beklee, wat sowat 50% swakker is
as vroeër; ’n duidelike mislukking in die doelwit om ’n beter lewe vir
almal te skep. So byvoorbeeld is dit nie voldoende dat fondse beskikbaar
gestel word om net meer polisiebeamptes aan te stel nie, maar moet daar ook
gekyk word na hoe fondse aangewend word om die effektiwiteitsvlakke van die
bestaande lede te verbeter. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It appears, for example, that the Departments of Health, Education, Social
Development, Home Affairs and the SA Police Service do not possess the
capacity to deliver improved services in accordance with their greater
financial allocation. This fact is reflected by South Africa’s position on
the Human Poverty Index, which is approximately 50% weaker than before; a
clear failure in the aim to create a better life for all. Therefore, for
example, it does not suffice to make funds available to only appoint more
police officers, but the focus should also be on how the funds are utilised
to improve the levels of efficiency of the existing members.]

The UPSA believes that this problem would be alleviated with the
implementation of a mentorship or guardianship programme for the financial
management of the problem departments. These departments cannot be allowed
to continue in the manner they do. This would broadly mean that Treasury
has regular liaison sessions with problem departments, which would require
that their performance be measured along the same lines as Project
Consolidate.

In conclusion, if Treasury is to achieve its objective of accountable,
economic, efficient, equitable and sustainable management of South Africa’s
public finances, with emphasis on sustainable management, then the
Department of Finance, together with the Office of the Auditor-General, has
to make sure that measures are in place to ensure that individual
departments meet their fiscal responsibilities. The UPSA supports the Bill.
I thank you.

Prof S M MAYATULA: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, on 6 March 2007 the portfolio committee had a presentation from
Unisa. They reminded us of the Millennium Development Goals, which, among
other things, are: One, to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger; two,
achieve universal primary education; three, to promote gender equality and
empower women; four, reduce child mortality rate and, five, combat
HIV/Aids.

Regarding the status of South Africa and achieving these goals, Unisa has
made the following observations: One, that the gross enrolment rate at
primary schools increase from 99% in 2000 to 103% in 2006; two, there is a
new curriculum focus on outcomes-based learning; three, gender parity has
been attained. However, there is a challenge with high drop-out rates for
boys at secondary schools and higher ones for girls at tertiary level;
four, there’s a concern at the low uptake for children aged 0 to 5 years in
the Early Childhood Development phase; five, 5,9% of 15 to 19-year-olds are
living with HIV/Aids; six, violence, including gender-based violence, is a
major concern in our schools.

Fortunately, Unicef conceded that these concerns were raised by the
President in the state of the nation address, when he said, among other
things, that South Africa is making progress in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals.

There is recognition of the importance of Early Childhood Development;
investing through the Expanded Public Works Programme; the resolution to
increase nonfee-paying schools in order to expand the opportunity for all
children; and the situation of violence against women and children is
unacceptable.

We have to intensify the campaign against HIV and Aids, and implement a
comprehensive package in addressing this pandemic. In order to address some
of these challenges, the ANC’s NEC/Lekgotla commands all of us to ensure
that school governing bodies are empowered to play a leading role in the
provision of Early Childhood Development in their respective local
communities, particularly in rural and poor farming areas.

We are also called upon to ensure that Adult Basic Education and Training
is accessed more and expanded by utilising empty school buildings, in the
process ensuring that poor families move steadily out of the shackles of
poverty.
We are called upon to ensure that the school nutrition programme is
expanded to include schoolchildren of all grades who are experiencing
extreme poverty.
We are called upon to ensure that proper school infrastructure and
resources, such as laboratories and libraries, are in place, including the
appropriate catering for special needs of disabled learners. We are called
upon to ensure that career guidance and computer literacy subjects are
compulsory in our schools.

Does the current budget come anywhere close to addressing these issues? Is
the ANC-led government putting its money where its mouth is? The facts do
speak for themselves. The Minister of Finance, in his Budget Speech, made
the following announcements.

Imali engange-8,1 yezigidi eziliwaka leerandi iza kubekelwa ecaleni ukuze
isetyenziselwe ukuba kuqeshwe iititshala, kunyuswe imivuzo yeetitshala.
Iititshala ezilalini ziza kuba nabancedisi. Liphelile ixesha lokuba
iinqununu zibe kwangomabhalane.

UMphathiswa ukwabekele bucala imali engangama-700 ezigidi zeerandi eza
kuncedisa bonke abantwana abafuna ukufundela ubutitshala. Akuzi kuthi
andikwazi ukufundela ubutitshala kuba ndingenamali; ikhona imali ebekwe
ecaleni ukulungiselela iimeko ezinjalo.

UMphathiswa ukwabekele bucala imali engange-850 yezigidi zeerandi
yokufundisa abantu abadala. Sesinawo nomthetho othi kuloo ndawo kukho
abazali kuyo, kufanele ukuba kubunjwe la maziko. Ngoko ke, maqabane, masiye
kwenza ezi zinto kwiindawo esizabelweyo njengabameli boluntu.
UMphathiswa uphinde wabeka ama-600 ezigidi zeerandi ukuze abantwana bethu
bakwazi ukuya kwiikholeji zokufundela imisebenzi. Ngelishwa, ezi kholeji
ziyinto entsha nalapha kuthi. Singabanye zange khe singene ngaphakathi,
kwaye asazi nento eyenzekayo kuzo.

Ndenza isicelo sokuba kwezo ndawo sizabelweyo njengabameli boluntu, sikhe
siye kubona ezi kholeji zokufundela imisebenzi zintsha nezilungiswe
ngokutsha. Kufanele ukuba sikhuthaze abantwana bethu ukuba bangafundeli
ukuba baqeshwe, koko bafundele ukuzenzela umsebenzi. Iyenzeka loo nto
kwiikholeji zokufundela umsebenzi.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[About R8,1 million will be set aside to hire additional teachers and to
improve remuneration levels of teachers. Teachers in rural areas will get
assistance. The time when principals used to work as secretaries is over.

The Minister has also set aside R700 million that will assist all young
people who want to train as teachers. You will not say, “I cannot train as
a teacher because I do not have money.”

The amount of R850 million has been set aside by the Minister for an adult
basic education programme. We already have legislation, which provides that
these institutions should be established in places where there are parents.
However, comrades, let us work in partnership with our constituencies.
The Minister has also set aside R600 million rand so that our children can
get access to these further education and training colleges. Unfortunately,
these colleges are new to us. Some of us did not attend them; we are not
well informed about what is happening there.

I appeal to our constituencies; we need to visit these new Further
Education and Training Colleges that have been refurbished. We need to
encourage our children that they must not study to become employed, but to
be self-employed. This is possible in these Further Education and Training
Colleges.]

The Minister has introduced a new conditional grant, the community library
services grant, to consolidate library services at provincial level. This
programme provides R984 million to transform library infrastructure. This
will transform our youth into a reading nation. This resource will
revolutionise our communities and enhance a better understanding of the
world we live in.

Xa kusithiwa abantu abamnyama abafundi, ngelinye ixesha siye sizibuze ukuba
inokuba yenziwa yintoni loo nto. Isiqhelo siyayoyisa ingqondo. Ukuba uthe
ngexa usesesikolweni awaqhela ukumana ufunda, kuba nzima ukuqala ebudaleni.
Le projekthi iza kujika loo nto, ukuze abantwana bethu babe neencwadi
ezikolweni zabo, bafunde ukufunda.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[There is a saying that black people are lazy to study, and we sometimes
ask ourselves what that means. Usuality conquers the brain. If it happened
that when you were at school, you did not acquaint yourself with studying,
it is difficult to start when you are old. This project will transform
that, so that our children can have their own books and study.]

In his Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance had this to say, and I quote:

   Our teachers are the frontline of our education system. It is in their
   hands that we place our 11 million children each day. In most cases our
   teachers do a sterling job under difficult conditions. We pay tribute to
   them and we ask no more than that they continue to serve with dedication
   and integrity.

On 1 March 2007, I was privileged to attend the most improved school awards
ceremony, which was hosted by the national Department of Education in
Pretoria. I saw with my own eyes, and I met the kind of teachers that our
Minister was referring to. They received awards in different categories.
One of these was excellence in mathematics.

Kufuneka sazi ukuba kwiititshala zethu zikhona ezenza umsebenzi ekumele
ukuba ziyawenza. [We must understand that among our teachers there are
still those who perform their duties as required.]

Ten schools were honoured for achieving high passes in mathematics,
specifically at higher grade level. Another award was for outstanding
achievement in home language and English as second language.

Xa sisithi iilwimi zethu ezisesikweni zili-11, sikutsho oko sinyanisile.
Kungoko bethiwe jize ngamawonga abantwana abaphumelele yo Kwiilwimi zabo.
[When we say we have 11 official languages, we mean that. That is why we
gave awards to learners who have made an outstanding achievement in their
home languages.]

The third award was for consistent improvement. Nine schools, mainly from
the disadvantaged communities, were honoured in this category for the
number of endorsements they achieved, with emphasis on quality education.

Into eyonwabisayo ngeli candela kukuba sithetha ngezikolo
ezingenazilabhoratri, amathala eencwadi kwanezikolo kwezinye zazo ekungekho
nezindlu zangasese ezi, kodwa ezikwazileyo ukuthi zivelise abantwana
abaziincutshe kwizibalo. Loo nto ke ithetha ukuba simele ukuba singamane
sisithi ingxaki yethu yile. Ingxaki yezikolo zethu lulawulo ezikolweni.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[What is consoling about this category is that we are talking about
schools, some of which do not have laboratories or libraries, while other
schools have no toilets, but which have managed to produce experts in
mathematics. That means, therefore, that we should not always say that this
is our problem. The problem of our schools is management at schools.]

One award was referred to as “the 100 club”.

Kweli candelo bekuwongwa izikolo ezithe zakwazi ukuba isikolo ngasinye sibe
nabantwana abangaphezu kwekhulu abaphumelele izibalo ngeNqanaba eliPhezulu,
okanye i-Higher Grade. Naleyo yinto eyenzekayo kwizikolo zethu.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[In this category schools that have managed to have more than 100 learners
who passed mathematics on the higher grade were honoured. That also obtains
in our schools.]

The bond that binds these schools together is the professionalism of their
teachers, the commitment to their jobs, the sense of duty and the calling
to better the lives of their learners. Teaching is a profession. No one
needs to be pushed and no one needs to be supervised. It needs that sense
of responsibility, knowing that you are responsible for changing the lives
of our people.

These are the kinds of schools that I wish everybody to take note of so
that they can emulate their success. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, I do want to say that
I liked the theme of Mr Manuel’s speech when he presented  the Budget
Speech, especially on the issue of human life that has equal worth. I think
as a pastor I can construct a sermon on that called: The importance of
equality as far as human life is concerned.

However, there are many people in South Africa who do not actually believe
what the Minister has said in terms of that theme, namely that human life
has any value whatsoever. That is why there are, unfortunately, still
between 18 000 and 20 000 murders in South Africa every year. Those who
murder, rape and loot from ordinary citizens with impunity every day must,
I think, hear this message very clearly, that not only does human life have
equal worth or value, but that we must be able to stay alive in order to
enjoy a life of equal value.

Prof Koos Malan of Public Law at the University of Pretoria presents a very
persuasive argument in an article in Business Day of 7 March 2007 in an
article entitled, “In the absence of state protection”, when a government
fails to protect the public against violent crime.

We all have the inalienable rights, and I quote him, “to life and physical
integrity.” Each one of us is also entitled to do personally what is
necessary to defend ourselves against attacks that endanger our physical
integrity. This right - the right to private defence - is also inalienable
and universal.

We act in private defence whenever we defend ourselves against an unlawful
attack, but also when we help somebody else in fending off an unlawful
attack.

The point is that whenever a pressing emergency arises, when life and limb
are under threat, everyone is naturally entitled to take the law into his
or her own hands individually, corporately or as a community. And when that
happens, of course, we have a situation where more and more people are
defending themselves and relying on the right to self-defence, but this
right must, in a normal society, be the exception and not the rule. If it
becomes a rule, however, the very integrity of government will be at stake.

The Minister, I think, successfully attempted to deal with this issue in
his Budget Speech when he spoke of protection services and our criminal
justice system. We applaud the Minister for the Budget allocation and the
significant increases in resources – the huge amount of money. The hon
Minister has done his fair share. I hope the police and the courts will do
theirs and we will have fewer deaths in our society. I thank you.

Mr G D SCHNEEMAN: Chairperson, comrade Ministers, comrades and hon members,
in its 2004 election manifesto, the ANC committed to invest more than R100
billion in improving roads, rail and air transport, as well as
telecommunications and energy. The ANC also committed to build more
subsidised housing, improve health infrastructure, ensure that all children
have decent classrooms, speed up programmes to provide water, sanitation
and electricity.

Two years later, in its 2006 local government election manifesto, the ANC
committed to invest more than R400 billion in infrastructure to create jobs
and fight poverty, build roads, rail networks, dams electricity-generating
plants and communications infrastructure. The ANC also committed to
providing all households with access to clean running water and decent
sanitation by 2010, and to providing electricity to every household by
2012.

In his address to the first Joint Sitting of the Third Democratic
Parliament on 21 May 2004, President Thabo Mbeki announced the following:
That all households would have easy access to clean water within the next
five years. Within the next eight years, working together with our state
enterprise Eskom, we will ensure that each household has access to
electricity and that there should be no learner or student learning under a
tree.

The ANC statement of 8 January this year stated that:


   Clearly, the guiding principle of our road map must continue to move
   forward decisively to eradicate poverty and all other elements of the
   legacy of colonialism and apartheid.

The ANC National Executive Committee declared 2007 as the year to intensify
the struggle against poverty as we advance in unity towards 2012 –
Phambili! [Forward ever!]

The Budget presented by the Minister of Finance on 21 February this year
provides the necessary resources to deliver the necessary infrastructure
which is required to meet these commitments.

The spending priorities of this Budget have been informed by the need to
accelerate economic growth, create employment and reduce poverty.

Significant allocations in this Budget are directed towards the provision
of infrastructure, such as new classrooms, water, electricity and
sanitation in schools, which will help to improve the quality of education
in our schools; the hospital revitalisation programme; the built
environment, with emphasis on the building of vibrant and safe communities;
the provision of efficient and effective public transport and related
infrastructure; the provision of water sanitation and electricity and the
eradication of the bucket system by the end of this year; the construction
of stadiums for the 2010 Fifa World Cup and other related infrastructure,
such as the upgrading of roads, railway stations and precincts that will
help make the 2010 Fifa World Cup the best yet staged; and the provision of
well equipped libraries in our communities.

It is estimated that the public sector expenditure on infrastructure over
the MTEF period to 2009-10 will amount to R415,8 billion. In addition,
major investment commitments have been made by Eskom and Transnet which
include power generation and the expansion of the freight rail network.
These investments will assist in reducing the cost of business by providing
certainty of the supply of critical services to industry.

The investment in infrastructure, and not only the maintenance but also the
provision of new infrastructure, provides an opportunity to develop a new
generation of workforce which is well skilled and equipped to serve the
economy in years to come.

It will be important that we ensure that we develop the skills that we will
need in the future now, and not wait for the future to arrive before we
realise that we do not have the necessary skills or capacity both to
utilise available resources and to deliver the required infrastructure.

This is not the task of the government alone. It requires the private
sector and all other relevant stakeholders to join the government in both
identifying and providing the necessary skill and capacity through the
Joint Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition programme, Jipsa, led by
the Deputy President.

The allocations which are provided for the built environment provide an
opportunity to continue to implement the Breaking New Ground housing
strategy, which seeks to build new residential communities that are
vibrant, sustainable, safe, nonracial, and have the necessary
infrastructure, such as housing, roads, community halls, sports fields,
water, sanitation, electricity, police stations, schools, libraries and
clinics.

Whilst we are seeing the roll-out of the pilot projects which focus on
informal settlements upgrading and the creation of new human settlements,
the speed at which they are being implemented needs to be increased. Even
though the concept of these pilot projects was announced in mid 2004 as
part of the Breaking New Ground housing strategy, in some provinces these
pilot projects are still in the planning phase on paper.

Although the N2 Gateway pilot project here in Cape Town is progressing, we
need to see a speeding up of the implementation of this important housing
project.

The resources of R32 billion over the next three years provide an
opportunity to accelerate the provision of new human settlements and the
upgrading of informal settlements. However, this will necessitate better
and more streamlined municipal and residential planning, as well as
improved interdepartmental co-ordination, planning and budgeting.

Red tape, which often reportedly delays delivery of housing and related
infrastructure, needs to be identified and simplified to allow faster
implementation. According to Sasha Planting, who wrote in the Financial
Mail of 23 February this year -


   Money is not the issue. Overcoming the backlog is about getting the
   execution up to speed and forging good partnerships with all tiers of
   government, the financial sector and the handful of developers who are
   able to tackle projects on a big scale.

Whilst the Minister of Finance commended provinces on the progress they
have been making in rolling out their infrastructure programmes, it is
incumbent on national departments to strengthen their monitoring strategies
on provinces, municipalities and agencies to which they make transfers.

Here in Parliament, we need to pay special attention to our oversight over
those departments who have received significant infrastructure allocations.
These departments need to provide relevant portfolio committees with
detailed plans and spending projections linked to timeframes so that we
will be able to institute effective monitoring.
We are often told that our policies are excellent but that the
implementation thereof is what often lets us down. Departments in all
spheres of government need to take proactive steps to ensure that
effective, efficient and quicker implementation of policies takes place.

The financial resources which are available for infrastructure must be well
utilised to ensure that employment opportunities are created, that poverty
is eradicated and that economic growth takes place. The 2007 Budget
provides resources to improve co-ordination in policy development and
planning and the technical capacity to manage expenditure effectively.

Furthermore, the Infrastructure Delivery Improvement Programme, which
addresses underspending of provincial capital expenditure budgets, targets
poor planning, lack of delivery, management systems and the general lack of
skills. It also supports improved effectiveness and efficiency of public
sector infrastructure delivery through the use of best practice methods and
also builds capacity to enable departments to deliver on their mandates.

This provides a clear indication of the seriousness of the government in
ensuring that departments are well equipped and capacitated to deliver on
their mandates. This applies not just to government departments but also to
those in the private sector who are awarded tenders by government
departments.
In particular, I want to draw your attention to two news items which
appeared in the Star of 12 March relating to a housing development at
Everton in Gauteng and the Metro supplement of the Sunday Times of 11
March, which relates to a housing project at Cosmo City in Johannesburg.

In both of these cases, tenders were awarded to specific companies who have
in turn reportedly not delivered what they were required to. If these
reports are correct, such mismanagement of state funds cannot be tolerated
and must be condemned, with the necessary action being taken.

I have raised these two examples because it must be clearly understood that
the infrastructure budget allocations are there to improve the lives of all
South Africans, particularly those who are most marginalised. This also
reaffirms the need for departments to improve their monitoring and the
evaluation of funds which they transfer, be it to other spheres of
government or to private sector companies who are awarded tenders.

According to the 2007 Budget Review:


   Civil construction in particular benefited from increased investment in
   road and water infrastructure. Employment gains have been robust with
   labour complement increasing from 348 000 in March 2001 to 548 000 in
   March 2006.
This is a clear indication of the impact of employment creation through
investment in infrastructure. These figures will be significantly increased
with increased allocation for infrastructure which includes the 2010 World
Cup Stadium construction and the Gautrain.

President Mbeki wrote the following in his weekly letter in the ANC Today
of 23 February 2007:


   The central task of the national democratic revolution is to construct a
   people-centred society that will, in practice, demonstrate that it values
   every human being on an equal basis.

Whilst we have done a lot to give meaning to the statement that human life
has equal worth, we still have to do more to confront the legacy of
poverty, racism and sexism.

In concluding his state of the nation address on 9 February this year,
President Mbeki made a call to all of us to roll up our sleeves and get
down to work. He made that call to all of us here in Parliament, to
provincial legislatures, local government and every person in the
employment of the different government departments to get down to the work
of delivering quality services to all South Africans. He made a call to
improve the living conditions of all South Africans and to create
employment and reduce poverty. I thank you. [Applause.]
Dr P J RABIE: Madam Chair, hon Ministers and hon members, the 2007-08
Budget must be seen in context. Our economy is fairly buoyant and commodity
prices like coal, platinum and gold are doing well. The Gross Domestic
Product growth for the period was 4,9% and that is in line with
projections.

The rand is one of the emerging currencies, but foreign investment capital
is of a short-term nature. The influence of relatively high domestic
interest rates and positive dividend payments must be taken into account
when we evaluate this Budget.

The DA welcomes the further relaxation of exchange controls announced by
the hon Minister in his Budget Speech. However, the DA appeals to the hon
Minister to abolish all exchange controls for individuals.

A number of economists have expressed the view that seen in the light of
our present positive financial position and the healthy increase in foreign
reserves, the removal of exchange controls for individuals will have the
net effect that a normalisation with international money markets will take
place; the investment horizon for domestic investors will widen and the
economy as a whole could benefit.

Ondanks die feit dat valutabeheer op buitelandse beleggers afgeskaf is, bly
dit steeds ’n onweerlegbare feit dat individuele binnelandse beleggers
steeds aan beperkte valutabeheer onderworpe is, wat steeds buitelandse
beleggers tot ’n mate van skeptisisme teenoor langtermynkapitaalbeleggings
in Suid-Afrika stem. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Despite the fact that exchange controls for foreign investors have been
done away with, it is an irrefutable fact that individual local investors
are still subject to limited exchange controls, resulting in foreign
investors harbouring a degree of scepticism towards long-term capital
investments in South Africa.]

The DA welcomes the abolishment of retirement fund tax from 1 March 2007.
With respect to the hon Minister, this announcement is long overdue. The
significance of it is that this reform will make an important contribution
to the adequacy of funds available to about 9 million members of retirement
funds in South Africa. The raised income interest exemption for under and
over 65 is also welcomed.

Hon Minister, in your Budget Speech you announced an additional R89,5
million to be spent to attain accelerating economic growth, modernising our
public services and infrastructure and reducing poverty and inequality.
More than merely spending money is, however, required.

It is estimated that about 5,5 million South Africans pay individual income
tax, most of them being middle income earners – the remainder pay indirect
taxes. It is to be expected that the South African electorate get value for
their hard-earned tax payments regarding protection, health, education,
etc. If we benchmark ourselves with internationally accepted norms we find
that there is ample room for improvement regarding basic services.

Another key characteristic of the South African economy is its severe
shortage of skills. The Centre for Development and Enterprise estimates
that between 1994 and 2005, 841 000 white skilled South Africans emigrated.

In a number of submissions to the Joint Budget Committee, various
departments attributed their lack of capacity to deliver to high personnel
vacancy rates. Allow me to quote CDE figures:

   Junior to middle and senior management vacant posts in domestic affairs
   amount to 34%. For Trade and Industry the figure is 41%, for Education
   26%, and 45% for senior management in the Department of Transport.

This is reason for grave concern. The only way to solve the problem is to
acknowledge that our labour sector is part of an international global
network like the communications sector. It is thus in the national interest
to relax our rigid labour laws and to encourage skilled immigrants to
settle in South Africa.

Vergun my die geleentheid om na die uitspraak van mnr Marius Fransman, lid
van die Uitvoerende Komitee van Wes-Kaap, te verwys toe hy gemeld het dat
daar ’n moratorium van drie jaar op SEB-vereistes geplaas word. Die DA
verskil met hom slegs ten opsigte van die tydelike vergunning rakende
verblyfreg. Waarom moet persone hul werksekerheid ontneem word indien hulle
’n positiewe bydrae tot die ekonomie van die land kan lewer? Meriete, en
nie velkleur nie, is die ... [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Allow me the opportunity to refer to the pronouncement delivered by Mr
Marius Fransman, member of the Executive Committee of the Western Cape,
when he indicated that a moratorium of three years would be placed on BEE-
requirements. The DA differs with him on the issue of temporary residential
rights only. Why should those who can make a positive contribution to the
economy of this country be deprived of job security? Merit, not skin
colour, is the ... [Time expired.]]

Mme L L MABE: Modulasetilo, ba re e re o ntima o mphele ngwana. Ngwana yo
ke tlileng go bua ka ena yo, ke ngwana wa motlhomphegi. Fa ke bua ka
motlhomphegi, ga ke bue ka ngwana wa nnete, ke bua ka motlhomphegi, motho
yo o sokotseng, a lebeletse puso e, gore e tla mo thusa, gore bophelo ba
gagwe bo ke bo tokafale. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Ms L L MABE: Chairperson, there is a saying that it does not matter if you
do not give me something but help my child. The child that I am going to
talk about here, is a child of a respected person. By a respected person I
am not referring to the real child, but to a poor person who has suffered
with the hope that this government will help him improve his life.]

I want to demystify the mist that blurs the vision of some people in the
society that the ANC’s deployees in Parliament cannot be critical of their
own indifferent trenches in their deployment. This mist ignores the
critical fact that the ANC in Parliament has the responsibility to the
nation to have vigorous oversight over implementation of ANC policies that
are translated into government policies.

ANC MPs must be the vanguards of ensuring that the government’s fiscal
resources are efficiently and effectively utilised towards the achievement
of a better life for all. Therefore, it is crucial for ANC MPs in
committees of Parliament to ensure that the departments spend as planned,
but also that spending should be premised on quality and value for money.

This scenario is dictated to by the ANC’s vision, thus we will be failing
the nation if we do not hold all those who received funding from the
national fiscus to account. The ANC Today of 23 February 2007 states that
our nation has deeply entrenched poverty underpinned by high levels of
unemployment, largely affecting unskilled black people with low levels of
education. Women and the youth are the hardest hit. They are also
unemployed due to the legacy of apartheid. But the reduction of dependence
on debt service costs has opened fiscal space to spend more on core issues
that affect our society and to gear the government for long-term reforms to
release funds that would have been utilised for the service burden and more
capacity by the SA Revenue Services, commonly known as the taxperson, not
the taxman, to collect taxes.

Most of the departments were caught off balance in the spending of their
budgets and I deliberately indicate this fact, because most of the
departments cannot account properly on how they use the funds, and on how
they implement policies of the government to ensure that the ordinary
person’s life on the street is improved.

But I also want to indicate that departments in the past did not invest in
capacity to spend. Although their capacity to spend has improved in the
2005-06 Budget, the critical issue is: Is spending targeted at balancing
the books to bid for increased allocations or is that spending for value
for money? By value for money I refer to the projects that would be
completed, being quality projects and not the ones that will lead to people
complaining about the government’s service delivery.

I also want to quote one of the commentators on the Budget, Jabulani
Sikhakhane, when he says, “People must have power.” Power in this sense
refers to the form of resources that we have. Without physical resources
you do not have power. We have fought for liberation, also but we fought
for power to have resources to participate meaningfully and effectively in
the economy, and without these resources our hard-fought freedom will not
be achieved. As a result, it is incumbent upon the departments to ensure
that they spend qualitatively, efficiently and effectively to ensure that
our people benefit to the maximum.

Research also confirms that there is ample evidence that access to services
for the poor has increased to a great extent over the past 12 years, and
that is a reality, because most of the people before 1994 did not have
access to basic services. Right now most of the people can have access to
those services.  This is an achievement on the side of the ANC, but it does
not at the same time say that we must be complacent as the ANC that we have
achieved the best for every South African citizen. The year 2014 is still
yet afar, and we therefore have to roll up our sleeves to ensure that the
targets that we have set up as the ANC - not as government – but as the
ANC, will be achieved, and it will be possible if we monitor the Budget.

I also want to refer to the Budget Review of 2007 that states that rapid
growth in budgeted expenditure does pose a challenge in terms of the
capacity to effectively utilise the allocated funds. It is good that the
government acknowledges that the capacity to spend is a big challenge. We
therefore say that as parliamentarians we must roll up our sleeves and hold
them to account. We should have proper oversight in the committees, and
that will mean fighting against our own comrades who are in the executive
or who are in government. The aim is to alleviate poverty and achieve a
better life for all. We are all destined towards the same direction.

The government acknowledges that there have been lags in the implementation
of policy and challenges in the co-ordination of delivery, especially for
large infrastructure projects, but the pace of investment has continued to
grow strongly since 2001, and that is a fact, because in 2001 our spending
on servicing debt reduced dramatically, which means that it leads to
resources being made available to be used in critical sections which
address poverty in our communities.

The ANC welcomes special attention given in the Budget to improve co-
ordination in policy development and planning and technical capacity to
manage expenditure efficiently.

It is time for those who are tasked with the responsibility of providing
service and improving the lives of our people to do some self-introspection
and a departmental analysis. I want to state this in Setswana:

A re dira go tlala seatla go netefatsa gore re atlegisa puso go tokafatsa
maphelo a batho ba rona, kgotsa re itumelela go phara molato mo pusong re
lebala gore puso e re thapetse go tlhomamisa maikano le maikaelelo a yona
jaaka badiredipuso? Potso ke gore, a re itumelela go bona dikhuduego le
ditshupetso mabapi le ditirelo re sa ipotse bongwe ka bongwe, gore a re
nnile le seabe mo go tliseng seemo se se ntseng jalo?

Tseo di diregang kwa porofenseng ya Bokone-Bophirima, re tshwanetse re
ipotse jaaka badiredipuso gore a re nnile le seabe gore go fetse go le ka
mokgwa oo. A naa madi a re a neilweng gore re tokafetse maphelo a batho a
re a dirisitse gore re ba fe ditirelo, kgotsa ga re a dirisa jalo? Re
tlogetse bao ba ratang manyofonyofo, gore ba tseye madi ao ba a dirisetse
maitlhomo a bona, e seng maitlhomo a ANC, e seng maitlhomo a puso?

Kgotsa re dira ka bomo tse re di dirang, re dira gore re senye puso ya ANC
leina? Kana re lebela gore badiredipuso re tshwanetse go tlhomamisa
maitlhomo a puso, ka lebaka la gore puso ke yona e e re thapileng, ka jalo,
re tshwanetse re lebale gore re ba dipolotiki tse dife re lebelele gore re
dire, re diragatse maitlhomo a puso.

Fela fa go direga tsotlhe tse, tse di diregang jaaka kwa Bokone-Bophirima
di a direga mo lefatsheng la rona la Aforika Borwa. Fela ditshupetso tse di
diragalang tse, ga re dumelane rona re le mokgatlho wa ANC le tshenyo, ka
lebaka la gore tshenyo eo, e re busetsa kwa morago go tseo puso e setseng e
di dirile. Ke ka moo re dirang boikuelo go setšhaba gore le na le tshwanelo
ya go dira ditshupetso, fela ga le na tshwanelo ya go senya, ka gore se le
se senyang, ke se se tshwanetseng se le thuse ka moso, se thuse bana ba
lona. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Are we doing enough in ensuring that the government succeeds in improving
the lives of our people, or do we enjoy blaming the government and
forgetting that as public servants we are employed to ensure that the
government achieves its aims and objectives? The question is: Are we happy
to see protest actions and unrest as a result of poor service delivery
without asking ourselves, individually, whether we have contributed to this
situation?

We, as public servants, have to ask ourselves if we have contributed to
what is happening in the North West province. Are funds allocated to us
being used to improve the lives of our people? Did we use these funds for
service delivery or we did not use them as we were supposed to? Did we
allow those who are corrupt to use these funds for their own benefit and
not that of the ANC or government?

Are we doing this purposefully to tarnish the image of the ANC-led
government? It seems that we as public servants tend to forget that we are
employed by the government to ensure that it meets its objectives.
Therefore, we need to put aside our political affiliation and focus on
achieving the government’s objectives.
But when all these occur, as is the case in the North West province - a
part of our country, South Africa - we, as the ANC, condemn vandalism
despite the ongoing protest actions because vandalism regresses what the
government has already achieved. That is why we acknowledge the right of
the people to protest but we condemn acts of vandalism, because what people
destroy is what might help them and their children in future.]

It is important for Parliament to urgently address the problem of member
support and to make provision for human resources to improve service to
members and committees of Parliament, to enable them carry out their
oversight functions with in an increased efficiency. Without proper
support, Parliament will not be able to do this function properly.

I therefore, as a member of the Joint Budget Committee, tell Parliament
that it is doing us a disfavour. It is doing the nation a disfavour by not
properly capacitating committees of Parliament so that members can have
information at their fingertips. [Applause.]

Without having information at our fingertips, how will we call the
departments and state institutions to account? People will get away with
murder, and this is not what the ANC wants.

I also want to say that it is unfortunate that tertiary institutions took a
long period to come to the table to transform and bring meaningful change
in the new dispensation. This exacerbated the skills deficit that we have
now. It solidified the structural unemployment and deficiencies in our
economy, because tertiary institutions did not want to come to the table as
part of the transformation of this country.

That is unfortunate because it is only now that they are rolling up their
sleeves. By this time we ought to have moved a great leap forward in
addressing the skills problem and education problems. We are spending a lot
on education, but it does not give us the necessary outputs.

Modulasetilo, ke rata gore ke re madi ao a tshwanetseng go katisa batho, ao
a fiwang di Seta, tota go re utlwisa botlhoko, e bile di Seta bontsi ba
tsona di re tsholotse, gore ba feleletse ba tsaya madi, ba ye go a naya
ditlamo tse di tswanang le bo Fidentia.

Tota di Seta di re tsholotse, mme di re tsholotseng, go raya gore se ke
neng ke se bua ke re, a dikomiti tsa Palamente di fiwe ditlabakelo tse e
leng gore di tla kgona gore di re fe tshedimosetso, re kgone go re re ba
bitse batle go ikarabela ka nako, e seng tshenyo e e kanakana e setse e
diragetse. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, I am disappointed by the decision to allocate funds to Setas
which were intended to train people. Most Setas are established financially
and it was not a good decision to have allocated funds to companies like
Fidentia. In fact, I would like to suggest that parliamentary committees be
provided with resources that will enable them to solicit information to
call Setas’ related companies to account in time, before any damage is
done.]

If proper integrated planning, implementation and monitoring of the Budget
by government departments and institutions can be the priority, with
vigorous oversight by Parliament, we can meaningfully reduce poverty and
improve the lives of our people.

An increased budget estimate from R534 billion to R650 billion over the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework can go a long way towards tilting the
scales of income inequality and poverty in our communities.

I also want to say that I am disappointed that some people from time to
time talk about the flight of white skills out of the country. It is so
unfortunate that people forget that it is not only whites who are leaving
the country. Blacks also do. Why don’t you talk about the skills of blacks
who are leaving? Is that racism? [Interjections.] White and black are
leaving the country and the government is playing its part to ensure that
those skills across the racial divide come back to the country to be
utilised. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

I also want to state that we welcome the task team that is in the
Department of Home Affairs and we monitor the outcomes and outputs of that
task team, because without a Home Affairs that functions properly, service
delivery by all departments will be compromised. We are, therefore,
interested, as Parliament, that Home Affairs must be up and running on its
own feet. We hope that this task team will assist Home Affairs to improve
on service delivery because, as the ANC, this is a concern to us, as Home
Affairs is central to service delivery.

Ke rata gore ke re, re le ANC re dumelana le Molaotlhomo Tekanyetso o. [I
would like to say, as the ANC we support this Budget Vote.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to express my
appreciation to all parties in the House, because all of them supported the
Budget. I am not quite sure how some of them arrived at the conclusion, but
we appreciate the fact that they supported it.

I also want to say a special word of welcome to my colleague, Minister
Pandor, because when we delivered the Budget she was in hospital. It’s good
to have you in the House - a lonely place this afternoon. Good to have you
here. [Applause.]

Let me respond by dealing with a few of the thematic issues that were
raised. The first of these issues is that of surplus, which was raised by
the hon Bekker, Harding, Van Dyk and Stephens. But I think the counter to
that is what has been raised by the hon Mulder. We’ve said that many of our
revenues are cyclical. [Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Lee, would you please allow me to speak?
[Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: I didn’t say a thing, Trevor! [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Please continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: So many of our revenues are cyclical, and if we
aren’t careful about that, we will make commitments that can’t be supported
by financial flows later, and we will have to cut them.

This idea that we should be ashamed of the surplus in the current commodity
cycle has to be born of ignorance. It’s very important that we deal with
the issues for what they are, because we must be careful about making
mistakes. We have seen this all over the world. We have seen the exuberance
of people who believe that there is no tomorrow. But economies, companies
and businesses all operate cyclically and commodities have proven
themselves to be cyclical, and there is sufficient evidence in this regard.
So, we shouldn’t be silly about this.

In respect of the tax issues, on the one hand, we’ve broadened the tax base
but we have reduced the tax rates. The tax-to-GDP ratio is something. It is
there. We’ve said it would be optimally 25%, but I don’t think we should be
too hung up about this issue.

On the issue of the secondary tax on companies, STC, we aren’t eliminating
it; we are converting it to a dividend tax. If the hon Davidson doesn’t
believe me, I am inviting him to look at chapter 4, on page 67 of the
Budget Review, which explains the two-step change. It will be there. For
the moment, we estimate that we will probably cede about R2 billion, but
I’m pretty sure that knowing the recipients of those dividends would not be
too difficult for SARS. So, it’s not a gap that will be a permanent
feature.

On the issue of the wage subsidy, the hon Davidson is, of course, being
quite disingenuous, because his arguments a few years ago were about
subsidising those who employ domestic workers who can drink their gins and
tonics while they lie by the side of the pool. That was the argument we
heard, and what we are dealing with here is substantially different. He
knows that and he shouldn’t mislead the House or anybody else.

On the issue of social security, I heard the hon Bekker saying that this is
BIG, or basic income grant. It’s not BIG. I think that it’s very important
that we understand this issue, and perhaps this House will afford us an
opportunity to have a wider discussion about the social security reform,
which is quite fundamental!

Philosophically, what we are talking about is a contributory scheme that
deals with the poverty trap. It’s very different from a “bakhand” approach
- the state must provide everything. This deals with people who will
contribute, and therefore we will be in a much better position to deal with
a series of other issues in society. It’s a big change; it’s a monumental
change. But it is a change that deals with the lives of people long beyond
their working lives. And that is what is so significant about it. So, we
must disabuse ourselves of the idea that this is BIG by the back door, or
BEG - a basic endowment grant - or anything else like it. It’s not that.
And the President has spoken on this issue.

The issue of capacity was raised by a number of members. The first thing
I’d like to do is to recognise that we have challenges. As we said in the
Budget Speech, don’t knock the provinces too hard, because if we tracked
the infrastructure spending, as I am sure all members of this House
regularly do through their section 32 reports - it’s there in the
Government Gazette, and I am sure that every committee discusses this
section 32 report of the PFMA every month - then we would all know that the
infrastructure spending of provinces has improved very significantly.

What was left at the end of the last fiscal year was 5%. And if you track
it six months into this fiscal year, it is already 35% up. There are some
provinces that are going to overspend this year on infrastructure, and that
is not an entirely bad thing.

So, in examining the oversight issues, let’s take account of those issues
as well, because they are indicative of very significant changes.

We are not unique in this regard. Labour came to government in the UK
almost eight years ago now. For the first four years of their tenure, each
year, the infrastructure spending remained untouched. This is also a
situation where the government takes account of spending for roads and so
on in municipalities. Long untouched! So, don’t feel too het up about this
issue.

Just like in respect of the skills base of our skills endowment, the hon
Stephens, apart from the other silly things he was saying, said: “Look to
France, where there are 37 colleges that train the public servants”. Well,
there is an article now in a news magazine that has just come out that
indeed looks at France. Amongst the things they raise in this article is
the fact that the picture in France is not so pretty.
The article says in 1975 a 30-year-old Frenchman earned 15% less than a 50-
year-old; now it’s 40% less. It also says that only 5% of French young
people believe that they have a better chance of success than their
parents. It also says that the proportion of 24-year-old French, who still
live at their parents’ houses, has doubled to 65%. This is indicative of
very significant changes.

Just like in Germany, there is talk of the intern generation - people who
are highly skilled, with multiple degrees, who can’t find permanent
employment - who are happy to do unpaid labour in order to find one of
those elusive jobs.

Now, you can be silly about it. You can believe that it’s affirmative
action. Of course, you are wrong about that. You are so wrong, because you
have not bothered to read the Act, hon Rabie, just like the hon Lowe, who
has not bothered to read the Act. The Act is abundantly clear.

It says:

  Recognising that as a result of apartheid and other discriminatory laws
  and practices, there are disparities in employment, occupation and income
  within the national labour market; and that those disparities create such
  pronounced disadvantages for certain categories of people that they cannot
  be redressed simply by repealing discriminatory laws.
The Act is clear. The intent is clear. It isn’t even optional; it’s a
constitutional imperative, so get a life. We will have to do it, because
that is what the Constitution requires of us. [Applause.]

In respect of the hon Woods, I was raised by something called “Woods Great
Peppermint Cure”. Is he still in the House? Perhaps it’s part of that.
[Laughter.]

The issues of oversight have been well-canvassed by the hon Smith, the hon
Mabe and a number of other members. We value that, but let me also say that
a lot of the oversight needs to happen in our constituencies where we are.
That is going to be the best source of information about what happens. That
is the place where Parliament or parliamentarians need to find information
against which they can verify the section 32 report.

One of the big changes that we are introducing, and something that Cabinet
has already decided on, is to budget for infrastructure differently from
what we have done in the past. The new approach will involve budgeting over
the cycle of the project. You might find some budgets for infrastructure
going beyond the MTEF into five years and so on, to ensure that we don’t
have these roll-overs; to ensure that departments can better plan; and to
ensure that the planning cycle doesn’t even need to depend on whether the
money is available or not.

These decisions have now been taken by Cabinet and I am sure that by next
year there will be another lot of information for Parliament to digest so
that we can improve on the quality of spending in respect of
infrastructure.

The last point I would like to raise, which is in part a response to the
hon Scheemann, is that the Constitution sets out responsibilities; some
concurrent powers and some exclusive powers. Whilst we may have the
Minister of Education sitting with what the Education Act calls the Council
of Education Ministers, the discussions they have are at best
recommendations to provincial ExCos who allocate the resources.

So whilst there may be a commitment, for instance - because I think the hon
Ndlovu raised the issue of learning under trees – and whilst may be an
agreement about that, the allocation of resources happens in a different
place, and lining this up is a process far more complex than what we
frequently understand. Therefore, whilst the Budget Review in table 5 in
the Annexures puts all of this together so that we have a sense of what we
are spending on education - we can say we are spending R109 billion on
education - the spending happens in different places, and so the oversight
function needs to happen in different places as well. That is why what the
National Assembly is responsible for is important, and what the NCOP is
responsible for is also important and that goes for the provincial
legislatures as well. We need to have an information base that will allow
us to take all of these together.

Finally, let me express my appreciation. I think this was a very good
debate. Members are far more familiar with the issues. There was far less
controversy. Occasionally, yes, there was a bit of silliness, but I think
that it is in the nature of the beast. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

The House adjourned at 18:10.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                            FRIDAY, 9 MARCH 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency


    (a)     Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
        2007 to 2009.


2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the year
        ended June 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for the
        year ended June 2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. Report of the Joint Budget Committee on 2007/8 National Budget, dated 09
March 2007:





1.    INTRODUCTION

The Minister of Finance tabled the Budget for 2007/8, including the MTEF
for the 2008/9 and 2009/10, on 22 February 2007.The Committee’s mandate
regarding the Appropriation Bill requires it to consider the allocation of
available financial resources against government policy. This mandate is
distinct from that of the Portfolio and Select Committees on Finance, which
deliberate on the macro-economic, fiscal and intergovernmental dimensions
of the Appropriation Bill respectively.


The Committee has interpreted its mandate to mean that  it  should  consider
the following:
    • The expected impact of expenditure allocations  on  the  effectiveness
      and efficiency with which  departments  can  respond  to  government’s
      stated policy priorities; and
    • Whether departments are making the tough choices  required,  tailoring
      their  planned  expenditures   to   priorities,   choosing   effective
      strategies and seeking efficiency in implementation.

After studying tabled documents and conducting hearings the Committee also
reviewed earlier processes on the Budget, including the Medium Term Budget
Policy Statement during it’s deliberations on the Appropriation Bill.





2.    THE PROCESS

The Joint Budget Committee, the  Portfolio  and  Select  Finance  Committees
held joint hearings on the budget that started  with  the  briefing  by  the
Minister, the Director General and  the  Commissioner  of  Revenue  Services
(SARS). Between 27 February and 5 March 2007 the Committee received  further
submissions  from  National  Treasury  and  SARS,  economists  and   a   tax
specialist, organised labour and business  as  well  as  the  Department  of
Transport  and  Department  of  Health.  Due  to  changes  in   parliament’s
programme the Departments of Sport and Recreation  and  Public  Service  and
Administration were unfortunately unable to attend. These submissions  dealt
with the full range of issues raised in the Appropriation  Bill  2007/8,  as
well as other related issues. Specific  emphasis  was  given  to  issues  of
expenditure, infrastructure, capacity/skills and human  resources  as  these
have been identified as the major focus areas for governmental spending.

    • The capital expenditure budget in government has seen a sharp increase
      over the  recent  period.  Capital  expenditure,  which  is  currently
      directed  towards   massive   infrastructure   development,   provides
      government with the opportunity to grow the economy at a higher  scale
      to reduce poverty and  create  jobs.  As  such,  the  2010  World  Cup
      provides  government  with  a  valuable  opportunity  to   invest   in
      development, to address the priority of poverty alleviation.

Having applied the mandate to the Appropriation Bill and after applying  its
mind, the Committee has made several recommendations.


3.    MACRO-ECONOMIC ISSUES



Although macro-economic issues do not fall within the mandate of the Joint
Budget Committee, their impact on financial management and expenditure
requires the JBC’s consideration.  Increasing efficiency of revenue
collection has caught up with the State’s capacity to spend. The present
surplus results from revenue collection outstripping projections as
reflected in the Budget Review of 2006. This development provides an
opportunity for allocating more funds to infrastructure, social services
and crime prevention. The committee is of the opinion that the current
capacity challenges may constrain the efficient, effective and economical
expenditure of these increased funds.





4.    SUBMISSIONS TO THE JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE


Briefing by the National Treasury


The Minister of Finance  and  the  Director-General  (DG)  of  the  National
Treasury briefed the Committee on the 2007/08 Budget on 22 February 2007.

The minister and his team highlighted the key aspects of the Budget
2007/08. He noted that increased revenues and steadily improving economic
growth enabled greater expenditure in key policy areas, which included
investment in social and economic infrastructure, improvement in the
education and health services, the modernisation of justice and
administration services as well as long-term investment in social security.
Critical concerns raised by members included the design of the social
security reform, methods to improve the current shortage of skills needed
for economic growth and the need to improve export performance. Concerns
were also raised over the continued inaccessibility and lack of integration
of transport services, despite existing and planned improvements in
transport infrastructure.


National Treasury stated that government expenditure  had  grown  by  9%  in
real terms, due to the steady growth in revenue collection. This led  to  an
improved fiscal position and a recorded surplus for  the  current  financial
year. The committee welcomes this improved position resulted in  a  net  tax
relief of R12.4 billion and the abolition of retirement  fund  tax.  Greater
investments in health and education  to  improve  the  skills  capacity  and
improved remuneration of teachers and health workers are also welcomed.
The new reforms would need to include unemployment benefits, disability  and
death benefits, and savings  and  pension  would  be  based  on  a  standard
payment log of 15 to 18% percent of income of  all  workers  in  the  formal
employment sector.  A  wage  subsidy  would  be  introduced  for  low-income
earners to encourage employment creation and the improvement in the  working
and living conditions of low-income earners. This would  offset  the  social
security contribution of this group. The total cost of this system would  be
around R20 to R30 billion.


The Impact of the Allocations of the Division of Revenue

The recommendations by the FFC, and the responses thereto  by  the  National
Treasury, were considered by the JBC in respect to the Division  of  Revenue
2007 and taken into account as they related to the Appropriation  Bill.  The
Division of Revenue  aim  to  strike  two  critical  balances:  one  between
executive authorities and administration and  the  other  between  executive
authorities across spheres. The JBC  also  noted  the  recommendations  that
government did not implement. The JBC  believes  it  is  critical  that  the
confusion over the concurrent functions and responsibilities  of  provincial
governments and municipalities should be speedily resolved. There is also  a
need for greater coordination between spheres of government as  well  as  an
improvement in the monitoring and spending of conditional grants.



National Treasury briefed the Committee on the DoR and the 2010  FIFA  World
Cup Stadiums Development Grant, and the Bulk Infrastructure  Grant.  Clauses
were also refined to facilitate the project registration  of  the  Municipal
Infrastructure Grant.




Efficiency Group Briefing

The Efficiency Group’s submission  focussed  on  taxation,  which  is  being
dealt with by the Portfolio Committee  on  Finance.   The  Efficiency  Group
highlighted that the  increase  in  social  expenditure  in  health,  social
development, education and housing stood at 43% in real terms  in  1994  and
has increased  to  50%  in  this  budget,  which  represents  a  significant
increase.  it  further  noted  that  this  increase  with  the   significant
reduction in debt has increased funds available for public expenditure.


Bureau for Economic Research (BER) briefing

Bureau for Economic Research stated that there were  sound  fiscal  finances
and there were generally stable expenditure and tax  ratios,  implying  that
there were no dramatic fiscal effects. Attention  was  being  given  to  the
issue of savings and Government’s own savings were positive. There was  some
evidence of delivery in terms of infrastructure spending, but it  needed  to
be stepped up. On the downside,  the  combination  of  a  ‘dovish’  monetary
policy and a ‘stable’ fiscal policy at this  point  may  not  be  enough  to
address macro-economic imbalances reflected in the  current  account,  which
implied risk.


Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) Briefing

The Industrial Development Corporation stated that domestic demand had  been
a key driver behind the sector’s recovery in the past  three  years,  mainly
due  to  buoyant  consumer  spending  and  manufacturers  had   increasingly
switched to the lucrative domestic market. The remarkable recovery in  South
Africa’s overall economic performance since 1994  had  not  translated  into
significant job creation in  the  formal  non-agricultural  sectors  of  the
economy. The economy  had  become  less  labour-intensive  over  the  years,
although some reversal in this  trend  had  been  observed  in  more  recent
years.


The Impact of Issues of Taxation

The Portfolio Committee on Finance is dealing  with  the  briefing  made  by
Mallinicks and BUSA due to  its  focus  on  macro-economic  issues.  In  the
Committee’s opinion the resulting increased revenue  arising  from  economic
growth and robust collection will be  utilised  by  government  to  increase
expenditure in prioritised areas.

Department of Transport

The Department stated that the economy is growing and as part of a
concerted commitment towards the 2010 World Cup and the expansion of public
transport, a sharp increase in capital expenditure has been planned. The
department placed an emphasis on the revitalisation, maintenance and
expansion of existing and new infrastructure. The committee stressed the
importance of ensuring that the infrastructure development creates a
lasting legacy beyond 2010. In order to address commodity price concerns,
the department has, together with the Department of Trade and Industry put
macro-economic processes in place around the acquisition of materials.
Other strategies include improving local manufacturing to circumvent some
costs; local assembling; as well as securing up-front commitments where
bulk purchases are to be made.



On the issue of the alignment between government departments to maximise
the utilisation of funds, the department confirmed that interdepartmental
coordination and the cluster system is followed. These measures have
brought about much closer cooperation between various departments, although
this must be done at an accelerated pace.  The committee raised its concern
around the low integrated approach between departments in service delivery.




Key policy areas of the Department of Transport regarding infrastructure

    • World Cup support: public transport infrastructure
    • Scaling up of EPWP in the road sector with a budget
    • Improvement of strategic secondary road network
    • Regional road infrastructure development
    • Passenger rail
    • South African National Road Agency


The department expressed its satisfaction with the budget, which shows a
54% increase. Furthermore it raised the issue of the lack of the skills
needed in order to implement some of its key priorities.



The JBC considered the following:

         • In  terms  of  transfer  expenditure  the  department  is  doing
           reasonably well and outcomes are dependent on  the  implementing
           agencies such as provinces, municipalities among others
         • In this regard JBC is concerned about the lack  of  capacity  of
           the implementing agencies to spend
         • The JBC further observed that  the  monitoring  of  implementing
           agencies by the national departments are minimal
         • The pace  to  meet  the  deadlines,  in  particularly  the  2010
           deadlines, may be hindered by lack of capacity
    • The EPWP are indeed labour intensive and  as  such  creates  jobs  and
      develops skills


After considering the above observations the JBC believes it is important
to monitor the expenditure challenges monthly, where possible and otherwise
quarterly and when necessary obtain departmental briefings to assist in the
committee’s oversight in these areas.



The Department of Health

The committee did not share the Department of Health’s optimism in regards
to the pattern of accelerated expenditure in the last quarter, which led to
a possible problem of fiscal dumping, notwithstanding the department’s
point that March transfers have been moved to December.



The department stated that though hospital revitalization has improved in
totality, funds allocated to revitalization are only sufficient to spend on
projects that have already been awarded tenders. Among the challenges they
face, are rollovers that are awarded too late for, as the DG stated,
effective expenditure, this includes provincial transfers. Furthermore, the
department assumed that the presentation of business plans would lead to
the required allocation of funds; given the emphasis placed on providing
business plans in previous years. The committee believes that the increase
of funds without the capacity to spend effectively and efficiently is not
the solution.



The JBC intends scrutinising the processes that led to these problems
raised by the department, in a joint engagement with Department of Health
and National Treasury, so that corrective measures can be taken to avoid a
recurrence of these problems.



The department noted an increase in a conditional grant allocation for
HIV/AIDS that led to more than 245 106 patients being treated in 2006/07
compared to the 28 393 treated in December 2004. The committee welcomed
this improvement. The department made it clear that this figure is small,
relative to the challenge the country is facing and pointed out that the
demand for resources is greater than the supply and noted that the time
will come when the system will not cope. The current policy requires that
the department provide treatment to all those patients who present
themselves and the DG noted the impact that the increasing numbers will
have on the department’s medium term expenditure projections. However the
department did indicate the role poverty plays and the importance of
supporting medication with proper nutrition.



GENDER CONSIDERATIONS IN THE BUDGET

The JBC also considered how far women, who are the greater percentage of
poor people, are directly taken into account in department’s allocations.
In this respect the submission from the Community Agency for Social Enquiry
was also considered when deliberating on the budgets. The Committee agrees
that there are weaknesses in making linkages between the various steps of
the planning, budgeting and monitoring processes.


The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development’s budget makes no
mention of maintenance in the 2007/08 ENE. The sexual offences courts are
not mentioned in the 2007/08 ENE apart from a target conviction rate, as in
2006/07, of 70%. The JBC believes that all departments and the EPWP, which
is one of government’s key programmes to address poverty alleviation,
should consider increasing their focus on women. The Department of Health
vote in the 2007/08 ENE states that 7 795 caregivers were trained in HCBC
in 2005/06, but does not state whether this was done as part of the EPWP.
The Department of Social Development, which also supports HCBC as part of
the social sector EPWP, provides no budget or performance figures on
delivery in this area in the ENE.


The JBC identified two aspects of the 2007/08 budget which are  particularly
supportive from a gender perspective. Firstly, the  increased  attention  to
bursaries and increased salaries for teachers,  nurses  and  social  workers
will benefit women because these areas  of  work  are  female-dominated.  To
date, the salaries paid to these workers have been far lower than for  other
jobs that require equivalent education and training.  Secondly,  the  above-
inflation increases  in  the  social  security  grants  will  benefit  women
because it is they, disproportionately who benefit from  the  grant  system.
However the JBC remains concerned at the lack of  gender  disaggregation  of
targets and indicators in the Estimates of National Expenditure.


6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

The recommendations focus on infrastructure and capacitation in its
broadest sense.

Infrastructure

    • The national departments should strengthen their monitoring strategies
      on provinces, municipalities and the agencies
    •  Parliament  should  prioritise  oversight  in  all  departments  with
      significant infrastructure allocations which should furnish parliament
      with detailed plans with spending projections that are linked directly
      to timeframes and monitor and evaluate monthly expenditure trends  and
      conduct robust on site oversight function particularly  on  the  major
      projects



Capacitation

    • DPSA should monitor and  evaluate  the  government’s  current  general
      personnel retention guidelines. It should also identify  the  existing
      limitations  in  addressing  the  current  challenges  that  exist  in
      obtaining and retaining strategic professional scarce skills
    • Departments should adopt innovative approaches within  the  parameters
      of the conditions of service
    • National Departments must provide  uniform  norms  and  standards  and
      service delivery plans to monitor
    • Parliament welcomes increased allocations. The critical responsibility
      is for parliamentary committees to strengthen their oversight  with  a
      focus on value for money, sustainability of  projects  and  impact  on
      communities.




BRIEFINGS & SUBMISSIONS RECEIVED


National Treasury
Financial Fiscal Commission
Efficiency Group
Bureau for Economic Research
Industrial Development Corporation
Community Agency for Social Enquiry


Report to be considered

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the Instrument for the
   Amendment of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation
   (ILO), 1997, dated 9 March 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having considered the request
        for approval by Parliament of the Instrument for the Amendment of
        the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation (ILO),
        referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
        231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Instrument.
   Request to be considered

                            MONDAY, 12 MARCH 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bill submitted

      (1)   The Minister of Finance


          a) Finansiewetsontwerp [W 5 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Finance
         Bill [B 5 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Works

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2007 to
          2009.
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on  the  Appropriation  Bill
   2007/8, dated 9 March 2007:



   The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered  and  examined  the
   Appropriation Bill [B2 – 2007] (National Assembly  –  Sec.  77)  and  its
   related documents, referred to it, and classified by  the  Joint  Tagging
   Mechanism as a Section 77 Bill, reports as follows:


   1. Introduction

   The Minister of Finance tabled the Budget for 2007/8, including the  MTEF
   for the 2008/9 and 2009/10, on 22 February 2007.


   On 22 February 2007, the Committee, in a joint sitting with the Joint
   Budget Committee was briefed on the Budget for 2007/8 and the MTEF
   forecast by the Minister of Finance, together with the Director-General
   of National Treasury and the Commissioner of the South African Revenue
   Services (SARS).



   Between 27 February and 2  March  2007  the  Committee  received  further
   submissions from  National  Treasury  and  SARS,  economists  and  a  tax
   specialist, as well as organised labour and business.  These  submissions
   dealt with the full range of issues raised in Budget 2007/8, as  well  as
   other related issues.
   The report is structured around the following main  themes  that  emerged
   throughout the hearings:


 • Macroeconomic framework
 • Fiscal Policy, Revenue trends and tax proposals
 • Other issues


   2. Macroeconomic Framework


   There was general agreement amongst the panellists that South  Africa  is
   currently enjoying the longest sustained period of economic growth,  with
   the current upswing in the  business  cycle  in  its  seventh  year.  The
   establishment of economic stability and  sound  macroeconomic  management
   over the last years provided the foundation for this continued upswing.


   The Committee commends Government on the  fact  that  the  2007/8  Budget
   continues to build on  the  sound  and  prudent  macro-economic  policies
   reflected in a robust economy, reinforced by the high levels of  business
   optimism. The Budget provides for further channelling of the benefits  of
   economic expansion to increase savings, economic and  employment  growth,
   and contributes to transformation and poverty alleviation.


   The 2007/8 Budget identifies the need to  accelerate  growth  at  a  more
   rapid  pace  to  further  reduce  poverty,  unemployment,  to   eliminate
   inequality, modernising service delivery institutions, investing in long-
   term security, and protecting the vulnerable. It supports the  structural
   development of the economy with increased  expenditure  in  economic  and
   social infrastructure investment, which would have a  long-term  positive
   effect on the economy. There was consensus among the panellists that  the
   Budget identified the need for stronger exports performance  through  the
   development of a growth orientated trade and  industrial  policy,  as  it
   seeks to address the constraints to a higher  economic  growth  path.  Mr
   Jorge  Maia  from  the  Industrial  Corporation  of  South  Africa  (IDC)
   highlighted that although we have seen a  remarkable  recovery  of  South
   Africa’s overall economic performance since 1994  it  did  not  translate
   into significant job creation in the formal non-agricultural  sectors  of
   the economy, and the economy has become less labour  intensive  over  the
   years.


   The panellists welcomed the fact that the Budget  sought  to  consolidate
   and expand economic growth through fiscal policy that sought to avoid the
   “boom and bust” of past business cycles through prudent management of the
   current economic upturn. Improved Government savings over  the  last  few
   years, reducing future debt serving obligations further, highlighted  the
   complimentary fiscal and monetary policies  stance  underlying  a  steady
   improvement in macroeconomic stability. Prudent fiscal policy will ensure
   the sustainability of current economic upswing.  The  Committee  believes
   that  the  planned  fiscal  surplus  could  be   seen   as   government’s
   contribution to the national savings effort.


   The panellists were in agreement that  the  strong  economic  outlook  is
   supported by global conditions, that although a slow down in  the  short-
   term is expected, global conditions remain  favourable.  Global  economic
   trends remain supportive of sustained growth in developing countries, but
   global imbalance remains source of  economic  and  financial  risks.  The
   reliance on short-term  capital  inflows,  the  high  level  of  domestic
   consumption expenditure, and the growing current account deficit are  the
   major risk factors for South  Africa  in  achieving  the  desired  growth
   projections over the medium term.


   All presenters echoed that business and consumer confidence remains high,
   providing a good indication of their confidence about the performance and
   prospects  of  the  economy,  despite  inflationary  pressures  and  high
   imports.  Pieter Laubscher alluded to the fact that the  current  buoyant
   economic conditions are cyclical,  and  a  result  of  favourable  global
   conditions that might change.  National  Treasury  viewed  the  continued
   buoyancy of tax revenues as a signed of strong  economic  growth  as  tax
   receipts grew at a faster rate than reported GDP. This would imply a  tax
   multiplier and the average value of the tax multiplier had  gone  through
   significant peak and troughs. National Treasury implied that this was due
   cyclical factors, such as swings in commodity prices, the external  value
   of the currency and shifts in the business cycle.


   2.1. Domestic economic outlook

   Panellists welcomed South Africa’s improving economic growth  performance
   and highlighted the strong  dominance  by  the  non-agricultural  service
   related sectors. According to Jorge  Maia  (IDC)  although  the  pace  of
   growth by the manufacturing sector was below  the  economic  average,  it
   recorded substantial  improvement  in  its  growth  performance  with  an
   average of 3% p.a. versus the  0.5%  p.a.  in  the  preceding  years.  He
   further argues that the key driver behind the sectors  recovery  was  the
   strong domestic  demand.  Recent  figures  published  would  indicate  an
   improvement  within  the  sector,  with  construction,  electricity   and
   telecommunication sectors the major drivers. Panellists agreed  that  the
   primary sectors contribution to GDP has been substantially reduced,  with
   National Treasury arguing that if one excludes mining and agriculture the
   economy would be growing at more than 6%,  well  within  the  target  for
   2010.


   The growth rate has substantially increased to an average of 5% projected
   over the MTEF period, marginally better that the ASGI-SA target of 4, 5%.
   Pieter Laubscher, chief economist at the  Bureau  for  Economic  Research
   (BER), concludes that the growth rate is more stable and sustainable  and
   that the growth rate over the last three years  was  underpin  by  strong
   household consumption as well as gross fixed investment of above 9% since
   1993.
   The panellists highlighted the fact that the demand side has  driven  the
   growth, while the supply side had been fairly muted. Net  export  made  a
   strong negative contribution to economic growth with a sharp increase  in
   domestic demand resulted in the widening of the output gap.


   2.2 Inflation


   CPIX inflation has remained within the 3  –  6  %  target  range  for  41
   consecutive months averaging at 4.6% in 2006. The rising oil price, along
   with acceleration in food prices, contributed  to  the  higher  inflation
   rate. The business community welcomed  the  better  coordination  between
   fiscal and monetary policy. The short-term interest rates seemed to  have
   peaked, however, but risks do remain. The panellist  agreed  that  fiscal
   policy supportive of the need for a  higher  level  of  domestic  savings
   would make the implementation of monetary policy  easier.  The  inflation
   outlook has improved since the end of 2006, and inflationary  expectation
   seems to be well anchored.


   2.3 Current Account deficit


   The strong expansion of domestic spending and imports over the  2004-2006
   period, combined with  a  poor  export  performance  over  the  2002-2006
   period, 3% on average per annum, led  to  the  widening  of  the  current
   account deficit. Government argued, supported by the panellist  that  the
   current  account  deficit  not  only  reflected  the  imbalance   between
   investment and savings, but that the country was consuming more  than  it
   had produced, with the difference being imported.


   Pieter Laubscher (BER) further concluded that the strong currency  played
   an important role in constraining manufacturing  exports,  stimulated  by
   domestic spending and import demand. Prof Ray  Parsons  said  during  the
   hearings that “South Africa  is  currently  having  too  much  investment
   chasing to little savings” resulting  in  the  widening  of  the  current
   account deficit. A concern from the business community was how Government
   would further stimulate the supply side of the  economy  to  address  the
   current imbalance.


   Although the current account deficit had risen from 4.2% of GDP  to  5,7%
   of GDP since last year, stimulated by the increase in import levels, high
   oil prices and sharp increase  in  South  African  Customs  Union  (SACU)
   payments, Government and business remained optimistic, as this  would  be
   offset by strong capital inflows. Factors underpinning this view were the
   stable macroeconomic climate and the improved economic growth position.


   The Committee commends Government on its fiscal stance  as  it  helps  to
   sustain growth by improving Government savings and prioritising  spending
   programmes, thus strengthening the economy. The Committee  would  caution
   Government on its reliance on portfolio investments, adding that it needs
   to attract foreign direct investment to address  this  imbalance.  Pieter
   Laubscher (BER) cautioned against this reliance as the direction of these
   inflows was globally determined. Government,  however,  is  committed  to
   improving  export  performance  through  appropriate  industrial   policy
   initiatives.


   2.4 Exchange Control


   The Budget contained few announcements with respect to  further  exchange
   control relaxation,  with  the  gradual  approach  still  in  place.  The
   Committee  welcomed  the  announcement  that  the  current   shareholding
   threshold for foreign direct  investment  outside  of  Africa  is  to  be
   lowered from 50% to 25%. This will make it easier for companies to engage
   in strategic international partnerships.


   3. Fiscal Policy


   The continued expansionary  fiscal  stance  adopted  received  widespread
   endorsement by all commentators, as  it  supports  the  growth  momentum.
   Pieter Laubscher  (BER)  alluded  to  the  fact  that  as  fiscal  policy
   continued on  its  expansive  phase,  Government  had  to  guard  against
   stimulating the consumption side of the economy.


   The strong fiscal position underpins the medium term policy objectives of
   job creation, modernising  service  delivery  institutions,  accelerating
   economic growth and tackling crime. As highlighted in the  Budget  Review
   of 2007, the Budget continues to build on the  gains  of  prudent  fiscal
   management to make a further contribution to economic growth  and  social
   development.


   Expectations are that the economy will to grow 5% a year over the  medium
   term, reaching 5.4 % in 2009  in  line  with  the  ASGI-SA  target,  with
   inflationary expectations to remain within the  target  range.  The  2007
   Budget reflects real growth in  non-interest  expenditure  by  an  annual
   average of 7.7% over the medium term.


   The Budget reflects quite strong expenditure over the MTEF both in  terms
   of current payment of 11% and wages and  salaries  of  10%.  Dawie  Roodt
   highlighted that Government’s spending trajectory  was  faster  than  the
   rate of economic expansion, with social expenditure (education,  housing,
   health and social development) the main beneficiaries.

   Gross fixed investment is forecast to increase rapidly with R410  billion
   Government infrastructure programmes  accompanied  by  higher  levels  of
   private sector fixed investment. Jorge Maia from the IDC  highlighted  in
   his presentation the positive  spin-offs  of  infrastructure  growth,  of
   increased demand inputs, the manufacturing of capital goods and transport
   equipment, and the crowding  in  of  private  sector  investment  through
   effective infrastructure.  He further argued that in order to achieve the
   ASGI-SA targets of 6% GDP  growth,  fixed  investment  activity  for  the
   economy at large had to accelerate by more than 13%  per  year  over  the
   period 2011 to 2014.


   3.1 Budget deficits and surplus


   The  2006  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  (MTBPS)  announced  a
   projected surplus of 0.5% of GDP for  the  fiscal  year  2007/8.  Due  to
   strong revenue growth the  revised  predictions  for  2006/7  forecast  a
   budget surplus of 0.3% to GDP and a surplus of 0.6% of GDP  forecast  for
   2007/8.


   Jorge  Maia  (IDC)  argued  that  prudent  fiscal  policy  and  continued
   improvements in tax collections resulted in a shift in Government balance
   from  progressively  lower  deficits  towards  a  budget  surplus,  hence
   enabling a developmental approach to fiscal  expenditure  going  forward.
   The broadly balance budget over the  MTEF  period  was  welcomed  by  all
   commentators, as it is positive from both a  confidence  and  credibility
   point of view. Pieter Laubscher  (BER),  although  welcoming  the  budget
   surplus,  cautioned  that,  from  a  cyclical  perspective,  this   might
   stimulate the demand side of the economy.


   4. Tax Policy


   The tax policy framework seeks to broaden the tax base, taking cognisance
   of societal realities, by minimising the distortionary impact that  taxes
   may have on economic growth and  employment  creation.  The  tax  reforms
   support accelerated growth in job creation and poverty alleviation, while
   at the same time encouraging individual savings. The buoyant tax  revenue
   over the past three years was due  to  strong  economic  growth  and  the
   broadening of the tax base, coupled with  the  efficiency  of  SARS.  The
   broad underpinning principles of the 2007 Budget’s tax proposals are:

    • Supporting economic growth,  investment  and  job  creation,  business
      development and confidence
    •  Promoting  financial  security  of  households  and  reducing   their
      vulnerability through retirement reforms that encourage savings
 • Supporting macroeconomic policy objectives.


   The Budget provides for individual tax relief of R  8.4  billion,  which,
   according to some commentators  provide  further  stimulus  for  consumer
   spending, with total net relief of R12.5billion.


   As the GEAR policy intention was to maintain a  ratio  of  tax-to-GDP  of
   about 25%, the increase from 26.4% to 27.9% of tax revenue as  percentage
   of GDP was met with concern by certain commentators.


   4.1 Corporate Income Tax (CIT) and Secondary Tax on Companies (STC)



   Robust debate on the global competitiveness of the South African
   corporate tax structure was evident during the hearings on the Budget.
   BUSA/CHAMSA argued that to encourage Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), the
   CIT should be internationally competitive, as a lower CIT rate would
   attract investment. Pieter Laubscher argued that CIT had been a major
   source of the revenue overrun, and that going forward, fiscal policy had
   to consider the tax burden borne by companies. Tax relief to companies
   would stimulate the production side of the economy. Government was not
   convinced that a reduction in CIT would automatically lead to supply side
   benefits as suggested by business.
   The  Committee  requested  that  in  the  debate  on  the   international
   competitiveness of the tax system, commentators should not  be  selective
   in their  comparative  analysis  of  international  CIT,  as  information
   provided by National  Treasury  and  SARS  indicated  that  South  Africa
   compared favourably with other countries. National Treasury  was  of  the
   view that the current tax system in South Africa is not an impediment  to
   investment and resource allocation had to be based purely  on  commercial
   grounds and not tax decisions only.


   In supporting and encouraging business development and confidence the
   Government announced the phase-out of secondary tax on companies and
   replace it with a dividend tax. This would be two phased approached as
   the dividend tax would be applied at a rate of 10% down from 12, 5%. The
   second phase, commencing in 2008, would entail the conversion to a
   dividend tax on shareholders, with administrative enforcement through a
   withholding tax at company level. The Committee welcomed this, as it is
   in line with the international norm, and also would have a stimulatory
   effect on business.



   5. Social Security Reform

   Improved economic performance has created the fiscal space  that  allowed
   Government to move towards a social security system that provides  income
   security for all. Despite the economic upturn, the  Committee  recognised
   that poverty and unemployment remain a major  challenge  for  government.
   The Committee welcomed the proposal by Government to introduce  a  broad-
   based social security framework over the  2001-2010  period.  This  would
   involve a broadening of social security reform to  include  an  earnings-
   related contributory system. If  the  principles  mentioned  –  those  of
   equity, pooling of risks,  mandatory  participation,  and  administrative
   efficiency - are adhered to, it could  be  a  force  for  greater  social
   stability and increase the levels of personal savings.


   The Committee welcomed the commitment by Government that all  details  on
   the earning-related social security tax  system,  the  wage  subsidy  and
   revision of retirement industry would be  tabled,  and  an  all-inclusive
   consultative process would be undertaken before the new dispensation  was
   finalised.


   5.1 Savings and Retirement fund reform


   Over the past two years the Committee has provided  a  platform  for  the
   discussion on retirement fund reforms. The Committee welcomed the  recent
   announcement in the  Budget  of  proposed  reforms  to  retirement  funds
   savings as part of the broader social security reform  process.  Business
   supports the proposed reforms and will contribute  to  the  debate  as  a
   social partner at NEDLAC.


   The Committee, business and labour  sectors  welcomed  the  abolition  of
   retirement fund tax, urging trustees to be vigilant in ensuring that  the
   benefits accrue to the intended beneficiaries.


   6. Concluding comments


   South African is experiencing sustained growth, with  the  management  of
   public finance creating the fiscal space  to  step  up  spending  in  key
   areas. The previous Budgets had laid the foundation for future  sustained
   economic growth, job creation and alleviating the plight of the poor.


   The growth outlook  remains  positive  over  the  medium  term,  strongly
   supported by investment. Investment would continue to grow underpinned by
   public  corporation’s  and  departments  capital  investment  programmes.
   Export growth is expected to exceed 6% over the MTEF as it benefits  from
   significant  investment  in  new  capacity  and  continued  international
   demand.


   The  projected  softening  in  consumption   expenditure   and   possible
   moderation in the exchange rate would  ease  import  volume  growth.  The
   continued strong investment expenditure means that capital import  growth
   might remain high. This will be good as it contributes to the  productive
   capacity of the economy.


   Despite the upward pressure on the CPIX it is expected to  remain  within
   the target range. The fiscal stance  adopted  by  Government  provides  a
   buffer against economic instability  and  the  fiscal  space  allows  for
   reforms on the social front.


   The proposal to introduce a broad-based social security system will  seek
   to address the legacy of discrimination and  inequality,  and  will  work
   toward the elimination of poverty.




   7. Oral submissions


   The following people made oral submissions before the Committee, some in
   their personal capacity. These submissions are available on request from
   the Committee Section of Parliament.


        1. Mr T Manuel, Minister of Finance
      2. Mr L Kganyago, Director-General: National Treasury
      3. Mr P Gordhan, Commissioner of SARS
      4. Mr Pieter Laubscher, BER: Stellenbosch University
   5. Mr D Roodt, Chief Economist: Efficiency Group
   6. Mr Hennie Bester, Director: Mallinicks
   7. Mr J Vilakazi, CEO: BUSA
   8. Prof R Parsons, Business Unity South Africa (BUSA)
   9. Adv A Meiring, BUSA
  10. Mr R Baxter: Chief Economist: CHAMSA
  11. Ms Riefdah Ajam, Federation of Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA)


   Report to be cons

                           TUESDAY, 13 MARCH 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency

      (a)   Strategic Plan of the Media Development and Diversity Agency
        (MDDA) for 2007 to 2010.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Draft Amendment of Regulations made in terms of section 92 of
        the Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of
        2000).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (a)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Rand Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).


      (b)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Namakwa Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (c)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Botshelo Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (d)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to  30 June 2008 by
        Lepelle Northern Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
        Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
        of 2003).

      (e)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Bloem Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (f)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Umgeni Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (g)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Magalies Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (h)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Sedibeng Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (i)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Pelladrift Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (j)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Mhlatuze Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (k)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Bushbuckridge Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (l)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Amatola Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (m)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Albany Coast Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

   (n)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to  30  June  2008  by
      Overberg Water,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42(4)  of  the  Local
      Government: Municipal Finance Management  Act,  2003  (Act  No  56  of
      2003).


