---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 21 November 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-11-21
---

WEDNESDAY, 21 NOVEMBER 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:30.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I shall move on the next
sitting day of the House:

   That the Council —

   (1)      notes that —

         (a)      25 November to 10 December 2007 marks the beginning of the
               16 Days of Activism Against Gender Violence campaign to
               highlight the scourge of violence against women and children
               in our society;
         (b)      the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender Violence transcends
               to many parts of the world and has grown to be one of the key
               international campaigns that are used as organised strategies
               by governments, individuals and civil society organisations
               to call for the elimination of all forms of violence against
               women and children in society; and

         (c)      for 2007, the global theme for the 16 Days of Activism is
               “Demanding Implementation, Challenging Obstacles: End
               Violence Against Women”;

   (2)      further notes that since 1991, the 16 Days of Activism campaign
         has helped to raise awareness about gender violence and has made
         formidable inroads in fostering change towards raising the plight
         of many women who are brutalised at home and at the hands of their
         loved ones;

   (3)      acknowledges the extensive policy and legislative framework that
         has been created by the government to deal with violence against
         women and children in South Africa;

   (4)      further acknowledges that the government has moved a step
         further in the process of promulgating the Sexual Offences Bill,
         which was passed by the Council and which is intended to provide
         greater protection to vulnerable persons who are victims of sexual
         offences; and

   (5)      calls on all the people of South Africa, including victims of of
         this appalling crime, to “Speak out, Stand up, and Commit to
         preventing Violence against Women and Children in our society”.

Mr M A MZIZI: Deputy Chairperson, I, hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the NCOP, I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the Council —

   (1)      notes with shock and disgust that a 57-year old teacher has
         appeared in court after being charged with raping a grade 7 pupil,
         who is only 12 years old, at a school in Louis Trichardt;

   (2)      further notes that teachers and all adults are in a position of
         trust and should serve as role models and mentors who guide and
         teach our children;

   (3)      acknowledges that the perpetrator of this heinous crime abused
         his position of influence and betrayed the trust of this young
         girl;

   (4)      realizes that children are amongst the most vulnerable members
         of society and their plight should always be at the fore of our
         decisions and thinking, especially during the period of 16 Days of
         Activism For No Violence Against Women and Children which starts
         next week; and

   (5)      hopes that, if found guilty, this man feels the full might of
         the law as he does not deserve to be part of our society.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Before I proceed to
the next item, I wish to welcome all the special delegates from the
provinces, MECs and also our Deputy Minister of Education, the hon E Surty,
to this House. Thank you.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Mr L T K Tonjeni)

Mr A T MANYOSI: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

   (1)      notes with deepest sympathy and sadness the passing away of a
         veteran of the liberation struggle, comrade Luvuyo Templeton
         (Kaizer) Tonjeni, on Sunday 11 November 2007, who will be buried in
         Middle–Tyira, Qumbu, on 24 November 2007;
   (2)      further recalls that Comrade Tonjeni served as a senator from
         1994 to 1997 when the Senate was replaced by the NCOP, and later
         served as a member of the Eastern Cape Provincial Legislature until
         he retired in 1999;

   (3)      expresses its untold appreciation for the invaluable selfless
         sacrifices and contribution he made towards the liberation of our
         country; and

      4) accordingly extends its condolences to the Tonjeni family and all
         his relatives and friends.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    2010 FIFA WORLD CUP PRELIMINARY DRAW

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, I move without notice:


   That the Council —

   (1)      notes that the 2010 FIFA World Cup Preliminary Draw will be held
         in Durban on 25 November 2007, which will be attended by thousands
         of delegates from 204 countries of which 53 will be from the
         African continent;

   (2)      also notes that this event is intended to set the stage for the
         country’s preparations for the hosting of the most important soccer
         spectacle to ever take place on the African continent – the 2010
         FIFA World Cup;

   (3)      further notes that the 2010 FIFA World Cup Preliminary Draw will
         be preceded by one of the most anticipated clashes in the South
         African football calendar, namely a derby between the country’s two
         soccer giants, Orlando Pirates and Kaizer Chiefs, which will be
         broadcast live in 43 European countries as well as in the United
         States of America and will be broadcast in French, English, German,
         Italian, Russian, Polish, Romanian, Greek, Turkish and Norwegian;
         and

   (4)      calls on all the people of South Africa and the African
         continent to stand tall and resolutely to ensure that this event
         sends ripples of confidence from Cape to Cairo and to spread the
         message that “Africa’s time has come and we are ready to host”.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          VICTORY OF BAFANA BAFANA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

   (1)      notes the victory of Bafana Bafana yesterday in a thrilling
         match against Canada; and

   (2)      hopes that this is the beginning of good things to come for
         Bafana Bafana.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                        EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Deputy Chairperson, hon MECs, members of
the provincial legislatures, esteemed members of this very august House,
the National Council of Provinces, congratulations on turning 10; I know
you celebrated your 10th anniversary and thank you for your contribution to
our democracy.
May I, at the onset, convey the apologies and best wishes of our Minister,
who is in the National Assembly answering questions. She would have liked
to be here personally to share the experience of the passage of this Bill
with you in this House.

I think it is appropriate to endorse the sentiments of the hon Mr Mzizi
with regard to the heinous crime by a teacher who is supposed to be the
caregiver, custodian and mentor of a child – such acts of violence and
abuse cannot be tolerated and it’s important that the SA Council for
Educators takes immediate steps and that such criminal actions are
eradicated. We cannot afford for certain individual’s diabolic actions to
tarnish the good name and reputation of thousands of teachers who commit
themselves on a daily basis to work for the benefit of our learners in many
schools under very challenging circumstances. Thank you very much for
drawing this to the attention of the House.

I also support the motion that we should commit ourselves to the 16 Days of
Activism. It’s important that we become aware of the fact that government
has, in fact, planned marches countrywide for men to demonstrate
extensively their support for women and to fight any form of abuse against
our women and children. Therefore, the MECs who are present here and
members of the National Council of Provinces should join members in this
House, as well as those outside, to join thousands of men who are trying to
achieve a Million Men March in support of our women, because it is the
business of men to ensure that they become the protectors of our women and
our children. So, thank you very much for that opportunity.

I also note that the chairperson of the select committee is in actual fact
not only the chairperson of education, but also of sports and recreation
and, indeed, we celebrate the victory of Bafana Bafana in relation to
soccer, and we look forward to a good 2010 World Cup.

Chairperson, I do understand that you have a very tight schedule, today.
I’m going to try to deal with the Education Laws Amendment Bill in the
easiest possible way so that we can have a shared understanding of the
importance of the Education Laws Amendment Bill.

It deals, firstly, with the issue of consultation in terms of the National
Education Policy Act, Nepa. Nepa has two sections, section five and section
11 which, when read against each other, create some confusion, given the
fact that when the Minister develops policy and passes law, she consults
with the various stakeholders, whether it be the Education Labour Relations
Council or the SA Association of Governing Bodies. It allows the Minister
to establish an appropriate forum where she requires support or assistance
in terms of any aspect with regard to policy. So, this legislation really
clarifies the law and provides the opportunity for the Minister to
constitute such a body for when an opinion or certain advice is required in
relation to any aspect of policy.

The important achievement, in my opinion, with regard to this law is issues
of norms and standards. We’ve never had any norms and standards with regard
to what a school is. What is a school? What should its shape and size be?
What should its content be? How big or small should a classroom be? What
should the learner-teacher ratio be in a classroom? Should a school without
a laboratory and a library be regarded as a school?

These are questions that we have to deal with, and given the context of our
past, and given the huge disparities in our schools, it’s important that we
enable the Minister to set out, at least, the minimum norms and standards
in relation to what a school should be and what type of learner support
material should be provided in a school; what a class size should be like;
what amenities, including sports and recreation, should be provided in a
school; and what kind of structures, with regard to safety and security in
a school, are necessary in order to create a caring environment for our
learners.

So, the Bill does enable the Minister to do that, and I think it’s
important that we support this particular aspect.
Hon members, you are all aware of the fact that we have a serious problem
with crime in general, and also with crime within our schools in terms of
drug abuse and learners carrying dangerous weapons. We’ve received many
appeals from all quarters, and from all political parties, that we should
strengthen the hand of the head of the school to enable him or her, where
there is reasonable ground for suspicion, to search groups of learners to
ensure that they do not enter the school premises being armed or being in
possession of drugs.

What this Bill does is, in fact, something quite drastic, but something
that responds directly to the appeal of our society to create safe and
caring schools. It enables the principal or a person designated by him or
her to search groups of learners, where there is reasonable suspicion and
in the best interest of the learners. I think this is important, because it
sends a very strong message that you do not enter our schools, which are in
any case declared gun-free and drug-free, with any weapons and if you do,
you will have to deal with the consequences. This is an important area
where we had to intervene and, indeed, we had.

If you look at the South African Schools Act, you will discover that it
describes at great length the roles, responsibilities and functions of
governing bodies. It’s important that we do so because these are democratic
institutions that have been established to ensure that our schools become
part of the communities they belong to, and are owned by the communities,
and also that they respect the right of parents, learners and educators
alike to participate in an important forum such as this.
However, the South African Schools Act did very little in terms of
describing the roles, responsibilities and functions of principals. In
fact, I think just about a line or two has been devoted to it – that the
principal is responsible for the professional duties in terms of managing
the school.

What we thought we should do in order to create clarity of understanding
amongst members of the governing body and the principals or headmasters or
headmistresses of the school, is to elaborate on the roles and
responsibilities of a principal. Indeed, he or she would be responsible for
the implementation of the curriculum. It is critical that this becomes a
responsibility that he or she does not delegate to anybody else, but that
it is a conferred responsibility in terms of legislation.

Indeed, he or she would be responsible for the professional management of
the school and the professional management of the staff so that we do not
have a situation where members of the governing body enter a school, assume
the authority of the principal and assume that they could professionally
manage the staff and then infringe on the professional authority and
autonomy of a principal. It is indeed necessary that we do so.

More interesting in this legislation is the attempt to ensure that they are
held accountable, as leaders of an institution and as leaders of a school.
If a school is led well, it functions effectively and quality education can
be provided, but when schools are led by poor leaders they become
dysfunctional. We are saying that the principal must account, and he must
be able to submit a report to the head of the department and to the
governing body in relation to the performance of the school.

Where the school is dysfunctional, he or she has a responsibility to ensure
that he or she submits an improved strategy in terms of dealing with the
issues of dysfunctionality. We cannot have consistent underperformance and
mediocrity in our schools.

This is what the legislation allows us to do. It holds the principal
accountable to the head of the department as well as the governing body, so
that they can become aware of the performance or the strategic vision of
the school on an annual basis.

It also allows, where a school is indeed dysfunctional, the head of
department to intervene and provide the school with a mentor for a defined
period of time to ensure that the school does not suffer or become the
victim at the expense of poor leadership within that school. It has been an
appeal from our people and we have indeed responded to the appeal.

The other element that the Bill deals with, which is important and we’ve
heard members in this House addressing it, is the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS. It speaks to more than a billion rand that has
been set aside for the learners who go to tertiary institutions.

We have, in fact, celebrated the recapitalisation of our Further Education
and Training, FET, colleges. They provide new avenues of opportunity; they
provide us with the intermediate and artisan skills that are so critical
and necessary in our country. But what kind of support have we provided to
these FET colleges in terms of enabling learners to have access to it,
particularly the poorest of the poor?

You may well be aware that, in fact, the Minister announced it in this
House. Rl00 million had been set aside last year and it’s going to be
increased to R200 million for the next financial year to allow for
bursaries for learners attending FET colleges. Somebody has to manage this
mechanism and indeed NSFAS will do so on behalf of the Department of
Education, and I think it is something that we can celebrate collectively.

This is the broad thrust of the Bill. I would like to take this opportunity
to really thank the select committee and its members for their diligent and
robust engagement in relation to various aspects of the Bill. In fact, they
proposed two substantive amendments through the provinces and these have
been taken on board by the Department of Education.

I would also like to take the opportunity to express my gratitude to the
MECs for Education as well as the chairpersons of the standing committees
in the various provinces who held public hearings; who listened to the
voices of the people and shaped the form, content and the nature of the
negotiating and final mandates to the members of this esteemed House. Thank
you to all of you for making this Bill a reality. I think it is something
that we could, as a collective in this country, celebrate together because
it responds not only to any political party, but also to the needs of
millions of learners in our schools and thousands of parents who have
appealed to us to make our schools safer, effective and efficient and
provide quality education to all our learners. Thank you for your kind
attention. [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, hon members, many education laws
which were passed were meant to create a framework to enable government to
transform education. Today, here, we can say that, without any fear of
being contradicted, as a country we have made serious strides into
transforming education. The landscape in education has transformed in such
a way that the bantu education we received prior to 1994 is now safe in the
museum of history alongside the spinning wheel.

However, with the implementation of these laws, it is clear that there are
still some practical problems that we are still facing. The Bill before
this House is an attempt by the Department of Education to refine some of
these education laws and to address some of the implementation problems
that we have come across.
It is common knowledge that there is still a big challenge with regard to
the school infrastructure, especially in the rural provinces. This has led
to an unconducive learning and teaching environment in our schools. In the
past 13 years, we have also seen that there is no uniformity in provinces
regarding the provision of infrastructure. Some provinces have built
schools whilst others have built classrooms. Even those that built schools
more often than others, have built low-quality schools.

This Bill makes provision for the national Department of Education to
establish minimum norms and standards that provinces will have to abide by
when building school infrastructure. The Bill further provides for minimum
and uniform standards with regard to the capacity of a school.

In the past, we have heard of situations where the education departments in
the provinces, and even nationally, have been taken to court by schools
motivated by racism, refusing to admit learners from other language groups
even if those schools were half-empty.

The norms and standards envisaged here will tell us about the carrying
capacity of each school. Therefore, there will be no excuse by any school
not to admit a child if that school is not full.

We are all aware of the violence and drug abuse that have gripped our
schools. We have seen children stabbing each other, even to death. In the
Western Cape alone we have been told that more than 70 stabbings have
actually taken place this year.

We have seen children using drugs like tik in some of our schools. As a
nation, we need to say enough is enough. We have a responsibility to work
together to reclaim our schools and make them once again proper
institutions of learning and teaching. If we do not do so history will
judge us harshly.

This Bill empowers teachers to carry out a random search of any group of
students suspected of having dangerous weapons or drugs in their possessing
and to also test the urine of any suspected drug users.

This Bill suggests that this be done in a manner that does not violate the
human rights of the learner. We have heard a very few voices, albeit,
saying that teachers are not trained to search students and that this must
be left to the police. We believe that that is being technical about this
serious matter. Anybody that is serious about education and the safety of
our children at school will embrace the provisions of this Bill with both
arms.

We believe that a teacher must teach a child in his or her totality and act
in a manner that seeks to protect innocent learners. Having sent their
children to school, parents must relax in the belief that their kids will
return home safely, because they are protected in a school environment.
That protection is the responsibility of teachers – as somebody said, in
loco parentis. In other words, the teachers are there on behalf of the
parents of the learners. Therefore, anything that the parents do to the
children, the teacher can actually do. So, this whole question of this
thing being left to the police is unwanted and unwarranted.

The Bill also outlines the procedure to be followed when dangerous weapons
or drugs are found in the possession of a learner. But you must hasten to
say that opening a criminal case for such a learner is not an option.

The South African Schools Act has hitherto outlined the functions of the
SGB, but not those of the principals. It has also been thought and taken
for granted that principals will know their functions. The other mistake
they have always made was to think that a good classroom teacher would make
a good principal.

Real life has taught us that that is not true. This Bill outlines the
functions and the responsibilities of a principal. The clarification of
roles between the principal and SGBs will enhance the smooth running of
school, as treading on each other’s toes will be a thing of the past. With
the passage of this Bill, there will now be some certainty as to what
happened to a school or to schools that are underperforming.

For a long time, we have heard of schools that have been underperforming
and nothing happened to them. The fact that the principal will now know
that if there is no improvement in results, his or her career may be at
stake, will help to improve the results.

To date, we have new situations where some provinces would not comply with
national policies and the national Ministry did not have any leverage to
compel any province to comply.

An illustration of this point will be that it has always been a national
policy that when a school is built, that school must have a sports ground
on its premises. We have seen so many schools being built without sports
grounds in the provinces and nothing is happening to these provinces. It
gives us pleasure to see that in this Bill there are measures in place to
compel provinces to comply with national norms and standards.

To date, the NSFAS covers students at tertiary institutions alone. This
Bill provides that this important financial aid scheme be extended to
deserving learners at FET colleges. It is now common knowledge that FETs
have been recapitalised to provide very important skills for the
development of our country.

It is our considered view that when this Bill is implemented, it will
fundamentally improve the situation in our schools and by extension improve
the quality of the lives of our people. We urge this House to support this
Bill with the amendments. We thank you.

Nksz N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. Ngizothatha leli thuba
ukubingelela iPhini likaNgqongqoshe Wezemfundo, abahlonishwa abaqhamuka
ezifundazweni kanye neNdlu yonke, uma ucubungula futhi ufunda isigaba 5(a)
salo Mthethosivivinywa obizwa nge-Education Laws Amendment Bill,
uzohlangabezana nezimo kanye neziqondiso zezingqalazizinda namakhono
ezikoleni. Lesi sigaba siyachaza ukuthi uNgqongqoshe angaba nalo ilungelo
lokunikeza umkhombandlela mayelana nezimo zezingqalazizinda ezikoleni -
izinto ezifana namagumbi okufundela, izindlu zangasese, amanzi, ugesi
nokunye okubalulekile okumaqondana nesikole.

UNgqongqoshe angabuye futhi abhekelele ikhono lesikole ukuthi bangaki
othisha kuleso sikole, inani lezingane ezifundiswa uthisha ngamunye ukuthi
zingaki, ukuthi izikole ngabe zinemiphumela emihle yini noma cha kanye
nokuthi ngabe isikole sinazo yini izincwadi zokufunda ezifanele kanye
nokunye okuwusizo ekuthuthukiseni izinga lemfundo kuleso sikole. Lokhu
kuzoba nomthelela ekutheni izinga lemfundo kuleli lakithi libe phezulu
ngokwanele. UNgqongqoshe usenalo futhi igunya lokwenza isiqiniseko sokuthi
inqubo yezemfundo iyefana kuzo zonke izikole zakuleli.

Isahluko 16 (a) sikhuluma ngezemisebenzi nelungelo likathishanhloko
wesikole. Kuyilungelo likathishanhloko ukumela uMnyango Wezemfundo
esigungwini esibhekelela isikole esibizwa nge-Governing Body futhi abuye
aselekelele isigungu leso. Ngakho-ke nguyena owedlulisa umbiko eMnyangweni
Wezemfundo futhi abuye awethule ubhaliwe. Lo mbiko wethulwa njalo uma
kuqala unyaka. Uqukethe amalungiselelo onyaka wonke futhi uchaza
ngokuthuthukiswa kwezemfundo kuleso sikole. Kunesidingo sokuthi lo mbiko
ubuye uchaze izindlela zokuthuthukisa kwezemfundo ubuye usho ukuthi
zizothuthukiswa ngaluphi uhlobo. Kubuye kube khona uhlelo futhi okufanele
lulandelwe yisikole ngasinye uma kwethulwa lo mbiko.

Kuyilungelo loMnyango lokwemukela noma ukuchitha umbiko kathishanhloko.
Esigabeni 58(c)kuyachazwa ukuthi oNgqongqoshe bezifunda yibona abafanele
ukuba nesiqiniseko sokuthi ngabe le mibandela yesigungu esibhekelela
isikole iyalandelwa yini noma cha, ngenxa yokuthi yibona abazokwethula
imibiko kuNgqongqoshe kazwelonke. Kuyilungelo futhi loMnyango ukugunyaza
izinhloko zeminyango ekutheni zibe nesiqiniseko ngesimo sezikole
ngokwamagumbi okufundela, othisha kanye nohlelo lwezemfundo kuleso sikole.

Umbiko onjengalona kufanele wedluliselwe kusihlalo wesigungu esibhekela
isikole kanye nothishanhloko ungakafiki umhlaka-30 Mandulo minyaka yonke.
Lo Mthetho uzothuthukisa imfundo kuleli laseNingizimu Afrika, ngakho-ke
kubalulekile ukuthi usetshenziswe yizifundazwe ngokwanele ukuze ube
nempumelelo. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech
follows.)

[Mrs N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Thank you, hon Chairperson. I would like to take
this opportunity to greet the Deputy Minister of Education, and members
from the provinces and the House at large. When one studies and reads
section 5(a) of this Bill, known as the Education Laws Amendment Bill, one
encounters rules and regulations that deal with infrastructure and capacity
in the schools. This section stipulates that the Minister has the right to
give guidelines with regard to infrastructure in the schools – things such
as classrooms, toilets, water, electricity and other important facilities
in the schools.

The Minister may also determine whether a school has sufficient capacity,
the number of teachers in a school, the student-teacher ratio, and the kind
of results produced by the school; and whether the school has sufficient
books as well as other facilities that are necessary for the improvement of
the standard of education in that school. This will have an impact on
elevating the standard of education in this country to an acceptable level.
The Minister also has the authority to ensure that the standard of
education is the same in all the schools of this country.

Section 16(a) deals with the duties and obligations of the school
principal. It is the duty of the principal to represent the Department of
Education on the school governing body and to assist that body. Therefore,
it is he or she who submits written reports to the Department of Education.
The report includes the school’s annual business plan as well as the
improvement of education standards in that school. The report must include
strategies for the improvement of education and how this is going to be
done. There is a prescribed format which must be followed by the school
when submitting the report.

The Department has the right to accept or reject the principal’s report. In
section 58 (c) it is stipulated that it is the duty of the provincial MECs
to ensure that the decisions of the school governing body are implemented,
because they are the ones who will submit reports to the national Minister.
It is also the duty of the department to authorise heads of departments to
ensure that there are sufficient classrooms, teachers and a proper teaching
programme in that school.

Such a report must be submitted to the chairperson of the school governing
body before the 30th of September annually. This Bill will improve the
standard of education in South Africa. It is crucial, therefore, that it
must be used extensively by the provinces for it to be successful. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Ms H LAMOELA: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, special delegates
from the provinces, I believe that our democracy cannot flourish unless
government is faced with vigorous, critical and effective opposition that
is loyal to the constitutional order and promotes the wellbeing of our
country. With regard to the Education Amendment Bill, I aim to do just
that.

This Bill is advancing amendments to the education system in South Africa
that, if enacted, will bring about significant changes in the management of
schools. However, there are major challenges in terms of gaps and a lack of
clarity regarding some of the clauses of the Bill, which should be given
careful thought before the Bill is adopted as law.

Clause 1 – and I hope my understanding is correct – places education almost
entirely in the hands of the Minister of Education and excludes important
organisations in the front line of education delivery from involvement in
policy-making. The only body that the Minister will be required to consult
is the National Education and Training Council, whose membership the
Minister is free to decide on herself.

The DA believes that in education everybody should be regarded as a
stakeholder and one person alone cannot take decisions on educational
matters. Will the Minister not overlook the need for consultation with
affected parties as it is the case in Khutsong, where unnecessary conflict
arose as a result of a lack of consultation with communities?

Regarding norms and standards, this push for uniformity rather than a
standard for what should be attained is concerning, and the DA does not say
that it is not proper to upgrade schools. My concern is that uniformity
must not become the benchmark of what a quality school is when it is really
about the quality of teaching.

It is hard to fathom how standards such as minimum numbers of learners are
going to be enforced, given the inevitable pressure at schools that are
seen as being good.

In respect of the right of principals to testify against the state, the DA
welcomes the removal from the Bill of the section dealing with the
advancement of one employee over another. This would surely be a violation
of the principal’s right to equality before the law. Secondly, this would
infringe upon the right to freedom of speech, would never be accepted in
terms of the labour law, and would surely affect the rights of others to
have disputes resolved fairly.

Regarding dangerous objects and illegal drugs, the DA has minor problems
with the definition of the former, yet it is not always clear that the
department has thought through the practical consequences of having to
train principals and teachers in body-searching and drug testing.

What will happen in the case where teachers are intimidated by pupils? Will
this have any cost implications for the department and will the full
effects of the law apply to learners in the same way that it would apply
outside the school?

I am asking these questions because it would be pointless to have
provisions on drug testing and body-searching for weapons if learners know
that there will be no ultimate sanction.

In conclusion, I think we need a more sophisticated approach to school
governance; one that recognises the enormous range of capacity in our
country, leaves those schools that exercise their powers responsibly alone,
but which demands accountability from those that do not.

Onderrig of geletterdheid is een van ons grootste skatte wat ons aan ons
volk se voortbestaan kan wy omdat niks kundigheid kan vervang nie want dit
het ’n langdurige uitwerking op lewens. Baie dankie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Education or literacy is one of the greatest treasures  we  can  contribute
to the survival of our  nation,  because  nothing  can  take  the  place  of
expertise in terms of long-term benefits in our lives. Thank you very  much.
[Applause.]]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister of Education and hon
members, it is common knowledge that violence in schools is beyond control,
and for that reason the IFP supports the provisions for random searches,
seizures and drug testing of learners. So far society has failed to take
the necessary steps to ensure that learners are protected against the
escalating violence in schools.

These provisions may infringe on human rights but until such time that they
are tested in a court of law, the IFP supports their use to combat school
violence. The IFP strongly believes that decisive and immediate action
needs to be taken to protect learners and ensure that schools are havens
for learning and not for violence.

Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, ubudlova nokungalawuleki kwabafundi ezikoleni
sebudlulele. Miningi iniphefumulo esichithekile, liningi igazi
elichithekile, abazali basosizini ngokufa kwabantwana babo endaweni
yokufunda ebiyaziwa njengendawo ephephile kodwa hhayi manje. Amathishela
awasakhululekile ekufundiseni ngoba awasaphephile.

UMnyango Wezemfundo uthathe igxathu elihle ngomthetho wokusesha abafundi,
uma kusolakala ukuthi kukhona okushaya amanzi futhi ayikho enye indlela
engenziwa ukubhekana nalesi sihlava esihlasele intsha yethu. Kuyoba kuhle
kulokhu kusesha kubhekelwe ukuphepha kukathisha omkhulu. Ubambiswano
luyadingeka phakathi kwabazali, isigungu esibhekele abazali esikoleni,
amathishela kanye nabafundi.

Utshwala, izidakamizwa, konke lokhu kuyincithakalo esikoleni. Abaqaphi
bayadingeka ezikoleni ukulekelela amathishela nabafundi. UMnyango
Wezemfundo kudingeka ufake isandla ngokuthe xaxa noma ukhuphule amasokisi
ngokolimi lwanamhlanje. UMnyango Wezemfundo udinga ukukhuphula amasokisi
ekufakeni imali ethe xaxa ukuze kwazeke ukuthi kufunwe abaqaphi
abangochwepheshe phela, abazoqapha ezikoleni ukuze kuvikeleke udlame,
ubudlova obuvela ngaphandle kwesikole nobuvela ngaphakathi esikoleni.
Ngiyabonga kakhulu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, violence and unruly behaviour among learners at schools
is excessive. Too many people have lost their lives and parents are in
agony due to the death of their children at schools that used to be known
for their safety, but which is no longer the case now. Teachers are no
longer comfortable when they teach because they are not safe.

The Department of Education has taken a firm step to search learners if it
is suspected that something is wrong. There is no other way of dealing with
this ugly situation that is confronting our youth. This searching of
learners would be appreciated if it protects the principal of the school.
Co-operation between parents, teachers and learners is necessary.

Alcohol and drug abuse is destructive in schools. Security is needed at
schools to assist teachers and learners. The Department of Education should
make a significant contribution and pull up their socks in today’s lingo so
that we would be in a position to find professional security personnel who
will look after our schools in order to prevent violence in and outside of
schools. Thank you.]

Ms T J NDIMANDE (Limpopo): Chairperson, I just want to make one point
before I start with the debate. I want to correct and workshop hon Lamoela.
I think she needs help because she doesn’t seem to have read clause 1
properly. She does not understand it. The clause says that the body, as it
stands, is like a mass meeting and that it needs to be made a manageable
body. That is what the Bill says. Nobody is excluded from policy-making in
Education as everybody has the right to make inputs. I hope she understands
that a school governing body, SGB, is a representation of the parents in
that particular body.

Hon Lamoela, please do understand! Do not assume and daydream so as to
mislead the public to score political points and for political gimmick
posturing. I just wanted to remind you.

Chairperson, thank you for the opportunity to share the position of Limpopo
on the Bill that is under consideration by this august House. In doing so,
I would like to reflect on a number of areas that the Bill seeks to
address.

With regard to the proposal that the Minister must prescribe the minimum
norms and standards on schools’ infrastructures, capacity and matters such
as learning and teaching support materials, we believe that these will be
helpful particularly in view of the challenges in these areas.

In provinces such as ours, where there is a serious infrastructure backlog,
it is key for government to come up with measures such as these so that we
could slowly close the gaps. We, therefore, welcome the move to introduce
such measures.

It is also plausible to know that the Bill seeks to tighten the screws
around issues of safety in schools. The country has recently witnessed some
unpleasant trends in terms of isolated cases of violent behaviour in
schools. We believe that the proposal made in the Bill to allow random
searches, seizing and drug testing will, in the long run, put an end to
these unwanted elements in our education system and ultimately society.

Leswi ndzi lavaka ku vula swona hi leswi, xiphiqo lexi nga tsandzaka
matshalatshala lawa ya vulavulaka hi Nawumbisi lowu hileswaku vana va
xikolo phela, a va xavisi swidzidziharisi, a va manyufakichari
swidzidziharisi, swidzidziharisi swi manyufakichariwa hi van’wankumi lava
va lavaka ku fuma hi ku hatlisa. Van’wana va vona i vaaka-tiko va tiko
reri.

Van’wana va vona hi lava va taka hi le handle- switaswifamba  lava va
lavaku na ku kongomisa poyila mfumo lowu wa ANC naswona xikongomelo xa vona
xin’wana i ku lava ku vona tiko leri ri wa hi matsolo. Hikuva ku dlaya vana
lavantsongo i ku dlaya rixaka na poyila tiko ya Afrika Dzonga hikuva rixaka
ra mundzuku i vana lava. Vana va xikolo i dzaka ya tiko leri loko vona va
nga switivi va lava ku hoxa mali aswikhwameni ntsena.

Hi ku vulavula hi ndlela leyi Limpopo yi ri vaaka-tiko hinkwavo va Afrika-
Dzonga a hi yimeni hi milenge hi lwa na swilo leswi hikuva kuri hina hi nga
tikumi hi ri van’wana va vaxavisi, ku lumba vana va hina swibamu na ku ka
hi nga vuli nchumu loko vana na ri na mukwana na mabyalwa lawa ya nga to
onha tiko leri ra Afrika-Dzonga. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs
follows.)

[One of the problems that won’t be addressed by this Bill’s initiatives is
that pupils who sell drugs are not manufacturing them, but these drugs are
being manufactured by rich people who want to maximise their wealth
overnight.

Some of these people are citizens of this country, while others are from
other countries and want to bring disrepute to the ANC-led government and
eventually bring this government to its knees. Destroying our children is
destroying a generation and bringing shame on South Africa, because they
are the future generation. School pupils are our heritage but they do not
realise this because they are only interested in getting money.

Limpopo urges all fellow citizens of South Africa to stand together and
fight against these things, lest we also become drug sellers ourselves. If
we give our children guns, and do not reprimand them when they are in
possession of knives and abusing alcohol, then we would be contributing
towards the destruction of our country South Africa.]

School governance is another area that needs constant reflection and
review. There have been instances where the roles of the principal and
those of the school governing body are confused. It is, therefore,
critical, as the Bill proposes, that the role of the principal be made
clear so as to avoid such challenges.

While we welcome the move to ensure that the SGBs support the head of the
department when dealing with a principal who lacks the capacity to perform
his duties, as a country we need to do more in terms of capacitating these
important bodies to function independently of principals. However, this
should not be misconstrued to mean the creation of adversarial
relationships between principals and the SGBs, but be a way of enhancing
the performance of SGBs.

In some schools, for example, the SGBs are used to endorse the decisions of
the principals. We also welcome the move to introduce a system where the
heads of the department are given the responsibility to identify
underperforming schools and come up with measures to address such
underperformance. These will enable us to turn things around, particularly
in schools that are known to be consistently performing poorly.

It would be critical for us in provinces to ensure that interventions to
address the identified weaknesses are devised and implemented accordingly.
We are particularly pleased with the move to broaden the scope of the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS, to include students who are
enrolled at Further Education and Training colleges. We believe that this
will help our youths from poor backgrounds to have access to post-matric
education. This will also help improve our skills base as we are likely to
see an increase in the enrolment at FET colleges.

As a province we are fully in support of the Bill that is under
consideration. Thank you.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, if my memory serves me
well, I put a question to our national Minister of Education sometime last
year about violence in our schools. We also had as the select committee an
engagement with the department dealing with this particular matter.

I am almost 100% sure that as a result of the questions and the engagement
with the department and the select committee these are the products that we
have here with us today in this august House. What I am trying to say is
that the select committee is doing its job and it’s a job well done.
[Applause.] If we can influence our executive to take a certain route, it’s
our responsibility to do so.

In the recent past we have seen many incidents reported in the media about
violence and drugs in our schools. To this end, we have also seen the
national department engaging in research and the formulation of a national
response to violence in our schools.

However, all this means nothing if we do not equip the Minister with the
proper tools to successfully deal with this particular problem. No matter
how much we speak about the issue of the inadequacies of addressing the
symptoms, we have to agree that removing weapons and drugs from learners
would definitely go a long way to ensuring that it is removed from society.


Because our children spend a lot of time in schools, they grow up in a
culture of certain things becoming acceptable because it happens at school.
Now if we take that principle and remove these dangerous weapons and drugs
from our schools, we would be ensuring that our children get used to coming
to a school that is in a very safe and drug-free environment. Hopefully,
this would culminate into the broader society being free of all these
evils.

Chairperson, it only makes sense that searches at schools are random and
unannounced. We must remember that in many cases these dangerous weapons
and drugs are not brought into our schools by adults or criminals, but by
some of our own learners. And I think, in my humble opinion, that the
legislation before us today makes ample provision to ensure that these
searches are conducted and recorded in a sensitive and, of course, in a
responsible manner.

Hon Minister, the idea of having searches does not necessarily mean that
our educators must report cases to the police. We would not like to see a
situation whereby our educators are involved in court cases everyday of
their lives. The educators are there to educate. Their responsibility would
be to inform the police who would then come and collect those drugs,
weapons or whatever it may be and the Criminal Procedure Act can kick in
after that.

Hon Minister, the issue of underperforming schools weigh heavily on my
heart. But I know that you are also extremely worried about it, and I trust
that this legislation would further equip you and your department to look
into the situation and that you would interrogate this issue thoroughly.

I just feel that South Africa has one training manual for educators and one
curriculum for learners. So why should we then have two completely
different outcomes, sometimes at different schools in the same community?

Lastly, I would like to touch on the issue of the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme fund. Though I am happy with the current performance
of the fund, I feel that more needs to be done to ensure that more
prospective students have access to these funds, even if we have to look at
lowering some of the criteria. It is indeed so that the student fund is
there to assist the poorest of the poor. Recently, the Chancellor of the
University of Venda, Cyril Ramaphosa, embarked on a campaign to raise R1
billion for that university. This has made me realise that we need to do
more to make our institutes of higher learning more financially viable and
less dependent on government funding. That way, Minister, we would be able
to put more money into programmes like the National Student Financial Aid
Scheme fund and to ensure greater opportunity for our children to further
their education.

Chairperson, with those few words, the Northern Cape and the ANC support
this Bill. Enkosi. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, may I express my gratitude
to all the esteemed members for their contributions. Indeed, Ms Lamoela, we
fully subscribe to democracy and democratic practices. And democracy is
alive and well, given the fact that in the context of this Bill alone,
three amendments had been proposed and they’ve been accepted. Which means
that this House is certainly not just a rubber stamp; it makes its
contribution. Your concerns have been raised and indeed are taken note of.
So, I think our democracy is working extremely well.

But, I would like to deal with some of the issues that you have raised a
short while ago. I thank the hon chairperson, Mr Tolo, for his contribution
and for his leadership in the select committee. Indeed he should take pride
in the fact that the select committee had all the types of recreation as
one of the norms, and that this House had proposed sports to be included in
it, and it is one of the norms that we have included as a result of the
suggestion.

He has alluded to an important area of challenge that we face in this
country, that is of infrastructure. Quite clearly, our historically black
schools are underresourced, have poor infrastructure and have no
appropriate sanitation. That is something that we have to address.
Otherwise we would not have parity, and we would not be able to create the
environment that is conducive for proper and effective learning.

You may well be aware of the fact that the National Education
Infrastructure Management System has been completed in terms of doing a
survey of all our schools. Today, we have visual and aerial photographs of
all our schools. We can see how many toilets there are; whether they are
receiving water from the municipality or from a borehole. We can say what a
classroom looks like, whether it has ceilings or not, and the survey of all
schools in the country has been concluded.

This enabled the department to plan very well and we persuaded the Treasury
to say that this is one matter that indeed requires more attention. And, I
think, we will certainly get the support of the Treasury in this regard.

Now, just to provide you with some statistics, Mr Tolo, given the fact that
you’ve raised the issue of infrastructure, the number of overcrowded
schools has fallen from 51% in 1999 to 24% in 2006, which is a remarkably
good achievement.

The number of schools with electricity has increased from 11 174 to 20 713
– almost a 100% increase in 10 years. The number of schools without water
has fallen from 8 823 in 1996 to 3 152 in 2006. The number of schools
without on-site toilets has fallen from 3 265 in 1996 to 1 532 in 2006.
That means we’ve made enormous strides. Yet, much more has to be done and
we would indeed take your suggestions very seriously.

Ms Lamoela, you’ve raised certain aspects and, indeed, in the context of
democracy it is important that you receive a response. And we do so in a
very dignified way, mindful of the fact that the voices of everybody in all
political parties are important to our democracy.
You’ve raised a concern which is a legitimate concern, but you would not
want to lock the Minister into only one association called the NEPC. What
this amendment does is precisely that; it allows the Minister to establish
appropriate bodies to advise the Minister. So, whilst consultation is
taking place with the ELRC, the association of governing bodies and various
other forums, the Minister still has the prerogative not to consult and
confirm with anybody, but to establish appropriate bodies as and when
required. So, what the Bill does is a response to your concern. In fact,
you are accusing us of not responding and being restrictive. In fact, we
are not parochial, we are much broader.

Now, to raise the issue of Khutsong in the context of management is really
a poor attempt at not being able to see the wood for the trees. You
basically have to understand that the turbulence has nothing to do with
education. The turbulence has a political background, and it is precisely
because of the lack of democracy and a failure to comply with the
provisions of the SA Schools Act that we have what we had in Khutsong in
relation to our schools.

I think what we should do – and if indeed we are patriotic as we ought to
be – we should congratulate the MEC for Education in the North West for
saying that notwithstanding the disadvantages, notwithstanding the
turbulence and the harassment and the intimidation, he took it upon
himself, with the support of the national department, to take those
children who are writing their year-end examination to another place and
provide special tuition and extra resources to enable them to write the
matric examination; and, indeed, the community has subsequently celebrated
the situation. That is what our democracy is all about. How are we going to
be more innovative about it rather than talking about political turbulence
and associating it with poor management in our schools?

With regard to the issue of the deletion of clause 16, we certainly support
the view, and we certainly believe that we should be mindful at all times
of being consistent with the Constitution.

But, interestingly enough, what this Bill does, and which has been
supported by everybody, is that it clearly indicates that the principal
acts on behalf of the head of department; and also that the principal must
act in a way that is consistent with the policy, the law and the directive
of the head of department. If we understand that, then we understand the
role of the principal in a school as an extension who derives his or her
authority from the head of department. And I think that would assist in
clarifying the roles of principals in schools; and certainly, as long as
that is in compliance with policy and directives, we will have no
difficulty whatsoever. I do believe that as a result of these amendments,
there would be a dramatic reduction in frivolous litigation that has
occurred prior to this.

With regard to the question of: What if teachers are too afraid? Are we
going to accept the excuse tomorrow that teachers, because of certain
postures of learners being somewhat aggressive, would now refuse to go to
school unless certain kinds of counselling are provided and/or that these
learners are removed from schools? You have to draw a fine line. I don’t
think our teachers are timid. I think we must give them more credit. They
certainly have the ability to search their own children at home. Certainly,
they could do so in a dignified way.

What Mr Sulliman is saying, is correct. We always said – and the Bill makes
it very clear, Mr Sulliman – that it has to be consistent with the dignity
and the right to privacy of the learner and that the best interest of the
learner must always be protected. So, there is nothing wrong with training,
but I don’t think we need years for the training. It is merely to say what
are the guidelines, and we will establish the guidelines regarding the
search.

But beyond that, Ms Lamoela, if a person is known to be an aggressive
person, the principal has three choices. He or she could call the police to
carry out the search or the arrest if a person is found in possession of
that particular item; or could use safety measures so that you don’t have a
random search. The principal can also take it upon himself or herself to do
that without even conferring that responsibility to the teacher, or to do
it as one would expect it to occur in the normal course or in terms of this
amendment. So, there are three choices available.

Mr Sulliman, let me assure you that this Act here and these amendments are
not going to end those criminal prosecutions. In fact, the law is very
clear. It says in subsection 14: ``No criminal proceedings may be
instituted by the school against a learner in respect of who ...’’. Which
means the intention here is not to become a police officer in the school,
but merely to maintain discipline and to ensure that, where necessary,
appropriate disciplinary proceedings are to be instituted.

However, if the principal finds a dangerous weapon or drugs in the
possession of a learner, he or she is obliged to take it and hand it over
to the police. The principal would then take that dangerous weapon or drug
to the police so that the school could not be accused of being in
possession of a dangerous weapon or an unlawful drug. So, I want to give
you that assurance and, indeed, that is the intention of this legislation.

With regard to school governance, you can’t have a law for historically
white schools and a law for historically black schools. In fact, that is
what you are doing. Because of the resources and the experience and the
advantages, generally you would find that the former model C schools tend
to function better than other schools which are more challenged in terms of
numbers, teacher development and resources.

What we are saying when we talk about the performance plan is that, whether
you are in a good school or a bad school, you have to submit it because
that’s part of accountability – not only to the head of department, but
also to the governing body – so that they have a sense of what is
transpiring. As much as the better and the good schools can be improved,
the mediocre schools can also be improved. It is for the benefit of
everybody, and I don’t think we should discriminate or distinguish among
schools.

I would like to thank Ma Vilakazi who always expresses herself about
creating safe environments. She has been doing that consistently as a
member of the House. Ms Ndimande’s comments have certainly been helpful. I
think by and large all members, including Ms Lamoela, made useful
contributions to the debate. We will certainly note all the concerns that
have been raised. Thank you once again for contributing to this Bill, which
I believe will be a reality very soon. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! I shall now put the question.
The question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with
in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their province’s
vote.

I shall now allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of
vote in terms of Rule 71, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: The Eastern Cape supports the Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat ondersteun. [Free State supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?
Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo hai seketela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Mr N J MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): Mpumalanga supports the Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun die wetsontwerp. [Northern Cape
supports the Bill.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West supports the Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces voted in favour.
I, therefore, declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF NCOP ON INTERGOVERNMENTAL SUMMIT AND TENTH
                                 ANNIVERSARY

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, thank you very much for giving me
the opportunity to present to the Council the report, this afternoon, on
our 10th anniversary activities that took place in May 2007. It is an
honour for me to table this report in this House.

As you are aware, Chairperson and hon members, 2007 has been a crucial year
for us as we took stock of what we have done as an institution to live up
to our mandate for the first 10 years of our existence. To this end, we
held an intergovernmental summit in May, where we looked, among other
things, at the NCOP’s role and challenges in the following areas:
intergovernmental fiscal relations; social transformation, with particular
focus on education, health and social development; socioeconomic
development, with focus on small business development and integrated
planning; institutional and legislative matters; and, the relationship with
the media.

The report before us this afternoon, published in the Announcements,
Tablings and Committee reports of 12 November 2007, captures presentations
and deliberations on the above issues. It also contains the recommendations
that were made by delegates to the summit on that day.

We owe it to all the different role-players and stakeholders represented at
the summit to do something about these recommendations. As presiding
officers we have already prepared a 14-page action document that lists what
we must do to respond to each of the recommendations that relates to the
NCOP.

The document was made available to members in the course of last week. You
should be having this document in your hands.

If we adopt the report today, with the recommendations, we will channel the
different tasks to the different structures and office bearers identified
in the document for follow-up action that we need to take as this House.

For instance, there are recommendations that we re-look the composition and
the size of this House, the NCOP, whether 54 permanent members are
sufficient to serve this House. As far as I am concerned, I don’t think
they are; I think we need to increase the number of permanent delegates in
this House. [Applause.]

The role of the rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP is one other issue
that we have to look at. In terms of the Rules and the Constitution, we
keep on electing the second, that is the rotating, deputy chairperson with
absolutely no powers. And what is happening in this regard is that once
this person is elected, he or she leaves the House and thereafter doesn’t
know what is happening in the NCOP. The following year we go on and elect
another person.

We need to design, if we agree that this role should continue, certain
powers and functions so that the rotating deputy chairperson can fully
participate in the work of the Council and guide it wherever possible. Of
course, we will take this up with the relevant structures.

I can cite many other issues that were discussed in this summit. For
example, there are issues relating to policy-making and budgeting for
concurrent functions that the Minister of Finance has raised with us on at
least three occasions, as well as at the summit.

These have been referred to the Chairperson of the Select Committee on
Finance, hon Tutu Ralane, who is sitting there, to advise us on how we
should proceed on them. I guess that they will look at the issues raised by
the Minister and advise the House very urgently, because we would like to
act on those things as soon as we come back next year.

We cannot sit on these things because, I believe, these are very important
facts that the Minister has raised in terms of division of revenue, as well
as how we deal with the fiscal issues relating to the provinces. We need to
make sure that we attend to all the recommendations made at the summit,
except those that are not within the scope of our mandate.

There are, of course, recommendations that deal with issues such as the co-
ordination of our oversight work, which is very important, and on which we
took certain positions at the programming workshop that took place in 2006.
We need to revisit the workshop report in order to remind ourselves of what
we said at the workshop, while at the same time continuing to monitor our
performance in this regard.

I want to repeat again, before this Council, that the bulk of the work of
passing legislation has been tremendously reduced at national Parliament.
Therefore, it is important for parliamentarians to go back to the people on
the ground and ask whether the laws that we have passed are relevant and
effective in terms of making the lives of our people better. That is where
our major focus, as permanent delegates and provinces, has got to be. I
think that is a programme that we need to shape up, from the coming year
onwards. In the decade to come, we have to look at those laws and say
whether their implementation has really had a meaningful impact on the
lives of the people on the ground or not.

From time to time we will report back to this House on the progress we are
making with some of the issues raised at the summit, including, of course,
the issues you will be raising again this afternoon when you debate this
report.
Now, let me touch briefly on the institutional memory projects. You will
remember that we did two institutional memories. Both of these projects
were launched yesterday, that is the documentary that you viewed last night
and the launch of the book. The most beautiful thing about these two
projects is that the documentary will remain in the NCOP, in order to help
the new generation of leadership and members of this House to understand
better what the NCOP is all about. This would help them not to start from
scratch, but to build on the work that has been done by the current
leadership and members of this House.

Some of us, when we took up our positions in this institution, could not
find anything documented that we could use for reference purposes and which
we could build on. However, these two projects are very important for us to
leave as an institutional memory for generations to come.

I must announce in this House that I am very disappointed that despite the
fact that we invited all the members of this august House to participate in
the ceremony last night, a lot of you did not turn up. It was really
disappointing. You had a sitting earlier and the buses were just outside,
ready to ferry you to the function, and so you had no excuse not to be
there.

I was actually very surprised that the function was well attended by people
from outside, NGOs and ordinary people on the ground, who actually made an
impact in terms of debating the topics under discussion last night.
However, I also wish to thank those people from the Council who attended.

I think that, as Members of Parliament, we need to pause and think hard
about the fact that when we take an initiative like this, we have to do
that with all the seriousness required, and not be unsure of what we are
doing or leave our work half-done.

As you are aware, hon members, the book itself is incomplete as there are
many things that we have to include in it, and we have consulted with the
steering committee thereon. The whole book will be completed around mid-
March in 2008. We will distribute it to all the stakeholders once it is
printed. We are looking for an independent person to draft it very quickly
for us.

Secondly, I want to talk about the question of the assessment of the Taking
Parliament to the People programme. We want to assess this programme, as we
had agreed. We have finished visiting the nine provinces. Now what we
should do as this House is to pause and ask: What impact has this programme
had on our provinces, particularly in terms of promoting public
participation by and education of our people on the ground?

We are now reviewing this programme, not with a view to stopping it, but
with a view to asking what we can do to make it work even better than what
it is at the moment.

We will use the results of this study, which will include interviews with
all the key stakeholders and the role-players on the ground, to enhance
this programme. We do not want to abolish it, as I have said, but to
enhance it.

Accordingly, we will interview Premiers in the different provinces,
Speakers of provincial legislatures, Members of Parliament, members of
provincial legislatures and the executive. All of these will be expected to
take part in this study. At the end of the day, we would like to see the
study really enhance this particular programme.

We want you to critique the programme and make suggestions on how we can
improve it so that it benefits our people even more as we continue with it.

I want to thank you all, as I present this report, and I want to table some
of the recommendations that arose from the summit. I am tabling the
document, which we will call an action plan once you have adopted it. Thank
you very much, hon members. [Applause.]

Mr S MAZOSIWE (Eastern Cape): Deputy Chairperson, first of all, I would
like to say that I was part of the proceedings last night and was happy to
have been at that event. It opened my eyes more, to the need to intensify
the work of the NCOP. I would also like to congratulate the Chairperson of
the NCOP for presenting this report. I read it timeously. I feel proud to
be taking part in this debate today, in celebrating 10 years of the NCOP’s
existence.

As we share experiences, we should always bear in mind that this is a
dynamic process and new ideas will continue to enhance the work of the
NCOP. Today, we are talking about increasing the numbers of the NCOP. At
its inception, I recall, in 1997, there was no mention of the word
oversight, Taking Parliament to the People, Provincial Weeks and many more
innovations that have characterised the NCOP.

The budget process of the NCOP has also taken a much desired leap forward –
that of taking the budget to the people. This process is now beginning to
bear fruit in the Eastern Cape in that all stakeholders are now able to
engage in critical issues affecting service delivery. The Great Kei and the
Butterworth Municipalities’ deficient capacities are now being addressed by
both provincial and the national government because of the NCOP’s
intervention.

There are other examples I could make, but because of a lack of time, I am
not able to do so. Another key achievement in the NCOP is engaging in
dialogue with provinces who, in the past, applied punitive measures against
truant municipalities, to concentrate on one of the most important roles
provinces can play – capacitating municipalities. Again, I would also like
to give an example of Butterworth. Hon members would recall that in 1998
there was a huge problem between the province and the Butterworth
Municipality then, which had a number of administrative and political
problems. The province intervened by instituting section 139, but the NCOP
debated the matter extensively. We were called from time to time to come
here and debate the issues.

You would recall the hon Mohammed Bhabha – I am not sure if the hon Surty
was there at the time, but I vividly recall hon Bhabha and Mr Ngcuka at the
time – who were involved and engaged in persuading the province to
capacitate and concentrate on section 158 of the Constitution, and to make
sure that the Butterworth Municipality, at the time, was really functioning
properly administratively. This is the route we ultimately took, and as we
speak now, things are not as they used to be in that municipality.

The Provincial Weeks provide an opportunity for permanent delegates to get
to grips with service delivery issues in various municipalities; to
interact with Premiers, MECs, Speakers, MPLs and councillors in a more
meaningful way and thus solving bottlenecks.

However, the biggest challenge continues to be the ability of the NCOP to
bring government departments to account with clear timeframes. I am not
talking about the adversarial process that we find sometimes. I am talking
about setting clear timeframes on programmes that government itself
promised to deliver to our people.

When we monitor as the NCOP, we really need to be stronger and make sure
that there are answers given to those communities who have problems. It is
something that I would like to see happening in the NCOP timeously, so that
at the end of the day, there is delivery on the ground. The reason why the
NCOP is taking parliament to the people and engaging in Provincial Weeks is
to ensure that service delivery, at the end of the day, is enhanced.

That is why we need to really make sure that this particular area is
strengthened in the NCOP. For example, in the next round of Provincial Week
MPs, should be able to report back fully on the issues raised in the
previous visit. In the Nelson Mandela Metropole, for example, we were faced
with that dilemma when the NCOP permanent delegates visited that area. For
the second time in August 2007, we were asked what has happened to the
questions which were referred to national Ministers, and to provincial
MECs. At the time, not all the answers could be given in that particular
meeting.

Therefore, I am saying again that we need to strengthen this area and make
sure that when we visit again, whether it is next year or some other time,
there are adequate answers on all those issues that they have raised. The
Eastern Cape legislature has attempted to engage with the South African
Local Government Association, Salga, over the past few years. Both parties
have signed a memorandum of understanding regarding co-operation on matters
of mutual interest. This marriage still exists, though it is in a dormant
state.
I must say that I was happy when the issue was raised last night as well,
so that this forum, the NCOP, takes up the matter with Salga nationally –
as well as perhaps trying to facilitate the same debates in provinces – for
it to participate in our debate in terms of the Constitution. We cannot sit
back and say that we are satisfied, because we are not. Our brothers are
still not fully participating in the process.

We know for a fact that, in the past, they used to participate in the NA
and in the budget processes, but that has also declined a bit. In the
provinces again, they are not really participating, except in the budget
process. As I said, we have attempted to have meetings with them, but
because of technical problems on their side, our meetings have always been
cancelled at the last moment.

I hope the NCOP will deal with this matter, whilst at the provincial level,
we will also continue to pursue the matter. I am raising this to highlight
the need to debate the matter and come to an amicable solution, because I
believe that, as the old saying goes, unity is strength. Halala! NCOP
Halala! [Applause.]

Mr Y BHAMJEE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, thank you for inviting me to
participate in this debate. As the Chairperson said earlier, this is indeed
a work in progress and we welcome the report. It touches on a significant
number of issues that we believe can only empower and advance the quality
of oversight as far as the NCOP is concerned.

However, whilst saying that, it must also be recognised that the status of
the NCOP needs to be advanced and, secondly, the way we go about conducting
our oversight role also needs to be advanced. Those are our challenges,
because for the last 10 years, we have been focusing largely on
transforming the legislative process that we inherited from the apartheid
regime.

The movement towards playing our oversight role has been slow, and even our
colleagues at the National Assembly find that it is indeed challenging.
Effectively, all Members of Parliament and legislatures need to understand
that our main responsibility is to ensure that every cent is accounted for
and that the plans and objectives as determined by the strategic plan are
adequately reported in the annual reports and that we play our oversight
role of holding Ministers and their respective departments accountable. If
we don’t do that then, effectively, we are not exercising the powers that
are granted to us in the Constitution and, in terms of the principle of co-
operative governance, we will indeed be found wanting.

On 13 September 2007, when the Minister of Finance addressed the KwaZulu-
Natal legislature on the provincial budget and expenditure review, he
advanced the cause of the principle of intergovernmental relations and co-
operative governance as enshrined in the Constitution. This was indeed a
historic and rich experience that involved the participation of role-
players across three spheres of government, which suggested to all that the
national Minister and Treasury, in general, are indeed touchable.

This interaction, at one level, advanced the cause of the intergovernmental
relations summit that brought together a range of stakeholders, which
included members of legislatures and executive branches of government from
national, provincial and local government, as well as nongovernmental
organisations. The participation of NGOs suggests that there is a role for
all concerned citizens to assist towards enhancing the principle of co-
operative governance, in particular the media.

I emphasise in particular the media largely because there is a general
understanding and appreciation among people, who know no better, that the
NCOP is a subordinate House of Parliament. We need to understand fully that
a lot of work needs to be done by the NCOP to correct that
misunderstanding. Nobody else is going to do that. Only those who are
committed to the NCOP will do that, because you understand what it is. I
served in the National Assembly and I know for a fact that even our
colleagues there do not fully grasp and understand the value and quality of
work that you are doing. I also understand that our colleagues in
legislatures, and as legislators, do not fully grasp the work that the NCOP
is doing and is capable of doing in terms of oversight and advancing the
principle of co-operative governance, because that is the core of our
Constitution.

The NCOP’s Intergovernmental Summit emphasised that the core responsibility
of the NCOP is to critically monitor intergovernmental relations and
thereby entrench the principle of co-operative governance across three
spheres of government, as mandated by the Constitution. There is no other
House or institution in South Africa that empowers a single institute to do
that. It empowers the NCOP to do that.

We know for a fact it is the NCOP that plays an oversight role on
provincial expenditure and outcomes, and it offers us an opportunity to
measure the performance of our respective provinces as per budget
allocations. We can start comparing.

For example, KwaZulu-Natal has the largest education budget compared to
other provinces. The province spent R56 billion on school education between
2003-04 and 2006-07. Over this period, 4 055 classrooms were built. The
number of learners at primary and secondary schools increased to 64 226.

While these are undisputed facts, we as legislators need to assess and
evaluate whether this delivery represented value for money. Given the
limited professional resources available to us, and equally limited
resources of the NCOP, we need to seriously address the concern whether we
are empowered to meaningfully fulfil our responsibility of oversight. It is
easy for us to talk about oversight, but if resources are not available ...

When the Ministers come before us, they normally have a team of experts
behind them, each qualified to talk about their respective programmes. We
have one researcher perhaps, if we are lucky, and that researcher is
serving two or three other committees. Even if that researcher is
dedicated, the task of today’s monitoring process and oversight is so huge
and so colossal that you need a lot of skills, expertise and backup
support.

The challenge facing parliamentarians, not only in South Africa but
internationally, is to ensure that there are enough resources available so
that we can play our oversight role. Failing that, we remain glorified
social workers. We need to ensure that we move out of this, friends,
comrades and colleagues. It is a challenge, and I am putting myself in the
same category. I do feel that at times I am found wanting. I have the
scope, I have the commitment, but I do not have the resources. So, it is a
challenge.

The other thing that you need to focus on, colleagues, is the fact that
each year when we are presenting our speeches, we will quote the President
and, at the same time, we will also quote the Minister of Finance and we
will then identify clearly what our priorities are.
For example, we would argue collectively that, and I am sure all of us
would put this in our speeches, accelerating economic growth and the rate
of investment is our first priority. Priority two would be creating work
opportunities. Priority three would be investing in community services and
growing the social wage. Four would be improving the effectiveness of the
state, including combating crime and promoting a service-orientated
culture. Lastly, another priority would be building regional and
international partnerships for growth and development.

When we are echoing these priorities, we need to move one step further and
ask how the departments are including these priorities in terms of their
strategic plans. Also, how are they reporting on them and are they
measurable? That is what the hon Minister said to us in the report, if you
look at it, and one of the recommendations is on page seven:


  The NCOP must, among other things, debate at length the following issues:
  One, policy-making and budgeting for concurrent functions; the assignment
  of powers and functions and oversight and accountability...

On what do we play our oversight and what do we account on? To grasp that,
we need to know what we are going to account on. If you do not know what
you are going to account on, then what are you going to account on? Also,
who accounts and why do we account? That has come out, but is not explicit.
It is implied that these are the things that you must do in your
recommendations.

As I said earlier, this is work in progress and it is extremely important
that we take this further: Oversight on how public resources are used to
champion the cause of a better life and in terms of the priorities. Is
there value for money? How do you assess value for money? Do we have the
expertise? At least, do we have the common sense to go to the strategic
plan and assess the annual report and take it programme by programme.
Sometimes you will sit for 10 or 15 minutes, or half an hour or probably
two hours and say the work is done, we have played our oversight role on
the department. However, if we are serious, we will have the department
sitting in front of us all day, for probably two or three days. How long
does it take them to put a strategic plan in place? How long does it take
them to put targets in place and how long does it take them to measure
those targets? So, how are we then going to assess, in the space of half an
hour, whether they are reaching their targets or not? These are the
challenges that are facing us.

We need to be constructive and very honest on monitoring what we have been
mandated to do. Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to share
my thoughts with you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr H E MATEME (Limpopo): Hon Chairperson, hon members, all protocol
observed, we would like to commend this institution for having the bravery
to look into itself. That is highly commendable. Before I make an input as
the province mandated me to do, I would really like to look a bit at the
question of resources, strategic plans, and so forth – at how fresh and
current they are.

With regard to resources, I do not think that as government we can
confidently say that we do not have enough resources – because come 31
March, there will be lots of roll-overs and more. Right in the first
quarter, through reports from departments, you can already see that in
March these people are going have a problem or an inability to spend money.
So, I think that this House should also tackle this challenge of the
inability to spend.

We appreciate this opportunity to debate on the important subject of
intergovernmental relations. It is rather a challenging subject. But for
the purpose of the debate, I have considered to just focus on two critical
principles – integrated development and co-operative governance.

The principle of intergovernmental relations is entrenched in the
Constitution, as speakers before me have indicated. All spheres of
government and all organs within each sphere need to do or consider to do
the following: respect the constitutional status, institutions, powers and
functions of governments in other spheres; not assume any powers or
functions except for those conferred to a particular sphere by the
Constitution; exercise powers and perform functions in a manner that does
not encroach on geographical, functional or institutional integrity of
government in any sphere.

I may be interpreted to be creating no-go areas. But positively
interpreted, we are saying let there be teamwork. I think that all the
three spheres have a responsibility to exercise oversight.

The principle of the separation of powers and co-operative governance is
based on the understanding that an institution that is designed to deliver
services – the implementing arm of government – cannot monitor and assess
the quality and pace of such delivery. We are referring here to the
executing arm. They cannot be the players and referees at the same time.
So, our good, world-renowned Constitution has made provision that there
will be implementers and referees. Implementers are players. In the same
breath, the legislative institution cannot make laws and be responsible for
the interpretation of the constitutionality of the laws. That is why then
we have the legal side of our government.

Inherent in the whole system of the intergovernmental relations is a need
for an institution to exercise oversight over the implementing agent.
Speakers before me have correctly identified the NCOP as such an
institution. The action of the NCOP on the ground is beginning to produce
results. The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa places this
mandate on the legislative arm of state. The exercise of oversight in the
country, to a large extent, has been ushered in by our democratic
government. Since then, legislatures have been exploring different models
through which oversight could be exercised effectively. One speaker said
that when we started, this word “oversight” was not even there in our
vocabulary. But now as our democracy matures, this word features more and
more and robust debates are emerging from it.

There are terms, by legislatures, to explore different models through which
oversight can be exercised. I think it has proved to be an exercise worth
its while. Consider the noise around the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts – Scopa – and the noise around all portfolio committees; those
that really carry out the mandate as given to them by the Constitution and
the Public Finance Management Act. So, this House is very much on the right
track.

We often hear that the journey of a thousand miles starts with the first
step. If in our context a start means a year, we have already taken 13
meaningful steps towards the thousand miles. Up to now, delivery has not
been happening in our communities. If it is not happening, it is not
because of a lack of good policies or lack of appropriate institutional
arrangements. It is also not because of a lack of warm bodies in the
offices or lack of funds – I have already alluded to the issue of roll-
overs.

With good policies in place, a sizeable number of warm bodies in our
offices and other requirements also in place, it is inexcusable for certain
sectors in our communities, up to this day, except for the vertical
programmes – pensions, free health services, etc. – to have not yet
experienced any change for the better. I have farmworkers in mind here.
Farmworkers are from such communities.

I agree with the draft of the NCOP Intergovernmental Relations Summit
report that: firstly, Integrated Development Plans, IDPs, should reflect
the synergy and alignment of plans of all spheres of government – that is
very, very critical; and secondly, there should be an alignment between the
financial years of the three spheres of government so that when we conduct
monitoring, we can move in steps. But if one financial year ends in March
and the other in July, then the synergy is compromised.

We also agree with the report that various pieces of legislation should be
reviewed per impact they are making on communities. A case in point here is
the Extension of Security of Tenure Act and the Communal Land Rights Act. I
work greatly with agriculture. These are Acts about agriculture. We have an
old lady who passed on in January. But because of the flaws in our own
legislation, we only managed to bury this lady in October. I think it is a
sad day for democracy if that is going to continue to be the way things
happen.

The civil service must also show an appreciable movement forward in
implementing our programmes. Excuses like learning curve and lack of skill
no longer convince anybody because our civil service is employed on merit.

The sooner we have a single service, the better. We have learnt that it was
being worked on. But really the sooner we have one machinery that
implements the policies of this government, the better. We, therefore,
submit that the NCOP should also tackle this particular challenge, because
it creates a flaw in our effectiveness.

Chairperson, I would further propose that this sitting here today be dubbed
the launch of operation “skop en donder” – the constructive way. We can
also dub it operation “shosholoza”. When we ask the civil service to jump,
they should only ask us how high and not why.

Materially, South Africa can rise to the basic expectations of its people.
Within 13 years, in some aspects, we have made much more progress than what
some governments before us could do within hundreds of years.

Internal monitoring systems of the departments must also be strengthened. I
thank you. [Applause.] [Time expired.]

Mr N J MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): Hon Chairperson, members of the NCOP and the
distinguished guests, it is a great honour for me to be accorded this
opportunity to participate in this debate on the consideration of the NCOP
Intergovernmental Summit and, of course, the Tenth Anniversary Report.

One would like to start by saying that the leadership of the NCOP,
particularly the Chairperson, together with the NCOP as a whole, need to be
congratulated on the fact that once you start reviewing what you have been
doing and identifying the gaps, you are surely going in the right
direction. There’s nothing that is cast in stone which is a formula that
you have to follow. You will need to review it now and again and there are
gaps which need to be closed.

Hon Chairperson, the South African Constitution divides government into
three spheres which execute delivery of service to the same community; what
the national, the provincial or even local government must do is done to
the same person. You don’t have a territory which is separate from local
government which is called the province alone or national alone. It is the
same Mrs Gumede to whom you must deliver service.

Now, that already indicates that there should be integrated government
relations. You cannot work in silos because you are going to duplicate the
job to the same person. The fact that we have Minmec Forums and the
President’s Co-ordinating Council at national level already provides the
basis for integrated government programmes at both national and provincial
levels.
Taking Mpumalanga as a case in point, we have the Premier’s Co-ordinating
Forum which comprises the Premier as chairperson, MECs, executive mayors,
municipal managers, the SA Local Government Association chief executive
officer, and his or her deputy, the Provincial Director-General and the
head of department for local government.

The main focus of this forum is to ensure the integration of the broad
planning of the provincial government with the municipal integrated
development programmes, commonly known as IDPs. The main challenges
encountered by the provincial government, and those encountered by the
municipalities in the province, are expected to be addressed at this level.

We also have various forums for provincial MECs at which the particular MEC
meets with councillors entrusted with the functions pertaining to the MEC’s
department. These forums are suppose to check the co-ordination of
programmes of local government and those of the provincial government so
that, for example, you do not have the provincial department of health
building a clinic or hospital in a municipal area without prior or proper
consultation with the municipality in question which is responsible for
providing basic logistics and commodities such as water, sanitation and
other related matters.

Although this is happening in our province, there is room for improvement
in that, at budgetary level, there should be strong co-ordination between
municipalities and provincial departments. You see, if these people are
budgeting differently and everyone is the boss of a particular department
or level, you have a problem in service delivery. You sometimes get a
feeling that things are not happening as they should, because of the
budgetary inequities which you find.

Another important form of co-ordination is among provincial departments
themselves. Normally, we have a provincial lekgotla in which departments
outline their plans for the coming year and in which all departments
participate under the leadership of the Premier. If this is strictly
adhered to, there will be no room for one department to create a
developmental project in isolation without bringing other departments on
board.

Here one can think in terms of housing settlement development by the
departments of local government and housing without involving the
department of education, which itself must build schools in the same
settlement. Another example is if the housing department does not consult
with the departments of health and social services in planning the
construction of health facilities in the same settlement, you will
encounter problems. Again, if the department of housing plans settlements,
but fails to consult or work together with the department of roads and
public transport, you will have no access road to that settlement.

Now, looking at this scenario, one is convinced that there are integrated
governmental relations in our province but there are greater things that
still need to be done. You need improvement, for instance, at the level of
oversight, because I think there is still a problem there. You find that
there’s a programme of the NCOP for oversight in the province. The
provincial legislature also has its own programme which is parallel to this
or they need to be adjusted in one way or another.

I think, in the review, something needs to be done to deal with co-
ordination, because if you don’t co-ordinate oversight – even if the
oversight is good – by the province or by the NCOP, you will be having
problems and the follow-up will be a problem. So co-ordination, to me, is
the most important thing and is paramount in service delivery. Otherwise,
it will be a talk show week.

We will all leave the programmes for the province and go to the Taking
Parliament to the People programme by the NCOP, and then, from there, you
go back and there are no follow-ups, or the province is following a
parallel programme. So, co-ordination in the oversight is important and I
would recommend that some mechanisms be found.

Of course, another area has already been mentioned by my colleague from
Limpopo. You see, to have one level having the financial year ending at a
different time than the other levels, while we have a unitary or a single
government or a single legislature which is national, is a problem. You
either find the mechanism to deal with it or change the financial years to
be congruent so that the oversight goes very well. You don’t have this
understanding which is a big problem. You can’t do it if the one has a
different financial year to the other.

My recommendation is that we should try and look at this question of
synchronisation of financial years in order to make sure that when you do
oversight you don’t have a problem. And, of course, the programmes of the
national sphere, particularly those of the NCOP, need to talk to those of
the province, the legislative programmes, so that you don’t have other
people going away to other projects when the NCOP is around in the
province. That makes it appear as if these people are not planning things
together. So, I think the review will be an important aspect in that.

I hope such matters and also many others will be looked at too. Of course,
the time at my disposal does not allow me to go into all those details, but
those budgetary matters and the oversight aspects are the most important
that need to be looked at, because you’ll find that one department will be
saying: I’ve been overseen by the provincial portfolio committee, and now
comes the NCOP about the same matter. Well, that would be because of a lack
of co-ordination. And, of course, oversight must be done by all the
structures of the NCOP. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr C A T SMITH (Northern Cape): Madam Chairperson, hon Chairperson of the
NCOP, the hon Mahlangu, MECs present, members of this House,
representatives of provinces, I have had the privilege of attending the
summit, and today I am privileged to participate in this debate that deals
with the issues that were discussed at the summit. Let me also join my
colleagues in congratulating you on your 10th anniversary. But, in
particular, let me mention and congratulate the leadership of the NCOP, and
everyone of these members who have participated and assisted, for having
done sterling work.

Let me also express my sincere gratitude for the invitation to attend last
night’s meeting. It was a privilege. I found that it was very educative and
it was good. Listening to this documentary is really something that the
NCOP must use.

Hon Chairperson, I sometimes get the idea that it is the members of the
NCOP themselves who sometimes feel inferior to their colleagues in the
National Assembly. Therefore, I would urge you all to be very proud of the
good work that you have done and that you are doing and to use this
documentary to build to your advantage, first of all, but also to educate
the masses out there about the good work that you have done. You must do it
yourself and we will certainly assist.
Agb Voorsitter, ek wil ook sê dat Suid-Afrika ‘n geskiedenis het waarin
demokratiese beginsels nie bestaan het nie en wat ons nie geken het nie.
Dit is absoluut arrogant, soos die agb lid van die DA vroeër gedoen het, om
in ‘n debat te kom praat oor demokratiese beginsels, asof “ons” die
beginsels vir Suid-Afrika geleer het. Dit is die ANC wat vir Suid-Afrika
demokratiese beginsels geleer het. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit is die ANC wat vir
Suid-Afrika ...
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, I also want to say that South Africa has a  history  where
democratic principles did not exist and where these were unknown to  us.  It
is absolutely arrogant, as the hon member of the DA has done,  to  come  and
speak in a debate about democratic principles, as  if  “we”  had  introduced
South Africa to these principles.  It  is  the  ANC  that  introduced  South
Africa to democratic principles. [Interjections.] It is the ANC that  taught
South Africa ...]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Hon House Chairperson, I want to know whether it is
correct for a member, in one debate, to refer to a previous debate? I don’t
think it is correct according to our Rules. Could you please just make a
ruling on this?
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, I am not going to rule
now. I am going to check and then I’ll rule accordingly. Continue, hon
member.

Mnr C A T SMITH (Noord-Kaap): Agb Voorsitter, baie dankie. Dit is ‘n
spreekwoordelike voorbeeld van iemand wat die beginsels van demokrasie nie
ken of verstaan nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die ANC het verder voortgegaan om hierdie goeie werk te doen en hierdie
prossesse voort te sit en die opvoeding vir Suid-Afrika te gee wat
gekulmineer het ... [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr C A T SMITH (Northern Cape): Hon Chairperson, thank you very much.  This
is a proverbial example of someone who either does not know or who does  not
understand democratic principles. [Interjections.]

The ANC further proceeded to do this good work and continued to  lead  these
processes, and to give South Africa the education  that  culminated  in  ...
[Interjections.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson, I would like you to rule in
terms of Rule 33, because the noise the hon member, Mrs Lamoela, is making
is so loud that it crosses the floor and also disturbs my ability to
concentrate on the speaker. [Interjections.] Now that I’m talking, she is
howling at me, again violating the very same Rule 33 and also violating the
decorum of this House. I request that the Presiding Officer rule that the
member either keeps quiet or be taken out of this Chamber.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Chief Whip, I think I have to
take a decision. Members have been making noise, and I have been asking
members to please have order in this House. Therefore, I’m not going to
remind any member about the Rules of this House; I will just urge members
to respect the House and to respect the speaker even if the speaker is
saying what the members do not want to hear or do not like. And, therefore
you, hon member, please continue. Thank you.

Mnr C A T SMITH (Noord-Kaap): Agb Voorsitter, baie dankie. Die Bybel leer
vir ons van Fariseërs. Dit lyk vir my hier is ook ‘n klomp.

Hierdie goeie werk wat die ANC gedoen het, kulmineer in die Grondwet wat
geskryf is en wat internasionale erkenning het. Maar, die ANC het nie
opgehou met hierdie goeie werk nie; hy’t voortgegaan. Die vestiging en die
skepping van die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies as die tweede Huis van die
Suid-Afrikaanse Parlement, is weereens iets waarop die ANC trots kan wees:
Dat ons so iets kon vestig wat uniek aan Suid-Afrika is en ook uniek in die
wêreld is. Ek wil graag vir die lede van die ANC in hierdie Huis vra om
voort te gaan om ook die ander partye te leer hoe om hul provinsiale
belange in die Raad van Provinsies te dien, sodat daardie
verantwoordelikheid van ware verteenwoordiging ook nagekom kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C A T SMITH (Northern Cape): Hon Chair, the Bible teaches us  about  the
Pharisees. It would seem that a number of them are right here.

This good work that the ANC has done culminated  in  the  Constitution  that
was drawn up, and that won international recognition. But the  ANC  did  not
cease  in  its  good  work;  it  continued  its  task.  The   creation   and
establishment of the National Council of Provinces as the  second  House  of
the South African Parliament is once again something the ANC  can  be  proud
of: That we could establish  such  a  structure  that  is  unique  to  South
Africa, and unique in the world. I would like to  ask  the  ANC  members  of
this House to  continue  to  teach  the  other  parties  how  to  serve  the
interests of their provinces in this  Council  of  Provinces,  so  that  the
responsibility of true representation may be complied with.]

Parliament needs the people. Again, it is a unique principle; something of
which the ANC certainly is proud of. It is a principle that is built on
what the Freedom Charter says: “The People shall govern.”

En ons moet voortgaan om hierdie goeie werk te doen en nie net deur hierdie
proses van “Parliament Meets the People” te kritiseer nie, maar so moet ons
ook help om Suid-Afrika te transformeer vanuit `n toestand van armoede en
van geweld, na rykdom en na vrede. Ons moet dit doen deur sosio-ekonomiese
ontwikkeling en deur die regering se geïntegreerde fiskale plan, wat op die
tafel is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[And we must continue to do this good work, not  only  by  criticizing  this
process of “Parliament Meets the People”, but also by helping  to  transform
South Africa from a state of poverty and violence to a state  of  prosperity
and peace. We have to achieve this  through  socioeconomic  development  and
through the Government’s integrated fiscal plan, which is on the table. ]

The principle of the separation of powers between Parliament, government
and the judiciary is important and teaches us our oversight role. I want to
urge the NCOP to go and exercise their oversight role and, indeed, make
public participation important, because it is through these processes that
the implementation of policy is realised. It is important so that we can
arrive at being the developmental state that we want to be. Through these
processes we can ensure that these IDPs are in place and that the LEDs at
local government level are established.

Maar, in hierdie debat wil ek graag stilstaan en aandag skenk aan die rol
van georganiseerde plaaslike regering, naamlik Salga. Dit is my nederige
opinie dat die manier waarop Salga in die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies hul
funksie verrig, nie effektief is nie. Ons moet vir Salga help om dit te kan
doen. Dit is nie goed genoeg om net hier te kom deelneem aan debatte van
gesamentlike aard nie, of om net die opening van die Parlement by te woon
nie. Ek is van mening dat Salga ‘n groter rol, ook in die komitees, moet
speel waarin hulle aan die komitees sal verduidelik wat die toestand is –
“The state of municipalities in the provinces”. Ek wil ook voorspraak maak
dat ons sal gaan kyk dat hierdie verteenwoordiging van Salga, binne die
Raad van Provinsies, op ‘n provinsiale basis sal geskied. Met ander woorde
dat dit nie een lid van Salga is nie, maar dat dit nege of meer lede sal
wees wat uit die provinsies kom om die komitees toe te lig sodat, wanneer
die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies besluite neem rakende plaaslike regering,
ons meer inligting tot ons beskikking sal hê.

Dan, baie belangrik en ten laaste, moet ons nooit die verskillende rolle
wat daar bestaan tussen nasionale-, provinsiale-, en plaaslike
regeringsvlakke verwar nie. Dit is absoluut belangrik dat ons ons rolle sal
verstaan en dat ons hierdie rolle nie sal oortree nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[But in this debate I would like to pause and pay attention to the  role  of
organised local government, i.e. Salga. It is my  humble  opinion  that  the
way in which  Salga  performs  its  function  in  the  National  Council  of
Provinces is not the most effective. We must help Salga to participate  more
effectively. It is not good enough to  come  here  only  to  participate  in
joint debates, or only to attend the opening of  Parliament.  I  am  of  the
opinion that Salga should also play a greater role  in  the  committees,  by
explaining to the committees what the situation is  like  –  “The  state  of
municipalities in the provinces”. I also wish to advocate that we see to  it
that this representation of Salga in the Council of Provinces is done  on  a
provincial basis. In other  words,  there  should  be  not  only  one  Salga
member, but nine  or  more  who  come  from  the  provinces  to  inform  the
committees, so that we have  more  information  at  our  disposal  when  the
National Council of Provinces takes decisions relating to local government.

Then, in the last instance and very importantly,  we  should  never  confuse
the different roles  of  the  national,  provincial  and  local  spheres  of
government. It is of the utmost importance that  we  should  understand  our
various roles, and that we should not transgress beyond these roles.]

At the end I would like to say may God bless you in all your endeavours.
Thank you.

Mr H YAWA (North West): Hon Chairperson, the Chairperson of the House, Mr
Mahlangu, distinguished members, in honouring and congratulating this House
for the sterling work it has performed, let me just quote from a Senegalese
author, Miriama Ba in her novel where she says:

   Women should no longer be decorative accessories, objects to be moved
   about, companions to be flattered or calmed with promises. Women are the
   nation’s primary, fundamental root, from which all else grows and
   blossoms. Women must be encouraged to take a keener interest in the
   destiny of the country.

I am saying this because this month we are celebrating not only the 16 Days
of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children, but also the
continuation and perpetuation of the abuse of women and children in the
country which this House must take as one of the aspects or actions that we
must engage in to strengthen the work of intergovernmental relations. This
campaign is presently not only taken at national level as it used to be in
the past. It is taken in at all levels, including local municipalities.

This year we have seen some progress in the implementation of the campaign
– the work that the NCOP is doing and the lessons that we can draw from
that. Let me just give you one example. In the North West Province, we were
visited by the Governor of Kronoberg County in Sweden who attended our
imbizo. As they left, they said that they would make sure that they start
the process in Sweden that we have embarked upon in South Africa. That is
how important the work is of forging relations between all spheres of
government in South Africa.

I do not want to be repetitive because the hon Mahlangu has emphasised the
issue of co-ordination which is sometimes confusing when oversight work is
done in provinces. You find that Members of Parliament in provinces do the
same thing that the NCOP does, whilst they should be complementing each
other. I think if that co-ordination can be strengthened, we will see the
very good work that the NCOP does in the provinces.

Hon Chairperson, you were sometimes in the North West, in the area of
Kgalagadi, where you did sterling work. As you went there and talked to
people, that taught us how important intergovernmental relations are. When
you talk to people, irrespective of the level you are at, they do not
separate you from government. They say that this is an imbizo of the
government. No matter if it is held by the provincial government, it is
still an imbizo of the government.

In the North West we attend our izimbizo with municipalities where mayors
are expected to respond to issues that communities are raising.
Chairperson, this is what you also do to us when you visit our provinces.
MECs or Premiers must account for what the people tell them. This is really
a good thing that we must continue with. We must work very hard at making
our people enjoy the fruits of the freedom which they were deprived of for
many years. It is only this government led by this House which talks to the
people. It is only this government which allows the people to even swear at
it. But at the end of the day, some people would claim that the ANC-led
government will not be voted for in the next elections. But the people do
not disappoint us, because they have someone to talk to and someone to
listen to.

It is because of this constitutional obligation that we, in the North West,
have accelerated in strengthening intergovernmental relations within the
province. We remain committed to improving the system of government and to
ensuring that we collectively bring service closer to the people in a
coherent manner. With regard to this, the North West Premier’s Co-
ordinating Council has been established, and has done an excellent job by
throwing leadership across provincial and local spheres of government. This
is replicated in the district by executive mayors. In this Premier’s Co-
ordinating Council, we also have the participation of the house of
traditional leaders. That is how you can see that the relationship and the
bringing about of unity for the people of South Africa can be done.

We have been able, within this context, to deepen the trust of forging the
collective identity of interest between spheres of government by
encouraging national government departments to participate, formulate, as
well as adopt sector master plans which outline goals that are to be
pursued in the local spheres of government. Co-operative governance has
been institutionalised, and we have created synergic links between the
National Spatial Development Plan, the Provincial Growth and Development
Strategies and the Municipal Integrated Development Plans.

Since we have adopted this approach, significant progress has been made.
This co-operative mode of governance has also helped us to identify
interventions and support measures necessary to building capacity at local
government level, and with appropriate interventions. This issue of the
realignment of planning, budgeting and delivery has taken root as we work
towards integrated and sustainable development.

By strengthening this co-operation and partnership with all the spheres of
government, we are underlining the fact that we are indeed a unitary state
governed by the same Constitution, which encourages co-operative governance
as a central pillar to the South African constitutional order. Co-operation
must characterise the way in which government governs; and it is about the
whole of government working together as one in an integrated way. We do
this with the objective to maximise development and to ensure that the
three spheres of government tackle developmental challenges in a co-
ordinated way. It was as a result of this continuing need for co-operation
with one another and the desire to ensure integrated governance that
institutional mechanisms such as the President’s Co-ordinating Councils;
Ministers and Members of the Executive Council – Minmec sector; Budget
Council; budget forums and other structures were put in place. These
structures were meant to foster integration between all spheres of
government.

The principle that integrated policy priority should inform resource
allocation has gradually gained momentum. The challenge, however, is
whether new regulations to remove barriers of integrated budgeting are
required or not.

I am sure you all know that the North West was known as the centre of
activities that were not quite acceptable – the burning of streets, the
digging of roads and the burning of tyres. Chairperson, with the help of
this House and your co-operation, we begin to see the results of our co-
operation. We are working towards rectifying the situation where people
have been complaining about water resources. Due to this relationship, our
people will benefit and enjoy the fruits of their freedom.

Hon Chairperson, let me congratulate you on the sterling work that you have
done in this august House. Please continue to do your oversight work. Whip
us if needed, but do so in a friendly manner. Thank you very much.

Mr C STALI (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members of the
NCOP, esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen, in unpacking the debate on
intergovernmental relations within the South African context, we are
obliged to recommit our efforts in achieving effective interaction among
the different spheres of government.

Our Constitution declares that government comprises national, provincial
and local spheres of government, which are indeed distinctively
interdependent and interrelated.
Addressing the NCOP Summit on Intergovernmental Relations and Co-operative
Governance, the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, Sydney
Mufamadi, reminded us that:


  Our national economic focus of 6% real growth is not realisable unless
  our three spheres of government work more closely together.

He went on to say:


  Growing co-operation between government spheres has already helped to
  improve the quality of the Integrated Development Plan – IDP – of our
  municipalities, while the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act 2005,
  is clear in its facilitation on how national government, provincial
  government and local government should promote and provide mechanisms and
  procedures to facilitate the settlement on intergovernmental disputes.

The NCOP Intergovernmental Relations Summit, which is the topic of
discussion today, took stock of the achievements since its creation. In
this case, taking stock entails evaluating and nurturing the successes of
the first decade but similarly stepping up our actions to respond to the
challenges that remain.

There is a need for all government sectors and spheres to understand that
we owe it to our people to continue to work together, irrespective of who
the political head of that particular sphere of government is.

In the Western Cape, for instance, we have witnessed public spats between
the City of Cape Town and the provincial government on transport
agreements.

The building of the 2010 Green Point Stadium and other important projects
in our province should not suffer while we have the
IntergovernmentalRelations Framework Act, which should guide us on how we
should do our work as government.

We should use our Constitution to address the achievements and challenges
we face as an ultimate resource on how our government should work. Central
to the question of local development objectives is local government’s
responsibility for social and economic development and sustainable delivery
of affordable services.

Last year, the Constitutional Court interpreted section 152 of the
Constitution as imposing a constitutional obligation on municipalities to
fulfil those objectives as a public duty. This means the municipalities
have a positive duty to fulfil local development objectives. It is also
clear that these objectives will not be achieved by local government in
isolation.

All sectors and spheres of government have a duty to work together to help
fulfil our mandate of halving poverty and unemployment by 2014.

To achieve these goals, we need to work together on the basis of planning
frameworks and identifying priorities concerning service delivery without
competing for the same space and roles. We will, indeed, achieve our goal
of creating a better life for all the people of South Africa.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I will try to respond very
briefly to the debate, but I think you will agree with me, today, when I
say we have really had a very vibrant debate in the NCOP. I have been
sitting there listening and it shows to me that members have studied the
report very carefully and they understand what is contained in the report.
I am even very impressed with the attendance by the special delegates,
something which was starting to diminish in this House. I am very proud to
see that you have revived yourself as special delegates to make this House
your House. It’s not our House; it is the House that takes care of the
interests of the provinces. I am very happy that you are participating so
actively, today.

It is perhaps a pity that Mr Yawa has already gone, who is MEC for local
government in the North West Province. I wanted to correct something,
because I made an incorrect announcement when we were sitting in Pniel,
where I said hon Xhasa was the first to submit the report on the status of
the local municipalities. Actually, it was Mr Yawa from the North West, who
was the first one to submit that report [Applause]. The Eastern Cape was
the second one to submit the report to me last week. It tells us something:
Provinces are now beginning to understand what it is that we should do. You
see, in terms of section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems
Act, all MECs of local government ... niyangiphazamisa. [You are disturbing
me.] ... all provinces, must submit a report on the status of local
government or local municipalities to the NCOP and to the national
Minister. That assists us because we can then study the report – all the
committees who are involved, from the finance committee, provincial and
local government, whichever committee – and thereafter say this is the
status of municipalities in these particular provinces. How can we then
together get involved and assist? That is the first point. Congratulations
to those provinces that have begun to understand this thing.

Secondly, I want to thank all the people who have contributed because you
now are beginning to think and understand that the NCOP is not an enemy
when it visits the provinces. I think that is a wonderful understanding. We
are not enemies when we come to the provinces, but we are there to
complement our colleagues because we are all working in the legislative
sector. The aim, for all of us, is to make sure that the executive delivers
on the promises that they have made to our people in terms of the budgets
that you have been talking about, in terms of the programmes, in terms of
policies, and everything that you have been talking about. If we can reach
that understanding that all of us from the local municipalities, provincial
legislatures and from national level are the legislative sector and our job
is to monitor and make sure that things are happening, then I think we
shall be moving on the right track. You are not to think that when we come
there and say, what are these people coming to do here? It is not our job
to intimidate you. Our job is to work together, as all members have said
from the different provinces, and we should monitor together.

On the issue of the SA Local Government Association, I think a lot of
people have dealt with it and said we need to improve. I agree. We are
calling a workshop – which is a proposal of the summit – early next year.
Mr Masondo made a proposal to us that we should call this workshop so that
we can reach an understanding of how we can together work with them as
Salga and participate there.

It is also a pity that the mother from the Northern Province [Limpopo] has
left. NJ is still here and Mr Bhamjee and all other people. Mazosiwe is
still here. You all raised very important issues, particularly of co-
ordinating the work of the departments from national government, provincial
government up to the local government, because if we don’t co-ordinate,
then we run the risk of not delivering the services on the ground as we are
supposed to. We will complain that we don’t have the resources, and yet we
are not putting the resources together to make them implementable or for
making service delivery to the people easier on the ground.

On Operation Shosholoza, why can’t we do it? Let us shosholoza! Let us put
in effort and some energy and let us move. Perhaps that is the thing that
we will talk about.

Regarding all the matters that you have raised, perhaps you can begin to
look at page three of the recommendations that I have just tabled to you
here. For example, commission one has already raised an issue which says we
must establish a joint planning mechanism to streamline integrated
development plan budgets and targets and strengthen the intergovernmental
relations between the three spheres of government. That is a recommendation
from the summit.

If you look at page seven, what the Minister of Finance is saying, just to
quote one or two of those things, is that the most important thing – I am
referring to the finance committee – is that:


   The NCOP must, among other things, debate at length the following issues:
   policy-making and budgeting for concurrent powers because I think that is
   where the difference is and that is where the problem is. The question of
   unfunded mandates in the provinces is where the problem is.


He says we must debate the assignment of powers and functions, the
concurrent powers that we are talking about. I want to cite one example
very quickly. I am looking at the time and I can see you are very tired. I
just want to give one example about concurrent powers. When a national
Minister gives you money as a department, that money goes to the treasury
of the province. Am I correct? [Interjections.] Once it is in the hands of
the treasury of that particular province, what can the poor Minister at
national level do about that money? He can’t dictate and say go and do this
or go and build 15 clinics. That might be the intention, but the treasury
in the province will decide to do other things because they have got other
priorities that they want to do.

Now the Minister of Finance says that we should discuss those functions.
What do we actually mean with concurrent powers, because if there are
concurrent powers, should we have both powers since they are concurrent?
Does it mean that once the money reaches the treasury in the province, it
is in the exclusive power of the treasury and the province and the
executive to decide what they want to do with the money? Do you understand
where the problem lies? Now the Minister is saying that all these things
should be discussed.

The third point is to discuss the question of oversight and accountability,
he says. Those are very crucial things and I can go on and on about the
report, but all these things are tabled here and we are going to take them
up and move on ... shosholoza] ... from next year onwards, and see how we
can improve on all these issues.

Thank you very much for your input. This was a very vibrant debate and I
think I can see that we are forging ahead, and we will be successful in
taking this House forward and also in assisting our people on the ground
together. Thank you very much and may God bless you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Chairperson. That
concludes the debate, and I shall now put the question. The question is
that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all
delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their province’s votes.
Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. We shall now proceed
to the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.

Eastern Cape?
Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape supports the report.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr N J MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Siyaxhasa. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: (Ms M N Oliphant): All nine provinces have voted in
favour.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
   AFFAIRS - CONSIDERATION OF CONVENTION ON CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF
             FISHERY RESOURCES IN THE SOUTH EAST ATLANTIC OCEAN

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, the convention before us today
signifies in a very profound manner that Africans have long been utilising
its natural assets, not only to develop socially and economically, but also
to contribute to a deeper understanding of conservation and the sustenance
of it.
The general objective of the convention is to ensure the long-term
conservation and sustainable use of the fishery resources in the convention
area through effective implementation of the convention.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Can I appeal to hon members
to please keep their conversations down? I just want to appeal to the
leaders of delegations to ensure that their delegates are not making a
noise in the House, including the Chairperson of the Council, hon Tolo and
hon Sogoni. Continue, hon member.

Rev P MOATSHE: Thank you, Chair. This convention is closely modelled on the
United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement – the United Nations Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.

The signatories to this convention are Angola, Namibia, South Africa and
the United Kingdom – on behalf of St Helena Tristan Da Cunha and Ascension
Island - as well as Iceland, the Republic of Korea, Norway, the United
States and the European Union.

In order to ensure the achievement of the general objective of long-term
conservation and sustainable use of fishery resources, the convention sets
out a number of general principles of responsible fisheries management, but
it is up to signatory countries to determine the specific details of
implementing these principles.

The convention requires countries to, inter alia, adopt measures based on
the best scientific evidence available to ensure the long-term conservation
and sustainable use of fishery resources; apply the precautionary approach
in accordance with the convention; take account of the impact of fishing
operations on ecologically related species such as sea-birds, seals and
marine turtles; adopt measures for species belonging to the same ecosystem
as dependent upon or associated with the harvested fishery resources;
ensure that fishery practices and management measures take due account of
the need to minimise harmful impacts on living marine resources as a whole
and protect biodiversity in the marine environment.

Chairperson, as is evident, the objectives of the convention affirm the
sovereign rights of the member states to manage the fishery resources in
the South East Atlantic Ocean collectively. Furthermore, it recognises the
conservation and sustainable economic use of the marine diversity of our
oceans. It spells out the obligations, jurisdiction, methods and procedures
which member states must uphold. Moreover, it encourages research awareness
and education with regard to the above.

With regard to the provision of resources – financial, human and otherwise
– it will be incumbent on state parties to honour their commitment with
respect to the effective implementation of the provisions of the
convention.

In conclusion, South Africa’s priorities with regard to international
maritime laws are indeed reaffirmed by becoming a signatory to this crucial
instrument. We so move, Chairperson.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! I shall now put the question
in respect of the Third Order. The question is that the report be adopted.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all delegation heads present?
Thank you.

I shall also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of
vote in terms of Rule 71, if they so wish. Is there any province wishing to
make any declaration of vote? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?
Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng siyavuma. [Gauteng supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal ondersteun. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE (Mpumalanga): Limpopo re a e thekga. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Mr N J MAHLANGU: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All provinces voted in favour. I,
therefore, declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICES -
  INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON OIL POLLUTION PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE AND CO-
                               OPERATION, 1990

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, the purpose of the International Convention
on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation is to ensure that
member states put adequate measures in place to be able to respond to oil
pollution incidents and, where applicable, enable states to co-operate in
dealing with oil pollution incidents.

It is, in the main, a proactive measure to ensure minimum damage to the
environment and to our 3 km coastline, which contributes enormously to our
economy in terms of fishing resources, whose value is estimated at R4,5
billion per annum.
It is also important to bear in mind that South Africa is located along one
of the busiest shipping routes in the world, making it vulnerable to
shipping disasters and pollution incidents.

This convention also applies to offshore units, seaports and oil-handling
facilities and requires that all member states’ registered vessels have an
oil pollution emergency plan on board; that all member states’ vessels,
while in port, be subjected to inspections for compliance; that all member
states establish national systems for responding promptly and effectively
to oil pollution incidents; that all member states have national
contingency plans in place for preparedness and response, and have the
mechanisms to co-ordinate and respond to oil spill incidents; that masters
of vessels and offshore units report any incidents of oil pollution without
delay; and that pilots of civil aircrafts promptly report any incidents of
oil pollution to the nearest coastal state.

The Select Committee on Public Services, therefore, recommends that the
Council, in terms of section 231 of the Constitution, approves the said
convention and protocol. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): That concludes the debate. I shall
now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote, if they so wish. We shall proceed to voting
on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.

Delegation heads must indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or
against the report, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayixhasa. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyayixhasa. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [Supports.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a ethekga. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr N J MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): All provinces have voted in favour
of the report. I, therefore, declare the report adopted in terms of section
65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICES -
  INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT OF SHIP’S BALLAST
                             WATER AND SEDIMENTS

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, at least four activities have been
identified that pose great threats to the world’s oceans, and these are the
following: The introduction of harmful aquatic organisms to new
environments; land source marine pollution; over-exploitation of living
marine resources and habitat destruction.

During the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002 in Johannesburg,
action was called for to accelerate the development of measures to address
the problem of invasive alien species in ocean-going vessels’ ballast
water.

Ballast water is water taken in by ocean-going vessels at a foreign port or
at sea to control the vessel’s trim, list and draft, and to ensure safe and
efficient operation of the ship during such sea voyages.

It must be noted that already the uncontrolled discharge of ballast water
sediments from ships has led to the transfer of harmful organisms, causing
injury and damage to environment in all parts of the world.

The delegation to the diplomatic conference convened by the International
Maritime Organisation in February 2004 adopted the International Convention
for the Control and Management of Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments.

The objective of the convention is to reduce risk to the environment by the
diversity of fisheries and health owing to the non-indigenous organisms
that are transported within ships’ ballast tanks.

This is a very important convention for South Africa, with its long,
sensitive coastline and the importance of the fishing industry in terms of
job creation and food security. Therefore, the Select Committee on Public
Services recommends that the Council approves the said convention in terms
of section 231 of the Constitution. Thank you, Chair.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): That concludes the debate. I shall
now put the question, and the question is that the report be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all delegation heads present?
In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote, if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.

Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against the report, or abstain from voting.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Siyavuma. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a e seketela. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr N J MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Elethu. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): All provinces have voted in favour
of the report. I, therefore, declare the report adopted in terms of section
65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE - MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET
                              POLICY STATEMENT

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon members, may I state upfront that the
Joint Budget Committee dealt with the terms of reference of the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement, as outlined by Parliament.

After the tabling of the statement the JBC, the Joint Budget Committee,
engaged the Minister of Finance and National Treasury and convened
departmental hearings from Wednesday, 31 October, to Friday, 2 November
2007.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement reinforces government’s commitment
to combating unemployment and poverty through accelerating the rate of
economic growth and through the improvement of service delivery.

Over the next three years provinces will receive an additional
R36,1 billion more than what was estimated during the Budget tabling in
February this year. This additional amount reinforces interventions in
education, health and social development, with the sole aim of expanding
the benefits and quality of these services, especially to the poor.

We wish to emphasise that the mere allocation of funds does not necessarily
secure the achievement of the desirable outcomes. We implore this
honourable House to ensure that the desired results are achieved through
this budget allocation.

There is, of course, no replacement for relentless vigilance in monitoring
not only the expenditure, but also the quality and usability of the final
product. Accordingly, we should, where possible, insist on infrastructure
and other capital projects that continue to bolster the community’s
economic opportunities, even long after the project has been completed.

The increased resources proposed for provincial and local government over
the medium term must be complemented by improved co-operative government
and intergovernmental co-ordination. Of course, this should include
increased efforts by the national sphere to drive more strongly the
implementation of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, among others.

An appropriate step should be taken to encourage that provincial and local
government co-fund and actively support nationally set priorities.

During our interaction with certain departments, we noted the disturbing
occurrence of repeated and substantial inter transfer of funds within
Budget Votes. Although these inter transfers remain within the permitted
margins, we were concerned that these may be indicative of poor planning
and might, therefore, conceal other inefficiencies within those
departments.

We are engaging the National Treasury in an effort to deepen our inquiry
into this practice in order to ensure that no substantial deviation from
the approved budget is allowed.

In conclusion, we wish to plead, again, with Parliament to allocate more
time for our committee – and all others in Parliament – to deal with this
statement. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): That concludes the debate. I shall
now put the question, and the question is that the report be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s votes. [Interjections.]

Hon Moseki, could you please respect the House, and the same goes for hon
Shiceka and hon Dlulane!

Are all delegation heads present? [Interjections.]
Hon Botha ...!

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make declarations of vote, if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.

Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against the report, or abstain from voting.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Re a e thekga. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo e a e seketela. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr N J MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Elethu. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: SinguMntla Koloni sihamba nayo. [We, as the representatives
of the North West, agree.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): All provinces have voted in favour
of the report. I, therefore, declare the report adopted in terms of section
65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

     Consideration of Report of select committee on local government and
                  administration – intervention in Utrecht

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, my presentation, today, is with regards to the
taking over of certain functions of a municipality by the provincial
government of KwaZulu-Natal. The municipality is called Emadlangeni
Municipality which is in Utrecht. The taking over by the provincial
executive committee happened on 22 August. This happened as a result of the
investigation which was conducted by the MEC in terms of section 106 of the
Local Government Municipal Systems Act.

This investigation was looking at issues relating to mismanagement,
maladministration, fraud and corruption. The outcome of this investigation
revealed a lot of things. As a result of this the MEC requested the
municipality at the beginning of August to respond within 30 days on how it
was going to implement the recommendations of the investigation. The
municipality could not respond to this. Therefore, on the basis of that,
the MEC communicated with the municipality without success. Then the MEC
took a decision to intervene in that municipality. That intervention, as I
said, happened on 22 August; and we as a committee were briefed on 23
October about the report. After the briefing, we took a decision that we
could not rely only on the information presented by the MEC. In terms of
the administration of justice one has to listen to both sides. We used the
audi alteram partem rule to be able to get these views from the ground.

We went there with a multiparty delegation that involved the IFP and the DA
which are members of the committee, as well as the ANC. These parties are
the ones that are represented in that municipality. We met with all
stakeholders ranging from mayors, councillors, senior management of the
council and all the employees of that municipality.

Our findings as a committee was that Emadlangeni Municipality is
dysfunctional; it cannot raise its own revenue; it is operating on a
deficit; it is unable to collect revenue and that the money owing was R2,9
million. There was no attempt to raise it.

Since it owns a lodge, the administration increased the tariffs of the
lodge at the beginning of the year, but the council had not taken a
decision to ensure that those increases were effected, meaning, therefore,
that the municipality was running at a deficit out of its own creation and
choice. If they wanted to, they would have been able to raise the revenue
so that they could to run the municipality.

This is a municipality of four wards with seven councillors – the whole
municipality. So, one can see how small it is. It’s a plenary municipality
where the mayor is also a Speaker holding all the positions.

The committee came to a decision that the municipality has a potential to
raise its own revenue and be able to work on its own. However, it requires
other spheres of government to assist it, because it cannot do what is
expected to be done.

We also found that in the municipality the top and middle management level
has unskilled labour. People could not give direction to what should happen
because they don’t even have an organogram. The employment was based on
which party one was supporting, then one would automatically be employed
without looking at the skills that are available in the area. There were
workers who have been casuals for the past 15 to 20 years, which is against
the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, against the Labour Relations Act
and it is in violation of the legislation of this country. Employees are
compelled and forced to drive nonroadworthy vehicles. If one drives one of
those vehicles and one is stopped by a traffic police, a ticket is issued
to that driver as an individual, whilst one was forced by the managers to
drive the vehicle.

The committee was also concerned about the bickering between political
parties. The conditions were very bad. One could see when people start
talking in the council meetings that their blood is almost at boiling point
and they would want to touch each other. They don’t understand that
politics is a theatre and you are just acting in that theatre and,
therefore, you must be expected to engage in such arguments and when you
come out there should be no bad blood. [Interjections.]

We then recommended that we can support the intervention in that area, but
on certain conditions, because we believe that a provincial government is
supposed to support all municipalities, including giving support to them in
terms of section 154 of the Constitution.

As was said, the Minister for Provincial and Local Government is supposed
to be giving reports to this House about the state of municipalities. MECs
are supposed to give reports to the Minister, and the Minister should
consolidate the reports and then present them to the NCOP.

You cannot believe that these two municipalities we are talking about are
in South Africa. Thus, it means that the provincial government is supposed
to play its part. What we are saying is that we can support the
intervention on condition that the Minister presents a comprehensive
programme of support to the municipality, to us, in terms of human and
financial resources. We want to see that in the short and medium term. The
Minister must also present to us the legality of the appointment of the
acting municipal manager, as well as the payment of the mayor in September,
because what happened is that the mayor signed a contract with the
municipal manager to say that he was appointed on a month-to-month basis.

In terms of the Constitution and the law, this responsibility belongs to
the council. We don’t know then how that responsibility was delegated to
the acting mayor to do so. That is why we want to get to the legality of
this move. The acting mayor was given an acting allowance of over R8 000 in
September. We are now checking because in terms of the Office Bearer’s
Handbook that is not there. There is no law that says it has to be done,
and there is no law that says it cannot be done to give an acting
allowance. We want to get that from the MEC.

We are also saying that political parties that are here must go and support
that municipality in terms of creating conditions conducive to political
debate and the handling of issues, then service delivery can happen.

We also recommend that the municipal manager must embark on creating a
financial recovery strategy and the broadening of a tax base in that
municipality. The MEC must engage the district municipality on water
services provision, because what is happening is that the municipality is
under another political party given the suspension of the mayor – because
the authority over water is in the district council – it is not providing
water at a local level because of political party differences, which is not
correct. We are saying that there must be intervention into this.

The last two points are that we must get monthly reports on the progress of
that intervention, and the MEC must tell us the timeframe for this
intervention. We cannot just support it on a blank cheque without us
knowing how long it is going to take.

Those are the recommendations that we are raising in terms of supporting
this report, based on those conditions. That is what we experience in
municipalities, but we will continue doing work in the municipalities as
this responsibility has been bestowed on us by the Constitution and by this
House. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): Order! I shall now put the
question. And the question is that the report be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wants to make a declaration of vote? None.
We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [In favour.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal.

Mr Z C NTULU: Siyavuma. [In favour.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a e thekga. [Limpopo in favour.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr N J MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Ke ya rona. [Northern Cape in favour.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Ondersteun. [In favour.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms m n Oliphant): All nine provinces voted in
favour. I, therefore, declare the report adopted in accordance with section
65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
  AFFAIRS - UPLIFTMENT OF PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF MAGISTRATE M S MAKAMU,
             SENIOR MAGISTRATE AT BENONI, DATED 25 OCTOBER 2007

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, seeing that I am the last speaker and have been
given 10 minutes, which I have never had before, I have to bargain.
[Laughter.] If you all clap and vote for my speech, I will cut it down to
five minutes and if you clap even more, I will cut it down to two minutes.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Hon members, the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, on 23
November 2005, provisionally suspended magistrate Mr M S Makamu – a senior
magistrate at Benoni – from office. The NA and the NCOP shortly thereafter,
confirmed the provisional suspension, based on the decision by the
Johannesburg regional court, to convict Mr Makamu of fraud on 21 June 2005.
He, Mr Makamu, was sentenced to a fine of R10 000, all of which was
suspended for a period of four years on certain conditions.
[Interjections.]

The Magistrates Commission, in terms of section 13(4)(a) of the
Magistrate’s Act 1993, determined to withhold Mr Makamu’s remuneration. The
Magistrates Commission then commenced with its investigation into Mr
Makamu’s fitness to hold office as a magistrate. However, the inquiry was
postponed at his own request, pending the outcome of his appeal against his
conviction in the regional court. The appeal was upheld by the High Court
in Johannesburg and both his conviction and sentence were set aside.
The commission has, therefore, decided not to proceed with this inquiry
against Mr Makamu and the determination to withhold his remuneration
automatically fell away at the time when his suspension was lifted.
Therefore, the committee recommends that this Council should agree with the
decision to uplift the provisional suspension of Magistrate Mr M S Makamu
from Benoni, with immediate effect. I so move. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Hon members,
I can delay this House for 30 minutes if you don’t behave. [Interjections.]

I shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s vote. Are all the delegation heads
present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): In accordance with
Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to make their
declarations of vote, if they so wish. We shall now proceed to the voting
on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour of, against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayixhasa. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Mr N J MAHLANGU (Mpumalanga): In favour.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N MACK: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All provinces voted
in favour. I, therefore, declare the report adopted in terms of section 65
of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution

The Council adjourned at 18:48.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Social Development


          a) Wetsontwerp of Tradisionele Gesondheidspraktisyns [W 20 –
             2007] (National Council of Provinces– sec 76(2)).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Traditional
         Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] (National Council of
         Provinces – sec 76(2)).

          b) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Keuse oor die Beëindiging van
             Swangerskap [W 21 – 2007] (National Council of Provinces– sec
             76(2)).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Choice on
         Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21 – 2007] (National
         Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).


     (2)    The Minister of Communications


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Elektroniese Kommunikasie [W 38 –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 75)
         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Electronic
         Communications Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2007] (National Assembly –
         sec 75).

     (3)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Wetsontwerp op Belasting op Oordrag van Sekuriteite [W 44 –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 77)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Securities
         Transfer Tax Bill [B 44 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).


          b) Wetsontwerp op die Administrasie van Belasting op Oordrag van
             Sekuriteite [W 45 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Securities
         Transfer Tax Administration Bill [B 45 – 2007] (National Assembly –
         sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
        Commissioner for Occupational Diseases (CCOD) for 2005-2006 and
        2006-2007, including the Reports of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 and 2006-2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
    SANDF to Uganda, dated 20 November 2007:



      The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letter
       from the President on the employment of the South African National
       Defence Force (SANDF) to Uganda, referred to the Committee, reports
       that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

2.    Report of the Mediation Committee on the Children’s Amendment Bill  [B
    19B – 2006] and [B 19D – 2006]  (Reprint)  (with  textual  corrections)
    (National Council of Provinces – sec 76), dated 21 November 2007:

       The Mediation Committee, having considered the Children’s  Amendment
       Bill [B19B –  2006]  and  [B19D  –  2006]  (Reprint)  (with  textual
       corrections) (National Council of Provinces - sec 76),  as  well  as
       the papers referred to it, reports the bill with further  amendments
       [B 19E – 2006] and presents a mediated version [B19F – 2006].

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
    on the Regulation of Interception of Communications  and  Provision  of
    Communication-related Information Amendment Bill  [B9B-2006]  (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 15 November 2007:

       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs , having
       considered the subject matter of the Regulation of  Interception  of
       Communication and  Provision  of  Communication-Related  Information
       Amendment Bill [B9B-2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred  to
       it, reports the Bill as follows:


       The Bill was referred to the Committee on  29th  August  2007.   The
       committee received a briefing on the 14th September on the Bill.


       On 17 October 2007, the  Committee  received  submissions  from  the
       three service providers, namely, Vodacom, MTN and Cell  C  and  some
       state  departments,  namely,  Department   of   Communications   and
       Department of Safety and Security.

       The committee deliberated on the Bill on 9th November 2007.  On  the
       basis of numerous inputs which were valid in nature,  the  Committee
       is of the view that the issues raised need to be  addressed  by  the
       department.


       The committee therefore recommends:


           That the Bill be referred back to the Department of Justice  and
           Constitutional Development to  look  at  issues  raised  by  the
           committee.  Due to  the  nature  of  inputs  received  from  the
           stakeholders, the committee is of the view that, if it  proposes
           amendments, it will be tantamount to redrafting of the Bill.



