---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 February 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-02-14
---

WEDNESDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORT — see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


   The issue of agriculture and land reform in South Africa.




                   PRESIDENT'S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS


                           (Resumption of Debate)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMISEBENZI YOMPHAKATHI: Phini likaSomlomo, Mongameli wezwe,
Phini likaMongameli, oNgqongqoshe namaPhini abo, malungu ahloniphekile ale
Ndlu yesishayamthetho, emveni kweminyaka eyi-12 umbuso wenqubo yentando
yeningi ukhona kuleli, singasho ngokungangabazi ukuthi indima
esesiyihambile ekwakheni kabusha iNingizimu Afrika iyabonakala.

Emiphakathini esihlala kuyo sezikhona izinkomba ezibonisa inqubekela-
phambili. Singasho ngokuziqhenya sithi: nempilo yemiphakathi ethile
isingcono kunalokho eyayiyikho ngaphambilini. Le nguquko-ke isinika ithemba
lekusasa elihle neliqhakazile.

Yize noma kunjalo, izinkinga zisekhona. Inselelo yobandlululo nobuphofu
kusabonakala. Kanti futhi izingqinamba eziza nentuthuko nazo ziveza enye
inselelo okumele sibhekane nayo. Isibonelo salokhu engikushoyo sibonakala
kakhulu uma sibheka ezinye zezinkomba zentuthuko, njengokuthuthuka
ngesivinini kwamadolobha, okubizwa phecelezi kuthiwe yi-urbanisation. Lesi
simo senza ukuthi babe baningi manje abantu abeza emadolobheni bezofuna
imisebenzi. Umthelela walokhu kuba ukwanda kwenani labantu abantula
izindawo zokuhlala emadolobheni. Yingakho nje sesibona imijondolo
nemikhukhu isijike yaba yisithombe esisibona mihla namalanga. Imizamo
eyenziwe yilo hulumeni kuba sengathi ayisabonakali, kanti lutho,
siyayibona, yikho nje ukwanda kwentuthuko.

Ukuguquka kwesimo somnotho nakho kuze nentuthuko kanye nezingqinamba
zokuntuleka kwamakhono ahambisana nezidingo zezimboni. Lokhu kwenze ukuthi
babe baningi nabanye abalahlekelwa yimisebenzi ngenxa yalezi zinguquko.
Nokho iqhaza elibanjwa uhulumeni ebambisene nosozimboni kanye nabasebenzi
kulesi sakhiwo esisibiza nge-Jipsa, lisinika ithemba lokuthi singazama
ukwandisa amakhono adingekayo ngokubambisana. Siyabonga-ke Phini
likaMongameli ngokuzikhandla kwakho nokufaka umfutho kulo mkhankaso.

Okubalulekile-ke ukuthi asizukubhekela nje kuphela ukuthuthukisa amakhono
alabo abafunde bagogoda enyuvesi, kodwa sizofaka nomdlandla kuleyo mikhakha
esebenzisa kakhulu izandla. Kubalulekile ukuthi sibuke nxa zonke amakhono
esiwadingayo ekuthuthukiseni umnotho, ngoba phela ukukhula komnotho
wakuleli kuzonika amandla kanye nezimali ezidingekayo ukuze sifukule labo
abasafufusayo, kanye nokuthi uhulumeni abe nemali yokuthuthukisa
imiphakathi maqondana nezinto ezifana nokuthuthukisa izingqalasizinda
kuleyo miphakathi esantulayo. Konke-ke lokhu kusho ukuthi kumele sibe
namasu namaqhinga azomelana nalezi zimo ngokwehlukana kwazo.

Mongameli, inkulumo yakho obuyibhekise esizweni sonke evikini eledlule
iphinde yagcizelela kabanzi ukubaluleka kokulwa nobuphofu nayo yonke
imithelela yakho ekwakheni kabusha iNingizimu Afrika. Okuyintokozo ukuthi
ihamba ngqo emazwini abhalwe kumqulu ongumkhombandlela obizwa nge-
Reconstruction and Development Programme lapho uthi: Ubuphofu ngumthwalo
onzima okufanele sibhekene nawo ngqo ekwakheni kabusha leli lengabadi.

Kungenzeka ukuthi, ngokukhohlwa, sizibuze ukuthi kungabe kungani ugcizelele
ukubaluleka kokulwa nobuphofu enkulumweni yakho izinkinga ziziningi kangaka
nje kweminye imikhakha yempilo. Ngizothanda ukucaphuna emazwini alo mqulu
we-RDP esawuvuma kule Ndlu ngonyaka ka-1994, ekuqaleni kukahulumeni wenqubo
yentando yeningi, ukuze sikhumbule ukuthi imuva lethu belimi kanjani
njengesizwe, mangicaphune: (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Deputy
President, Ministers and their Deputies, hon members of the National
Assembly, 12 years of democracy in this country, we can say without any
doubt that the great strides that we made in rebuilding South Africa are
now clear.

In communities where we live, there are indications of progress. We can say
with pride that life in our communities is better that what it was before.
These changes give us hope for a good and flourishing future.

However, there are still problems. The challenges of racism and poverty are
still there. There are also challenges that come with development, which we
must address. The example of what I am talking about here is very clear
when we look at other signs of development, like urbanisation. This state
of affairs makes more people to immigrate to towns to look for jobs. And
this sadly increases the number of people who do not have shelters in
towns. That is why today we have shacks and squatter camps all over the
country, and even the efforts by this government, seem to be inconspicuous,
but we see them, and we are aware that it so because of the increase in
development.

The change in the economic situation also came with development and
challenges of skills shortages that are in line with industrial needs.
These changes resulted in job losses. But the role played by the government
together with industries and workers in the project called Jipsa, is giving
us hope that together we can try to develop the necessary skills. We
therefore thank the Deputy President for working tirelessly and by putting
effort into this initiative.

What is important therefore is that we are not only going to deal with the
development of skills for the graduates only, but we are also going to
train people in artisan’s skills. It is vital to look everywhere for the
skills that we need for economic development because economic growth in
this country will give us the power and money to help those who are
emerging and the government will have the money to develop communities in
areas of infrastructures in poor communities. All this denotes that we must
have plans and strategies in place t o deal with all these situations in
different modes.

Mr President, in your state of the nation address, you again emphasised the
importance of fighting poverty and its root causes so as to rebuild South
Africa. What is good is that this is in line with the words that are in the
guide called the Reconstruction and Development Programme, which states
that poverty is the difficult task that we need to face in rebuilding this
country.

It is possible that we might have forgotten, hence we may have asked
ourselves why the president put so much emphasis on poverty in his state of
the nation address whilst we have a lot of problems in other sectors of
life. I would like to quote from this document of the RDP which we all
adopted in this House in 1994 during the first democratic parliament so
that we will remember how our history, as a nation, was before. Let me
quote:]

   Our history has been a bitter one dominated by colonialism, racism,
   apartheid, sexism and repressive labour practices. The result is that
   poverty and degradation exist side by side with modern cities and
   developed mining, industrial and commercial infrastructure. Our income
   distribution is racially distorted and ranks as one of the most unequal
   in the world. Lavish wealth and abject poverty characterise our society.

Interestingly, the RDP itself acknowledges that while this was the past
that characterised us, South Africans in their millions struggled against
this system over decades. They struggled to improve their lives, and to
restore peace and bring about a more just and humane society.

Therefore, we agreed with you, Mr President, when you reminded us, in your
speech, not to forget that still more needs to be done to achieve the just
and humane society that many of our people struggled for, and where many
even sacrificed their lives.

In the 12 years of our democratic rule we have introduced policies,
legislation and programmes that have been the building blocks of
transformation in our society. These building blocks have, on the one hand,
sought to change the material conditions in which many of our people find
themselves, whilst, on the other hand, building a caring and humane South
African nation as evidenced in the Macrosocial Report that was released
last year.

Today we have a society that is gradually embracing the common values of
our country as espoused in our Constitution; a society that has gradually
embraced the symbols of our nationhood; a society that collectively
embraces the outstanding achievements of our citizens in sports, arts and
science, and holds them in high esteem as our own, regardless of their
racial background or gender.

We have a society whose corporate citizens are gradually working in
partnerships to meet the challenges of our development, such as the work of
the Business Trust and Business against Crime, to name just a few. It is a
society that mourns together when one of us is maimed, injured or abused.

Maybe it is for this reason that almost all of us, particularly in the past
few days, have been talking about the challenges of crime and the need for
us to work collectively to address it. In the past 12 years, our social
transformation has also seen material change in the lives of our people and
within their communities. Many now have access to basic services such as
water, sanitation and electricity.

We do acknowledge, however, that there are some among our communities who
still live in conditions where these services are not available. It is for
this reason that the programme of the Cabinet committee, Social Cluster, of
government has resolved to work tirelessly to ensure that we accelerate the
programme on sanitation, in particular the eradication by the end of this
year of the bucket system that still remains in other communities.

Because municipalities are key delivery agents of our basic services at
community level, it is important that they have the capacity to undertake
this task. The intervention in the past year at this sphere of government
has enabled us to build the capacity necessary for municipalities to
undertake their work.

The results of Project Consolidate show us that if we work together as the
different spheres of government, we can indeed improve the capacity at this
level of government. The Ministers of Finance and Provincial and Local
Government, together with the Development Bank of South Africa, DBSA,
through their work on Siyenzamanje, which seeks to build the skills
capacity of our municipalities on those technical areas of the built
environment – have also shown us that if indeed we work collectively, we
can change the lives of many of our people.

Today, many in our society have access to health care through the provision
of health infrastructure and health services closer to where they live.
Many people today have assets such as housing and land through our land
reform programme.

We also acknowledge that our integrated human settlement strategy, which
has delivered 2,29 million houses, will further contribute to building
communities with access to all necessary social services.

The challenge of housing our people closer to our towns and cities will be
addressed, in part, by prioritising the use of state land and public land
where these are available. The special purpose vehicle, for instance, will
act as a holder of such land made available by other government
departments, public entities and private sector contributions for housing
development.

Mr President, the approach of inner city densification with regard to
housing delivery is another mechanism that will help us to meet our housing
demand, while at the same time assisting us to meet our objective of
integrated cities. The delivery of land, through the land reform programme,
has not only given access to land to those who were disenfranchised before,
but has also given a possibility for economic participation by these very
communities.

Experience over the past years has shown that an integrated approach to
land delivery is required, if such an asset will be used to empower
communities economically. It therefore means that, from a planning stage,
all relevant departments must constantly consult with communities so that
these programmes remain sustainable.

Our social security acts as a safety net for those who are vulnerable among
our communities. It is also true that this safety net is necessary. Our
long-term objective should be, however, to create possibilities for
empowerment where these communities and individuals can have opportunities
for productive work, which will also bring back their dignity as a people.

Our employment creation strategies, such as the Expanded Public Works
Programme, must be upscaled because they offer an opportunity, if done
well, to create employment, while at the same time improving our
infrastructure delivery where it is needed most. Our government assets,
particularly our buildings and properties, have not been well maintained,
making us ashamed that we are not the best landlord or landlady in the
land. This state of affairs, while appalling, does create a possibility for
employment creation for those young people who are unemployed.

The young people who will be recruited for this programme will also be
enrolled with our Further Education and Training colleges, and industry
colleges as artisan trainees, so that at the end of their national youth
service they would not only have given service to their country but would
at the same time have gained the skills necessary to make them employable
in future.

We have correctly observed, Mr President, in your speech, that this is a
challenge that needs all of us as South Africans. Maybe this is the time to
revive our Masakhane campaign and Vukuzenzele, so that we can create
meaningful partnerships. We have always had these campaigns, but maybe we
have not done much to bring them to an operational level, where indeed we
can build ilima [co-operative engagement] to fight poverty, using our
various resources.

Mr President, a lot of faith-based organisations and charity organisations
have, for many years, run soup kitchens, where the homeless have sought
refuge and shelter. Others have run child care centres, responding to the
challenge within their communities, while others have used their church
premises for food gardening projects in order to enhance food security
interventions at the local level. Others have, on their own, volunteered
their services as health workers, at times not expecting any compensation.
This is an indication that there are many of our citizens who are willing
and ready to be part of a broad front for development.

The work that we will be doing as government this year, together with
nongovernmental organisations, following a visit to Chile and Tunisia by a
delegation from SA Women in Dialogue, will enable us to find a better
platform around which we can co-ordinate all our efforts in fighting
poverty. Central to the experience gathered from these two countries is
that there is no quick solution to fighting poverty. The experiences of
these countries also tell us that partnerships between government,
community and the private sector are key.

Dedicated capacity is also required. This capacity must remain close to
these communities and families for a period of time to ensure that targeted
support as well as continuous engagement can be undertaken. These
experiences, while not similar, are very close to the work by a self-help
group known as Helping Hand in the province of Chennai, India, on which we
have modelled our job-for-growth initiative.

Central to these initiatives, for instance, is that one needs to empower
people to come out of poverty through engaging in productive activities,
using the skills that they have acquired over many years.

This targeted approach will ensure that we bring dignity to our people, who
may today find themselves poor and dependent on our social grant system. If
they are linked to a job creation scheme as they enter the social security
system in particular, including those in the indigent policy at municipal
level, they will be able, once again, to regain their pride.

I must say that one of the things that we need to do is to take care of the
health profile of our people. You have mentioned, Mr President, in your
speech, our fight against HIV and Aids and the need for partnership in this
area. Furthermore, revelations have been made in the past few days
regarding a number of deaths arising from the ARV treatment regime.

This, in my view, Mr President, affirms the work that the Ministry of
Health and the department do, and it actually highlights the importance of
building a health infrastructure that would respond to this challenge.

I know that this might have been a debate for some time in this House, but
today we can all affirm the correctness of our comprehensive HIV and Aids
plan.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, your time has expired.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Madam
Deputy President, politics is full surprises. After being censured by
Parliament at the end of last year on a motion by the ANC Chief Whip, the
surprise is that I’m still here and he is not. [Laughter.]

Another surprise is that four years into the Travelgate saga, we’ve still
not reached the end. You must listen to this; I take no pleasure in
reminding the hon Minister about it: It’s surprising that 20 or so, hon
members are still here after they have pleaded guilty to charges of
defrauding the people. I will not anticipate the findings of the ad hoc
parliamentary committee. Its purpose is to debate how Parliament should
respond.

But, I want to address today how the political party should respond, and
say that the real surprise is that the hon President, as the leader of the
ANC, has said nothing about crime in Parliament and has failed to act.
Surely, the ANC considers that those among us who have stolen money from
the people are not fit to be parliamentarians. From the word go, the DA
stated that any of our MPs convicted of dishonesty with the people’s money
would be removed from Parliament.

The next surprise is that Members of Parliament, as many as 200, have been
sued by liquidators. Thirty were sued in the last two weeks and some of
them have paid and some are still paying up. The people of South Africa do
not know who these MPs are and why they incurred these debts. Two hon
Cabinet Ministers, who are married to each other, had to repay more than
R300 000 to the liquidators. Mr Goniwe, the former Chief Whip, had to repay
R70 000. It’s a real surprise that members could make a mistake amounting
to that much money and yet have done nothing illegal that makes them liable
to criminal prosecution. Surely, this is something that cries out for an
explanation.

The DA believes that everyone of the persons who have had to pay money back
amounting to millions of rands to Parliament, should be given an
opportunity of explaining how and why these huge debts - sometimes R50 000,
R70 000 and R100 000 were incurred.

The next surprise is that there has been no prosecutions yet. The
parliamentary oversight authority was assured by the Scorpions that they
would institute prosecutions if they had a case. I understand that a great
deal more information has become available and I’m surprised that no
further prosecutions have yet been instituted. Perhaps they will be soon
prosecuted, especially if the prosecution refuses a plea bargain to just
one or two of the accused travel agents and the truth, as contained in the
original PricewaterhouseCoopers report, comes out.

Until we’ve cleared up every last crumb of data about Travelgate, the smell
will permeate this Parliament. Our people regard corruption as one of
biggest problems. While persons in high positions in public life get away
with it or appear to have got away with it, corruption will not be stopped.
When this Parliament demonstrates that it sets high standards; when the
political parties, especially the ANC, show that they will not tolerate
corrupt representatives, then the people of South Africa will believe that
we are serious. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Deputy
President, hon members and colleagues, let me once again add my voice ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, just a minute. Hon members, if you have
questions for a person addressing us, you have the Rules that you can use.
I don’t think we have to allow howling and shouting at members. Are we
agreed? Let us respect our own Rules. Hon Minister, please continue.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Deputy speaker. Let me once again
add my voice to the many heartfelt condolences conveyed by other members to
the family of the late Adelaide Tambo, the wife of former ANC President,
Oliver Reginald Tambo, and great stalwart of our revolution in her own
right. We shall always remember her as one of those humble giants who have
given so much to her people’s quest for freedom and dignity.

Ma Tambo chose a life of struggle because she loved her country and her
people deeply. This is evident in the work she has done, such as caring for
and comforting the aged and her numerous visits to children’s homes. Our
hearts were warmed during the period immediately after her death, when a
group of children from the Orlando Children’s Home came to pay their last
respects to her. Her dedication to the course of the poor and the
vulnerable has a lot of reference to this debate and we shall dedicate this
speech to her accordingly.

I must congratulate you, Comrade President, for your continued strong and
incisive leadership demonstrated in your well-balanced address to the Joint
Sitting of Parliament on the occasion of the state of the nation address.
It is my view that the issues you raised and urged us to address are the
real core issues that our society is concerned about and therefore want us
indeed to prioritise.

In line with the government’s programme of action for the second decade of
our freedom, the 2007 state of the nation address by the President has
served to reaffirm government’s commitment to the intensification of the
struggle against poverty. Most importantly, the President has re-emphasised
the link between the eradication of poverty and the ability of our people
to “enjoy the happiness that comes with freedom”. We indeed agree with the
assessment of the President that the ANC’s historic mission for
thoroughgoing social transformation in our country cannot happen outside
the context of moving our people from conditions of abject poverty. We
accept this assessment, acutely mindful of the fact that the very task of
intensifying our struggle against poverty is intertwined with many other
tasks ...

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I wonder if I could ask the hon Minister
if she would take a question.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: I won’t take a question. I will take a
question at the end of the speech. Just allow me to finish my speech.

We accept this assessment, acutely mindful of the fact that the very task
of intensifying our struggle against poverty is intertwined with many other
tasks, and that none of the social ills that affect our people every day
can ever be addressed in isolation from each other.

It is in this context that the ANC government preferred an integrated and
sustainable approach concerning the tasks involved in social
transformation, which cover the need to address a whole range of
challenges, including access to education, jobs, health care, housing,
water and sanitation.

On 27 April this year, we will officially mark the 13th anniversary since
the dawn of democracy in our country. That will also mark the middle point
of the current term of the third democratic government installed after the
2004 general election. It was with this in mind that the national executive
committee of the ANC Women’s League attached greater significance to the
business of our NEC lekgotla that was convened earlier this month.

It was important for the lekgotla to assess at this stage of our revolution
whether we are succeeding in this historic mission of social transformation
– most specifically to pose and answer the question as to whether the work
that we have done so far has had a meaningful impact on ensuring that women
are able to enjoy the happiness that comes with freedom. At the conclusion
of this lekgotla, the NEC statement outlined the key outcomes thereof and
emphasised that, I quote:

   The lekgotla proceeded from an understanding that the central and most
   urgent task of the league is to intensify the struggle against poverty.

And that,


   In line with Imvuselelo campaign, our branches should be central in the
   ongoing monitoring of poverty alleviation programmes at ward level.
We believe that our branches should have, as one of their main tasks, the
role of being leaders of social cohesion at a local level, and support and
monitor poverty alleviation programmes. We also resolved that a broader
economic summit for women be convened to address some of the gaps
identified in intensifying the fight against poverty and the extent to
which this affects women.

We’ve identified that these gaps exist in areas such as institutional
arrangements, inconsistent multisectoral inputs, funding and distribution
of resources, capacity to monitor and the sharing of best practices. We
should take this opportunity to express our gratitude for the work that
Sawid has done through research and study tours. We believe that their
research capacity will help in our analysis of these trends and gaps.

A number of initiatives have been suggested in this regard, including the
possible establishment of a national women’s fund that will look at
supporting developmental programmes for women around the country. The
lekgotla noted that despite progress made by government in refocusing
service delivery towards the poor, many of our people still remain trapped
in the pool of poverty.

Speaking directly to these South Africans, particularly women in rural
areas, I must send this message that we are aware that we can never really
be justified to declare victory over poverty, suffering and indignity as
long as there are still many who do not yet enjoy the happiness that comes
with freedom - those whose weathered faces tell a grim story of a life
that, in spite of the gains of our freedom, continues to be characterised
by squalor, hunger, disease, neglect and abuse.

To those women, I must say that we shall never betray the confidence that
you continue to have in the government’s commitment to extend these
benefits of freedom to you too. The work that we’ve been doing since the
advent of democracy has started to make an impact on many women. These are
women who were in a similar position as yourselves 10 years ago. We know
the confidence that you have in your sharing the hope for a better life for
all is neither misplaced nor unrealistic. We are aware that it is a sense
of confidence based on the strong track record of this government to
improve the quality of life of all South Africans. We also know that this
confidence is further enhanced amongst yourselves due to the progress South
Africa has made in the area of poverty alleviation, including the targets
of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, some of which we have
already surpassed in our first 12 years of freedom.

You would have found confidence in the ability of this government to take
the commitments it makes to the nation and the world seriously, including
the speed with which we have moved to implement a considerable amount of
the tasks emanating from the Beijing Platform for Action, as adopted 11
years ago. We have taken a keen interest in some of the achievements
registered by the democratic state in accelerating the delivery of services
to our people, not only in terms of the statistics and numbers of
beneficiaries but also in terms of the extent to which the delivery has
helped to change the overall gender relations in our society.

As the 2006 human development report correctly observes, gender division of
labour assigns responsibilities to women that men otherwise do not share.
As a result of lack of development, time spent collecting water represents
a heavy burden on women. Further observations by the report are important
in this regard, particularly on the issue of rights-based approach to the
delivery of water in South Africa. Through the human rights-based approach
concerning the delivery of water and other services, government has also
ensured that more women no longer remain drawers of water. We should
applaud the fact that South Africa is getting it right in this regard.
[Applause.]

While we are greatly encouraged by the ability of our economy to create
much-needed employment opportunities to key sectors, the ANC Women’s League
lekgotla however decried the continued low levels of access to jobs for
women in our country and the perpetuated skewed income levels in the
workplace.

We welcome the support given to women in small businesses through training
and financial resources provided by agencies. As this sector grows,
including the acquiring of a share of international trade, we should assess
the extent to which some of these enterprises are able to absorb more women
into employment and thereby creating a ripple effect on the investment by
the state.

We believe strongly, Madam Didiza, in the capacity of the Extended Public
Works Programme to make a visible dent and provide immediate relief to many
rural women. We have seen it, particularly regarding its ability to draw
massive numbers of poor people into jobs at a go, coupled with the training
and the resultant economic benefits in infrastructural development in these
communities – that’s what women say. It comes with a bang and a boom.

Comrade President, we share the view that we need to move with speed to
ensure that many women, particularly the aged and young mothers who receive
social grants, are not trapped in the vicious cycle that is created by
total dependency on the social security network. Although some of us have
scoffed at the amounts of money paid for these support grants, particularly
the child support grants, the experience of the poorest of the poor has
been that this money makes a huge difference in a place where there was
once nothing. Many families are forced to survive exclusively on the grant
paid to one child - you may not know.

Le mali ithenga i-12,5 leekhilogramu zomgubo, iphinde ithenge i-12,5
leekhilogramu zeswekile, ibhokisi yezingxotyana zeti ezili-100, iilitha
ezintlanu zeoyile kunye nekhaphetshu elinye ngeveki ... [This amount of
money can only buy 12,5kg of flour, 12,5kg of sugar, a box of 100 sachets
of tea bags, 5 litres of cooking oil and one cabbage per week ...]

... and this makes a difference to a family where there is no income at
all. Therefore, it is important to help these young women who benefit from
this social system because when that child grows and the money is
withdrawn, they find creative ways of continuing to access this fund. They
either increase the age of the child or find other ways – there are many
other ways. I can teach you a lesson or two from the department.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, unfortunately you don’t have any time
left to take the question that was coming your way. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

I would like to welcome visitors to the National Assembly, schoolchildren –
the future of our country. [Applause.] You are most welcome to the House,
but you must be good visitors and not participate in the debate. Thank you.
[Laughter.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, the
FF Plus agrees with the majority of President Mbeki’s proposals that he
made in his state of the nation address. Our problem is that what is being
said here in Parliament and what is happening at the grass-roots level
outside is usually two totally different issues. I only have time to talk
about the President’s proposals on social cohesion, which the FF Plus
welcomes.

Mevrou, verskille tussen ryk en arm veroorsaak konflik in sekere lande.
Verskillende godsdienste, tale en kultuurgroepe veroorsaak konflik en
bloedige oorloë in ander lande. Ons het al daardie verskille in Suid-Afrika
en daarom is Suid-Afrika ’n baie moeilike land om te regeer. Dit was in die
verlede so; dit is op die oomblik so en dit sal altyd so bly. Huidige en
toekomstige leiers in Suid-Afrika sal altyd sensitief vir hierdie verskille
moet wees. Dit gaan nie verdwyn nie. In Suid-Afrika gaan daar altyd sigbare
wit, bruin en Indiërminderhede wees, daarom sal verdraagsaamheid en
versoening altyd op die politieke agenda van Suid-Afrika moet wees. Europa,
wat vir almal wil voorsê wat om te doen, weet nie op die oomblik hoe om hul
Islamminderhede te hanteer nie.

Die Nederlandse Minister van Immigrasie Rita Verdonk is besig met wetgewing
om alle kledingstukke wat Moslemvroue se gesigte bedek, te verban. In my
toesprake in Europa het ek gesê dat hulle by ons kan kom leer. Ek sê dit
nie meer nie, want ek sê dat ons besig is om die foute van die verlede te
herhaal.

Onlangs moes ek ’n vorm van ’n staatsdepartement invul. By die derde vraag
moes ek myself klassifiseer as hetsy “African” of “Asian”. Dis twee
kontinente. Daarna: “White” of “Coloured”. Dis twee kleure en dit is uiters
verwarrend. Jy kan nie appels met pere vergelyk nie. Of jy moet kontinente
gebruik of jy moet kleure gebruik. Met kontinente moet jy onderskei tussen
“African”, “European” of “Asian”, maar dan, sê ek, gaan ek en alle VF Plus-
ondersteuners “African” daar invul. Ons is nie Europeërs nie. As jy kleure
wil gebruik, moet jy swart, wit of bruin gebruik. Ek het in hierdie geval
“African” ingevul. Solank as wat ’n vorm my vra om te kies tussen “African”
en “white” sal ek eersgenoemde invul.

Dit kan vir u onskuldig klink, maar dit is baie belangrik vir die hele
debat oor nasiebou en oor wie almal deel van Afrika is. As jou uitgangspunt
is dat sommige mense “African” is en ander nie, dan eindig jy met woorde
soos “white settlers”, wat sommige ANC-leiers gebruik. Dit lei tot woorde
soos “maburu”, “makgowa”, “white trash”, wat ek mense wel op straat hoor
gebruik.

Tien dae gelede is Albie Greyling in Eldoraigne deur jong, swart rowers
doodgeskiet. “Ons gaan al julle witmense doodmaak,” is op sy vriend Martin
Vermeulen geskreeu. Verlede maand het ’n swart jeugdige vir mnr Sarel
Breedt aan ’n stoel vasgemaak. Die vasgemaakte Mnr Breedt is 78 jaar oud en
was geen gevaar. Tog het die 15-jarige jeugdige vir Mnr Breedt op
teregstellingswyse doodgeskiet. Waarom noem ek hierdie voorbeelde? Waarom
verwys ek na swart en wit? Omdat ek bekommerd is oor ons jeug, swart en
wit. In albei hierdie gevalle was die aanvallers jong swart jeugdiges wat
in die nuwe Suid-Afrika grootgeword het. Hulle het nie Kaspirs of
onlustepolisie of traangas ervaar nie. Hulle ken net vir President Mandela
en President Mbeki en die nuwe geslag wat veronderstel is om sonder
vooroordele te wees. Die jeugdiges reageer op toesprake wat hulle van
leiers hoor. Hulle hoor dat wittes “settlers” is wat hul goed vat en dan
kan hulle dit weer terugvat.

Verlede maand het ons ook die moordsaak gehad van die Waterkloof Vier –
jong, wit jeugdiges wat so jonk soos 16 jaar oud was toe die misdaad
gepleeg is. Afrikanerjeug reageer ook op hierdie gebeure. Hulle reageer op
verskillende dinge. Die nuwe geskiedenisboeke skryf óf die Afrikaner uit,
of hy is die skurk in die geskiedenis. In die Turning Point-reeks wat in
skole gebruik word, is daar slegs ses reëls oor die aard van die Anglo-
Boereoorlog. Geen melding word gemaak van enige Boereleier of –held nie. Is
u dan verbaas as jong Afrikaners ’n lied soos De la Rey aangryp, wat oor
een van die helde uit daardie oorlog gaan? Bok van Blerk het dubbele
platinumstatus gekry met meer as 100 000 verkope in ’n baie kort tydjie.

Hulle reageer op die ANC se aanslag op Afrikaanse skole. Afrikaanse skole
is lankal gemeng met bruin en swart kinders en daarom is die aanslag teen
Afrikaans en nie teen ras nie. Waar Afrikaanse skole parallelmedium word,
is dit net ’n kort tydjie voor die skool enkelmedium-Engels word. Ek kan
vir u voorbeelde noem. Daar is slegs twee Afrikaanse enkelmediumskole oor
in die provinsie van Mpumalanga. Die Minister gryp persoonlik in en forseer
Ermelo om parallelmedium te word. Het die regering ’n idee wat die reaksie
in die Afrikaanse gemeenskap hierop is? Meer as 800 plekname in Suid-Afrika
is reeds verander. Die VF Plus het begrip daarvoor dat alle groepe se name
erkenning moet kry. Om die waarheid te sê, ons het voorgestel dat die
Noordelike Provinsie Limpopo moet wees, gaan kyk maar.

Teen die verandering van die meeste van hierdie name het Afrikaners nie
beswaar nie. Maar daar is ’n baie groot verskil tussen ’n naam soos
Pampoenfontein en Pretoria. Name soos Pretoria, Potchefstroom, Lydenburg en
Pietersburg dra swaar aan ons geskiedenis en ons emosies. Deur hierdie name
te verander, is ’n berekende klap in die gesig van die Afrikaner. As jy
praat van “Africans” teenoor “white settlers” dan kan jy maar die
“settlers” se name verander, want hulle hoort eintlik nie hier nie. Dink u
dit help versoening aan? Dink u dit bring ons nader aan mekaar of saai ons
die saad vir ’n volgende konflik? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Madam, differences between the rich and the poor cause conflict in certain
countries. Different religions, languages and cultural groups cause
conflict and bloody wars in other countries. We have all those differences
in South Africa and for that reason South Africa is a difficult country to
govern. This was the case in the past; it is the case at present and it
will always be the case. Present and future leaders of South Africa will
always have to be sensitive to these differences. It will not disappear. In
South Africa there will always be visible white, brown and Indian minority
groups; hence tolerance and reconciliation will always have to be part of
South Africa’s political agenda. Europe, who wants to prescribe to everyone
what they should do, has no idea of how to deal with its Islamic minority
groups.

The Minister of Immigration of the Netherlands, Rita Verdonk, is currently
busy preparing legislation banning all pieces of clothing covering the
faces of Muslim women. In my speech that I made in Europe, I told them that
they could come and learn from us. I do not say this anymore, because I now
have to tell them that we are busy repeating the mistakes of the past.

Recently I had to complete a form for a government department. At the third
question I had to classify myself as being either “African” or “Asian”.
These are two continents. Thereafter: as “White” or “Coloured”. These are
two colours and it is extremely confusing. You cannot compare apples with
pears. You either use continents or you use colours. With regard to
continents you have to distinguish between “African, European or Asian”,
but in that case I am saying to you that I, and all other FF Plus
supporters as well, will fill in “African” there. We are not Europeans. If
you want to use colours, you should use black, white or brown. In this
particular case, I wrote “African”. I will write “African” for as long as a
form requests me to choose between “African” and “white”.

It may sound innocent to you, but it is crucial for the entire debate about
nation-building and who is considered to be a part of Africa. If your point
of departure is that some people are “African” and others are not, then you
will end up with words such as “white settlers”, which are used by some ANC
leaders. This leads to words like “maburu”, “makgowa”, and “white trash” –
that I have heard being used by people on the street.

Ten days ago Albie Greyling was shot and killed by young, black robbers in
Eldoraigne. They were shouting at his friend, Martin Vermeulen, “Ons gaan
julle witmense doodmaak!” [We are going to kill you white people!] Last
month Mr Sarel Breedt was tied to a chair by a black youth. Mr Breedt, the
man who was tied to the chair, was 78 years of age and posed no threat to
anyone. Yet, the 15-year-old youth shot and killed Mr Breedt execution-
style. Why do I cite these examples? Why do I refer to black and white?
Because our youth – black and white – concerns me. In both these cases, the
assailants were young, black youths who had been raised in the new South
Africa. They did not experience the likes of Caspirs or riot police or
teargas. They only know of President Mandela and President Mbeki and the
new generation that is supposed to be without prejudice. These youths
respond to speeches made by their leaders. They hear that whites are
“settlers” who are robbing them of their property and now they are entitled
to taking it back again.

Last month we also had the murder case of the Waterkloof Four – young,
white youths, who were as young as 16 years old at the time the crime was
committed. Afrikaner youth also respond to these events. They respond to
different things. The new history books either disregard the Afrikaner
completely or portray him as the villain in the history. In the Turning
Point series that is used in schools, there are only six lines devoted to
the nature of the Anglo-Boer War. No mention is made of any Boer leader or
hero. Does it surprise you then when young Afrikaners embrace a song like
De la Rey which relates to one of the heroes of that war? Bok van Blerk
obtained double platinum status with sales of more than 100 000 within a
very short time.

They are responding to the ANC’s attack on Afrikaans schools. Afrikaans
schools have been racially integrated with coloured and black children for
a long while and therefore the attack is fielded against Afrikaans and not
against race. When Afrikaans schools become dual medium, it does not take
long for the school to become English single medium. I can mention some
examples to you. There are only two Afrikaans single medium schools left in
the province of Mpumalanga. The Minister himself intervened and compelled
Ermelo to revert to dual medium. Does the government have any idea what the
reaction is to this in the Afrikaans community? More than 800 name changes
have already taken place in South Africa. The FF Plus understands the fact
that the names of all groups should be acknowledged. In fact, we suggested
that Northern Province should be Limpopo – go and have a look.

Afrikaners have no qualms about changing most of these names. However,
there is a vast difference between a name such as Pampoenfontein and one
like Pretoria. Names such as Pretoria, Potchefstroom, Lydenburg and
Pietersburg are laden with our history and our emotions. Changing these
names is a calculated slap in the face of the Afrikaner. If you talk of
“Africans” as opposed to “white settlers”, then you may as well change the
names of the “settlers”, because they do not actually belong here. Do you
think this will bring us closer together or are we sowing the seed for the
next conflict?]

Now you should understand why I object to having to complete forms where I
have to choose between whether I am an African or a white. I prefer
President Mbeki’s speech in 1996, “I am an African”, where he added:

   I am formed of the migrants who left Europe to find a new home on our
   native land. Whatever their own actions, they remain still part of me.

I was here when he delivered it and I applauded it. There cannot be two
cradles of humankind. Our ancestors, thousands of years ago, migrated north
from here. President Mbeki’s ancestors stopped in Central Africa and mine
continued to Europe. [Laughter.] The Khoisan ... look at the history ...
the Khoisan remained here. In approximately 1400 the Bantu speakers had
started to move back south and, in 1600, so did my ancestors. Accordingly,
only the Khoisan are not settlers – if you want to argue that.

Volgens die media moet die nuwe DA-leier ’n “African” wees. As ons die VF
Plus se definisie van ’n “African” aanvaar, dan het Ryno King as ’n wit
Afrikaner of Douglas Gibson as ’n wit Engelssprekende “African” ook ’n
kans, naas Mnr Seremane. Die “Europeans” aan hierdie kant – as daar van
hulle is – skakel hulself uit. Dit is ’n billiker benadering.

Gelukkig is dit nie vir die ANC om te besluit oor wat ek is nie – net soos
die vorige regering nie vir Mnr Manuel kon forseer om vir die Springbokke
te skree nie, want hy wou nie. Ek is ’n Afrikaner en ’n Afrikaan. Daarom is
my party se kleure oranje en groen: oranje slaan terug op die Prins van
Oranje, op Holland en Protestantisme, en die groen verwys na Afrika. Meer
as 90% van Afrika se vlae is groen. Die regering moet besluit of Afrikaners
’n bate of ’n las is, maar 50 jaar van nou gaan ons nog steeds hier wees.
Daarom verwelkom die VF Plus ’n debat oor sosiale kohesie en die regte
resep vir nasiebou.

In 1996 is ons geforseer om met mekaar te praat. Feitlik 82% van die ANC-
parlementslede wat in 1994 hier was, is nie nou meer hier nie. Ons praat
nie meer met mekaar nie. Ons ken mekaar nie. ’n Toespraak van 2 minute hier
van die podium af, gaan nie die probleem oplos nie. Suid-Afrika is ’n
moeilike land om te regeer. As ons dit regkry, kan Europa by ons kom leer
hoe om verskille te hanteer. Die Afrikaner stap graag daardie pad, maar nie
op eensydige ANC-voorwaardes nie. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[According to the media the new DA leader should be an “African”. If we
accept the definition of an “African” as expressed by the FF Plus, then
next to Mr Seremane, Ryno King, as a white Afrikaner, or Douglas Gibson, as
a white English-speaking “African”, also has a chance. The “Europeans” on
this side – if there are any amongst them – eliminate themselves. That is a
more equitable approach!

Fortunately, it is not for the ANC to decide who I am – just like the
previous government could not force Mr Manuel to support the Springboks,
because he refused to do so. I am an Afrikaner and an African. For that
reason, the colours of my party are orange and green: orange dates back to
the Prince of Orange in Holland and Protestantism, and the green refers to
Africa. More than 90% of Africa’s flags are green. The government has to
decide whether Afrikaners are an asset or a liability, however, 50 years
from now, we will still be here. Therefore, the FF Plus welcomes a debate
on social cohesion and the ultimate recipe for nation-building.

In 1996 we were forced to talk to one another. Virtually 82% of the ANC
Members of Parliament that were here in 1996 are no longer here. We do not
talk to one another anymore. We do not know one another. A two-minute
speech from the podium here will not solve the problem. South Africa is a
difficult country to govern. If we succeed, Europe can come and learn from
us how to deal with diversity. The Afrikaner gladly embarks on that road,
however, not to the tune of the ANC’s unilateral terms. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, Mr President, I just need to stop the
number of notes that are coming to my attention by granting the request of
hon members. They say that I should wish you a happy Valentine’s Day.
[Applause.] [Laughter.] Thank you, hon members - no more notes!

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hope somebody
has said “happy Valentine’s Day” to you.

Mr President, Deputy President, hon members, many of us are indeed
fortunate to be a part of the economic transformation taking place in our
country and to be part of an economy that has experienced its longest
upswing in history. While GDP per capita growth averaged 3% per annum
between 1994 and 2002, it has accelerated from 3,1% in 2003 to 4,8% in 2004
and 5,1% in 2005. The goal of growing the economy by at least 6% beyond
2010 is therefore reasonable and attainable.

This rising tide has lifted all boats but as we enjoy the new view, we
cannot forget those whose circumstances conspire to exclude them from this
view. Moreover, as we forge ahead to deepen and consolidate our economic
successes, we must not lose sight of those sections of our population and
areas of our country that remain marginal to these mainstream economic
trends.

To include the excluded requires a systematic, coherent and co-ordinated
approach. So, where we need to intervene quickly we shall, but guard
against expending all our energies on the immediate and fail to plant the
seeds now to ensure that we build on our current economic successes.

We have to deal with this issue within the realm of wider challenges facing
the South African economy. One of those challenges is expanding the base of
the economy, both in terms of ownership patterns and general participation
in the economy. It is about whether we can move beyond the current
strictures, limits and boundaries of the South African economy.

We need to break these boundaries and open up new frontiers. And the
question must be asked as to whether, with the current ownership patterns
and traditional players so dominant, we can break those boundaries. We must
also ask whether we do not need new players to break these boundaries and
move into new horizons.

We must ask: What must be expected of new black entrants and new players in
the economy, especially those who are successful? Should they not be the
embodiment of empowerment itself? Should they not lead the charge into
these new frontiers and horizons? This is the context within which the work
we do in broad-based black economic empowerment takes place. These are the
issues of broadening participation, tapping into pools of talent, expanding
opportunities through procurement and small enterprises, and of ensuring
that people are exposed to opportunities to develop operational experience.
This is the spirit of the codes we have gazetted, and therefore the
scorecard should not be treated simply as a box-ticking exercise.

Hon members, when you passed the BEE Act in 2003, you enjoined government
to take further steps to increase the effective participation of the
majority of South Africans in the economy. We have acted. After an
intensive period of consultation, during which we canvassed the widest
possible range of views, the codes of good practice on broad-based black
economic empowerment were gazetted on Friday, 9 February, along with two
sector charters: the construction sector charter and the financial sector
charter.

These codes will immediately become binding on all public entities, as it
is required that they are taken into account in all economic interactions
that government has. In terms of the Act, government must apply the codes
when entering into decisions with respect to preferential procurement,
licensing and concessions, public-private partnerships, and the sale of
state-owned assets and businesses.
I think it is important to note that, during the process of consultation,
we were privileged to experience much constructive criticism and comment,
but were also gratified to learn of the extent to which our society and
international partners have shown an appreciation for the spirit of this
legislation. It is for this reason that we anticipate profound co-operation
during the next few years of enhanced implementation, as very few will
argue that our country must be on an economic path that excludes from
participation the majority of its population.

The BEE Act also directs us to establish an advisory council. This council
will provide guidance and overall monitoring on the state of BEE
performance in the economy, with a view to making policy recommendations to
address bottlenecks and those areas that may contribute towards unintended
outcomes. And we will be proceeding and concluding the work of appointing
an advisory council fairly soon.

As increasing numbers of black people productively enter the economy, the
opportunities for rapid expansion of our market and concomitant
opportunities for diversification of our production base will become
apparent. This brings me to further challenges facing the South African
economy.

The challenge facing the South African economy is to ascend to new
platforms. So, part of what we need to respond to is the knowledge
intensity of our economy. We clearly have to push harder and more
consistently and move in the direction towards a more knowledge-intensive
economy.

We must also respond to the degree of value addition that takes place in
the economy. We must respond to really substantially expand our capacity to
export value-added goods. We must respond to the challenge of
diversification, which is also really one of the best tools of
macroeconomic management, because a diverse production base mitigates the
impact that price swings always have on economies with a narrow production
range.

So, through the work we have been doing on industrial policy, we have
developed a national industrial policy framework in which we outline the
following vision for the economy: to facilitate diversification away from
current reliance on traditional commodities and nontradable services.

This requires the promotion of increased value addition per capita,
characterised particularly by movement into nontraditional tradable goods
and services. It’s a vision for the long-term intensification of South
Africa’s industrialisation process and movement towards a knowledge
economy. It is a vision for the promotion of a more labour-absorbing
industrialisation path, with particular emphasis on tradable labour-
absorbing goods and services, and economic linkages that catalyse
employment creation.
It is also a vision for the promotion of a broader-based industrialisation
path, characterised by greater levels of participation of historically
disadvantaged people and marginalised regions in the mainstream of the
industrial economy.

The implementation will entail intensifying the implementation of sectors
identified in Asgisa, the investigation of the industrial policy dimensions
of the strategic infrastructure investments in information and
communication technology infrastructure, in energy infrastructure, in
public transport infrastructure, and other major investments.

It will also entail implementing sector strategies, which have been
completed in such areas as metals, chemicals, clothing and textiles, as
well as using the national industrial policy framework both to evaluate and
speed up work in other sectors such as agriculture and agro-processing, and
creative industries.

With regard to all of these challenges, be it inclusion, opening up new
frontiers, or the industrial expansion challenges, the issue of competition
in the economy has become of critical importance. The competition
environment should be of such a nature that the barriers to new entrants
are broken down. Therefore, competition law and the competition
dispensation in general will have to be and will be strengthened as part of
responding to these challenges.

One of the wider challenges facing us is overcoming the divide that
persists in our economy. This divide is not just about racially defined
participation patterns, but also about regions and communities that remain
marginalised and excluded.

Hon members, for an economy that must respond to the challenges we have
outlined above - enhancing economic inclusion, broadening participation in
the economy, addressing the inclusion of marginal areas and communities -
we must promote new activities and locate them in new areas.

Izolo, Mongameli, bendityelele uMasipala weSithili i-O R Tambo. Ebebambe
ingqungquthela yohlumo nophuhliso. Ndandikuthembisile ke, Mongameli, ukuba
ndiya kuzama ukuba ndizizimase ezi ngqungquthela zohlumo nophuhliso.

Nitshilo kaloku, Sekela-Mongameli, ukuba aniliboni lithabatha nxaxheba
kuphuhliso loqoqosho lommandla nakuphuhliso loqoqosho lwezekhaya iSebe
lezoRhwebo noShishino. Batshilo phaya ukuba bayeva ukuba kukho umzimveliso
we-biofuels oza kwakhiwa eNgqurha. Babuzile ukuba njengokuba ingabo nje
abaza kukhulisa lo mbona esifuna ukuwusebenzisa kuveliso lwale biofuel,
kutheni kungathiwa omnye wale mizimveliso mawuze kwakhiwa kweliya cala?
Ngumbuzo lowo endifuna ukuba nindincedise ukuwuphendula, Mongameli.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr President, yesterday I visited the O R Tambo local municipality. They
were holding a conference on economic growth and development. I had
promised that I would attend such growth and development conferences.

The Deputy President had complained that the Department of Trade and
Industry is not visible and does not take part in local economic
development programmes. It was indicated by the people from that local area
that they know about a bio-fuels factory that is going to be built at
Ngqurha. They further wanted to know from us, whether this factory could
not be built in their area, as they will be expected to produce maize that
would be used for this purpose anyway. I would like to be helped to respond
to that question, Mr President. [Applause.]

Clearly, we have to work on economic efficiency and thus investment in
economic network infrastructure: road, rail, telecommunications,
electricity, all assume greater importance. But perhaps the biggest
challenge we have to respond to is the public transport efficiency
challenge.

Public transport systems are vitally important to the economic empowerment
of the majority and remain the only way to promote sustainable mobility for
all citizens in our municipalities and districts. As our economy expands
and we strive to bring more and more people into the economic mainstream,
the public transport system will be a core element of economic development.

South Africa’s ability to generate the desired shared economic growth will
require excellent public transport systems. The majority of South Africans
are entirely dependent on, if not confined to, public transport for them to
travel daily between their homes, schools and places of work.

In this respect, public transport plays an important social role and
contributes immensely to economic growth and development. Therefore, the
wellbeing of many South African communities is directly linked to their
ability to move through a public transport system that is efficient and
reliable.

To this end, the goal of the public transport strategy is to accelerate the
transformation of public transport service delivery from 2007 to 2020. The
strategy aims to equip South Africa with a modern and efficient,
integrated, rapid public transport system. The system to be introduced will
shift the current operator-controlled, commuter-based and unimodal system
to a fully integrated, rapid public transport network based on 24-hour
service and accessibility. [Applause.]

I wish to stress again that investment in the economic network
infrastructure is an absolutely critical element in enhancing economic
efficiency. As we go about these investments in public transport, in
energy, in ICT, we shall also be investigating the industrial policy
dimensions of all these investments in ways that help us to meet our other
objectives, such as job creation and managing our current account deficit,
among others.

To the extent that it identified the major constraints facing the economy
and gave all the pointers to the issues we needed to address or the
programmes we needed to undertake to respond to these, Asgisa remains a
relevant framework in the context of which the work on industrial policy,
investment in economic network infrastructure, and broadening economic
inclusion, – for both of people and regions, has to take place.

So, as we report on work done, industrial policy, investments in ICT,
public transport and energy, as we attend to the issues of integrating
small and micro enterprises, we are in fact advancing the implementation of
Asgisa.

And, indeed, since the adoption of Asgisa, we have seen important progress
on the work of developing a strategy for the production of biofuels, and we
have seen important progress in implementing the tourism strategy by, among
other things, adopting a national airlift strategy to support the tourism
strategy. We have also seen the finalisation of government assistance and
support for business process, outsourcing and offshoring.
The structure of our economy is still of a nature which precludes the rapid
expansion of economic inclusion. This fact exacerbates the challenges we
face in poverty alleviation. The process of continuing, accelerating and
sharing growth is therefore being, and will continue to be, tackled on a
wide front.

To summarise, we must increase efficiency in the economy; we must promote
dynamic growth sectors; we must integrate small and micro enterprises; and
we must continually improve our institutional arrangements in support of
these initiatives. In other words, to improve our capacity to implement,
these tasks will require that, as a society, we work together and work
hard. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President, hon
members and Ministers, one senses that the attention of an expectant nation
is focused in a particularly profound, even spiritual way, on this House at
this time. Once again, we are being called upon to invoke the gritty spirit
of national unity which oiled the construction of the new South Africa.

Yesterday, my party leader, Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, went beyond
providing a socioeconomic commentary of our present state of affairs; he,
once again, provided crisp solutions to our country’s profoundest and
seemingly intractable problems.

It was therefore with surprise and sadness that one noted that the hon Ms
Sotyu was not prepared to concede that the top-heavy centralisation of our
Police Service does impede the fight against crime. It is also sad that she
and others continue to harp on the point that crime is not out of control,
even during the very same week that Rattray was slain.

If one is looking for international benchmarks, one could not find a better
example than the decentralised New York police department. The NYPD has
more police on the beat than our entire Republic.

During the 1970s and the 1980s, New York was a byword for lawlessness and
street crime. In the 1990s, however, the city was able to reverse its crime
rates through the implementation of zero-tolerance policing under the tough
political leadership of Mayor Giuliani. I emphasise the word “leadership”.

New York is now one of the safest cities in the United States. Overall,
crime fell by 54% between 1992 and 2000. Between 1993 and 2000 New York
underwent a 67% decrease in the total number of robberies and manslaughter
cases, and murder rates also decreased by 72% in the same period.

Concerning crime, let us stop talking and start acting, because we know
what works. I would also like to touch upon one of the more important
missing elements in the debate in fighting crime, the role of traditional
leaders. Traditional leaders have been peace officers and administrators of
justice since time immemorial.

In 2003 this Parliament passed the Traditional Leadership and Governance
Framework Act. Each province was supposed to pass its own provincial
legislation to comply with the law. Of all nine provinces, only KwaZulu-
Natal has so far complied with this legislation.

Traditional leaders in the province have, despite extreme difficulties,
complied with the law. Yet, during the budget debate of the Department of
Provincial and Local Government in November, Mr Mufamadi ominously told the
House, and I quote:


   This does not detract from the fact that what is happening in KwaZulu-
   Natal is a matter of great concern to us. It is for this reason that the
   chairperson of the National House of Traditional Leaders, Nkosi Mzimela,
   and I have been in discussions, which led to an agreement that we are
   going to intervene and exorcise this ghost out of the body politic of our
   country once and for all.

The President twice asked the Minister for Provincial and Local Government,
Mr Mufamadi, and iNkosi Mpiyezintombi Mzimela, then chairperson of the
National House of Traditional Leaders, to see the Premier of KwaZulu–Natal,
Mr J S Ndebele, concerning these matters. Sadly, these instructions have
not been carried out.
Of most urgent concern is the fact that the provincial legislation does not
address the obliteration of the powers and functions of traditional
leaders.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Madam Deputy
President, the theme of this year’s state of the nation address was
partnerships - partnerships of all kinds. Our President said:

   We must today renew our pledge, to speak together of freedom, to act in
   partnership to realise the happiness for all that should come with
   liberty, to work together to build a South Africa defined by a common
   dream, to say, together, in action - enough of everything that made our
   country to contain within it and represent much that is ugly and
   repulsive in human society.

Much of the debate yesterday focused on crime. To many members who spoke,
this is the most pressing issue confronting South Africa. One cannot, of
course, deny that crime is a challenge - a serious challenge and one that
we must not neglect to address directly and forcefully. Nevertheless, it is
worrying that the representatives of the people at this, the national
level, seem unable to look beyond the terrifying effects of crime to the
root causes and to determine ways of addressing them.

Crime is a serious problem, but the most serious problem and one we must
confront directly, decisively, is the continuing reality of
marginalisation, exclusion and deep poverty. [Applause.] If, as Parliament
and government, we fail to address these issues, we will not eliminate
crime.

Mr President, your reference to partnerships as a route to realising our
immense possibilities is a call to action for all South Africans. The
question we must answer as Parliament is: Can we meet the challenge?

Mongwe le mongwe o tshwanetse go dira, go itsenya mo tirong e e botlhokwa
e, ya go tsholetsa setšhaba, ya go tsikinya botlhe ka tshwaragano ya go
roba maatla a a maswe a a tlileng le tlhaolele. Tirisano ya baetapele le
baagi ba rona ke yona e e tlileng go supa gore Aforika Borwa ke lefatshe la
tshepo le ditshepiso. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Everyone should ensure that they are part of this important undertaking of
developing our society, to conscientise everyone about partnership in
discouraging the bad influences of discrimination. The partnership between
leaders and our community is the one to show that South Africa is a country
of hope and promise.]

Each of us has to play a practical role in the critical process of
mobilising our people, all our people, in the national task of breaking the
grip of the apartheid legacy.

We must, as Members of Parliament, as leaders, show South Africa, our
people, that this is a land of possibilities. Our job, beyond winning and
sustaining freedom and democracy, is to embed in South Africa a fundamental
social transformation that will unambiguously signal that we have created a
better life, that indeed South Africa is a land full of possibilities.

To be that kind of national agent for social change, we need to move beyond
our inherited and acquired social, political and cultural attributes. We
have to throw off the cloak of self-imposed superiority that seeks to
pretend that some of us know it all. We also have to throw off the cloak of
imposed inferiority that causes some of us to define ourselves as unequal
to the deep challenges.

We all must become full citizens of South Africa, able to enlist our people
in the pursuit of those characteristics that signal a free, capable and
able South Africa.

The assignment is that all of us must enter into a social compact that
involves us in leading a process of social transformation. Such a compact
means we do not need to ask the President about crime. Rather, we need to
ask ourselves: What more can I do? What more can I contribute?

Such a stance will require commitment from Rev Meshoe to all the clauses in
our Constitution, not just the ones that deal with homosexuality. We are
bound by the whole Constitution, not just a part of it. [Applause.]
National leadership carries with it the obligation to be true to the spirit
and intent of our Constitution.

Clearly, the creation of this transformed, engaged, positive and thriving
society depends on education. As the President said, we must redouble our
efforts at improving the quality of our schools, our universities and our
colleges. Our colleges are at full steam; 25 000 new students have
registered onto the new curricula and we will soon reach our target of 27
000 at FET colleges in new modern programmes for this year. [Applause.] Our
universities are, among many new initiatives, increasing the engineering
intake and are taking decisive steps to ensure that our young people
succeed.

Much that is positive has occurred. For example, for the first time in a
decade we have offered student teachers full-cost bursaries, we have no-fee
schools, and all high school learners, for the first time in our history,
must now do maths or mathematical literacy. [Applause.]

The participation rates of young people in higher education are far higher
than the statistics the hon Leader of the Opposition referred to when he
quoted Naptosa yesterday, and I shall provide him with the correct figures
shortly.

Building a transformed society will take more than changing structures and
curricula in our schools, our universities and colleges. We have to re-
examine all our practices. Multilingualism has to become a part of who we
are. [Applause.] The study of South African history has to become a part of
who we are. A knowledge of Africa has to become a part of who we are.
Access to music, to the creative arts and the sciences has to become a part
of who we are.

Schools and universities should reflect increasing diversity. Our mix of
learners and students has changed; our mix of teachers and academics has to
change as well.

We must also address the needs and interests of the vulnerable in our
society. We need to do more for those with disabilities, and all of us must
ensure that girls and women feel safe and that the conditions for feeling
safe emerge. This implies building a truly caring society.

Our government has been commended by many for its social protection
measures, pensions for the aged, child support grants, access to health
care and housing support. All these are praiseworthy achievements.

However, given the growing number of orphans, the massive disadvantage and
want of many pensioners, the number of beggars on our streets, and the
clear evidence that many are hungry and without means, we have to ask: Are
we doing enough to build a truly caring society?

Giving does not always show care; at times giving may actually reflect
disdain. A truly caring society is one which would empower while giving,
would support but ensure that the recipient, the poor person, the young
person, will be free to direct his or her own life one day.

A recent strategy and tactics document of the ANC asserts that we as South
Africa are only at the beginning of a long journey to a truly united and
prosperous society in which the value of all citizens is measured by their
humanity, without regard to race, gender and social status. It also states
that if there were to be any single measure of the civilising mission of
the national democratic revolution, it would be how it treats the most
vulnerable within its ranks.

How do we, as South Africans, treat the most vulnerable? I believe that we
need to work more closely with communities and social partners to ensure
that we devise new models and, where necessary, institutions of a caring
and empowering social development system.

If we wish to reduce the number of orphans seeking refuge in institutions,
as some say, should we not support the development of caring communities
where children feel safe and are loved? Should we not link grant recipients
to work opportunities within national development programmes or to skills
training opportunities? How do we make real our support for a thriving,
caring society - one that is dynamic, thriving and empowering? Our social
development programmes should be of a character that restores caring, mends
the social fabric and creates the conditions for the promotion of dignity
and freedom.

Each of us, I believe, Mr President, as you have said, has a role to play
in defining such a response. Imagine for a moment a social compact in which
each one of us South Africans gives up a meal to someone who is without
food; each of us feeds one – no one goes hungry; hundreds work the land to
ensure food for all – with seeds bought by all of us with the money we
might spend on advertising a crime message.

Mr President, it is possible for all of us and our potential partners to
work together to achieve that common dream you referred to last Friday. The
type of South African equal to that imagery - I got the Leader of the
Opposition riled – is the cadre identified by the ANC as “she who can pass
through the eye of a needle”. She is a person who fully understands the
sociopolitical impact of social engineering; who knows that the ANC cannot
successfully be made a scapegoat for the residues of the racism that
engulfed our country; one who knows that mouthing holier-than-thou
platitudes will not work, because fundamental transformation requires
getting our hands deep into the muddy bowl, right up to our elbows, if we
contribute, as we must, to a South Africa that has rid itself of much that
is ugly and repugnant. [Applause.]

Hon members, we must ask ourselves, as our President has done: Are we up to
the challenge? [Applause.] I think, hon members, that we probably will see
off the Leader of the Opposition with some glee but also a sense of fear
that the hon Gibson might become the leader of the DA. [Interjections.] I
can’t imagine anything more terrible than that. Thank you. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C S Botha): Order! Hon members, order please! May
I repeat what the Deputy Speaker requested of the people in the gallery. I
can understand your excitement, but it is difficult enough to keep order
down here, and we cannot do it at both levels. Please, don’t participate in
the debate. Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Chairperson, Mr President, as you see here, the
very mention of the word “crime” puts South Africa’s National Police
Commissioner to sleep. This man is a self-confessed confidant of an alleged
organised crime boss who showered him with gifts. It is no wonder that he
simply failed to appear again before the portfolio committee.

This is the same man whose very neighbours continue to be victimised by
criminals. He doesn’t live in the rural areas, that your colleagues oddly
claim over and over are the only areas experiencing crime, and as long as
he continues to remain impassive to the plight of those of us not wrapped
securely in the protective arms of seemingly endless shifts of taxpayer
bought-and-paid-for bodyguards, we will continue to ask, to use his very
words, what “all the fuss is about”.

Perhaps, Mr President, you could have a word with the man and instruct him
to speak with his deputy, Tim Williams, who was shot at his home in
Pretoria on Wednesday and then snarled at the journalists covering the
story because he wanted it all kept quiet.

How embarrassing that this Deputy National Police Commissioner should be
attacked, as the rest of us have been attacked and are being attacked in
our homes, be it in rural and metropolitan areas, on the roads, on the
beaches and at our places of work! I’m certainly not alone in finding it
shocking that the Deputy National Police Commissioner tried to muzzle the
press.

Your Minister Lekota yesterday took a very nonracial swipe at all South
Africans who have been driven out of the country by crime - telling Ivan
Makoku he was just some wealthy individual who could afford to leave.

Perhaps, hon Minister, you could find the time to sit with another member
of the Cabinet, Minister Pandor, to discuss with her where all the artisans
have gone. Not rich people, just ordinary souls who actually work for a
living rather than battering elderly ladies over their heads and stealing
their pensions. Like so many other hundreds of thousands of South Africans,
they are not here anymore because they fear that their children might be
raped and sodomised and disembowled and dismembered, or their relatives
beaten and tortured. You find that amusing, I trust, Minister.

Minister Lekota, perhaps if you have left your armed bodyguard at home one
day you’d come to understand how the rest of us are living. Fifty or more
of us will be murdered today. Some of us farmers, some of us from the
cities and some of us from townships ... 50 of us today and every day.

Civil society has been patient, polite and forgiving up until very
recently. However, after hon Minister Charles Nqakula flexed his muscles
and shut down the FNB anti-crime campaign, while his spin doctors worked
themselves into a positive lather trying to prove that the perfectly polite
letter was somehow a direct attack on the hon President, it became clear
that being patient and polite would no longer do. It was a bleak day for
democracy when the government used its powers to muzzle civil society.

Mr President, ordinary South Africans are fighting what is basically a low-
grade war – they are at war with criminals. While we welcome some of the
initiatives you mentioned on Friday, there are still questions to be
answered about how it is that, for example, a policeman or policewoman
could become effective with more money in their pocket if they are not
effective today?

It is also to be welcomed that 13 years down the line, an ANC President has
finally agreed with us that the forensic laboratories have a serious
problem. What you are not perhaps aware of, Mr President, is that the mass
resignations at these laboratories can be tracked directly back to the
apartheid-style race-based societal engineering, which attempted to force
the highly qualified leaders of those laboratories to hire underqualified
staff simply because they were black. Like SAfm’s John Perlman, they chose
to resign rather than to compromise their professionalism. The backlog at
these laboratories is staggering.

We do welcome, Mr President, your aim to improve crime analysis, but how
can this be done when the public is continually kept in the dark about
crime statistics? Your Deputy Minister of Safety and Security told me the
figures were available. They are not! So, how is it possible to monitor
what’s happening in one’s own neighbourhood without the relevant
information? How can we help if you hog-tie us?

To quote Raymond Louw who wrote in Business Day today:

  The crime moratorium creates the foundation for censorship, cover-ups and
  spin-doctoring, and all this, together with shady conduct, is destroying
  public trust in the credibility of government in dealing with people’s
  safety.

No one, Mr President, believes the crime statistics anymore. Your Minister
was the first to refer to the “crime whingers” and to tell them to leave
the country, the call eloquently repeated by Minister Lekota yesterday.
This insight into the true feelings of the ANC towards South Africans has
been an eye opener for the rest of us without 24-hour protection.

Mr President, the DA has put forward a Private Member’s Bill on the
creation of a fund for the victims of violent crime and I do trust such a
move will merit discussion in this House this year. I fully understand your
spin doctors feel the need to belittle anyone who highlights the problem
that may reflect negatively on your governing of this country – that’s what
they are paid to do.

Finally, Mr President, last year you assured me in this House that you gave
your full endorsement to my creating a multi-party commission determined to
drive the revival of our Police Service, our courts and our prisons ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Kohler-Barnard, your time has
expired.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: And I have begun to do just that. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Voorsitter, agb President, agb Adjunkpresident,
President Mbeki, die naweek van u staatsrede, verlede Vrydag, was dit vir
my as ’n ANC-lid enersyds teleurstellend en andersyds ironies om veral die
redaksionele opinies in die naweekpers se uiteenlopende kommentaar gade te
slaan.

Dit was teleurstellend omdat die hoofstroommedia, beide Engels en
Afrikaans, gefokus het op aktiwiteite wat grens aan sensasie, en dit is die
koers wat hulle ingeslaan het om relevant te bly, en ironies omdat ek glo
dat miljoene lesers, asook die bevolking in die algemeen, bewys het dat hoe
meer hulle aan hierdie doemprofesieë blootgestel word, hul gesonde oordeel
eintlik versterk word. Die oorweldigende ANC-meerderheid in die 2004-
verkiesingsuitslag is ’n klinkklare bewys hiervan.

Maar om perspektief en uitdaging aan ons President se staatsrede te gee, is
dit uiters kritiek dat ons in geen onsekere taal uitdrukking gee aan die
President se ongeëwenaarde leierskap in hierdie verband – leierskap, omdat
ons in hierdie demokratiese Suid-Afrika kritieke skuiwe moes maak waardeur
sommige van die sogenaamde openbare beleidskenners en andere, verskans as
onafhanklike ontleders, die harnas in gejaag is.

Mnr R J KING: Asseblief!

Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Ons is byna 13 jaar aan bewind, en in hierdie periode
van stille sukses het ons as die ANC streng volgens die kongresresolusies
van 2002 in Stellenbosch, wat ons hoofdoel van anti-armoede en ’n beter
lewe vir almal nastreef, geregeer. Nodeloos om te sê, hierdie beleid van
ons is in sy geheel ongeëwenaard in die geskiedenis van ons land. Dit is ’n
onbetwisbare feit dat toe die ANC die leisels by die apartheidsregime
oorgeneem het, was Suid-Afrika in ’n greep van ongelykhede, opwaartse
armoedevlakke, stygende werkloosheidsyfers, onvolhoubare regeringskuld en
begrotingstekorte.

Nieteenstaande hierdie verlammende nalatenskap het hierdie ANC-regering die
volgende ekonomiese stutte verseker: ongekende hoë vlakke van vertroue en
stabiliteit en sekerheid, nie net nasionaal nie, maar ook internasionaal;
lae regeringskuld en inflasie; substantiewe groei in die uitvoer van
vervaardigde goedere, veral in die motornywerheid, en minerale anders as
goud; en verhoogde produktiwiteit en verbeterde menslike tegnologiese
vaardighede in die algemeen.

Dit is die eerste keer in hierdie land se geskiedenis dat ons in die Noord-
Kaap druiwe, wyn, rosyntjies en selfs vleis kon uitvoer. As dit nie vir
hierdie ANC-regering was nie, sou ons dit nooit kon doen nie. [Applous.]
Dit het gelei tot ’n toename in bemagtigings-geleenthede vir veral
swartmense in die algemeen, vroue en die jeug, en tot hervorming van die
arbeidsektor wat tot beter arbeidsverhoudinge gelei het.

Ek wil egter graag die dinamiek van my provinsie, die Noord-Kaap, benadruk
aan die President en die ander agb lede, wat dalk nie bekend is met die
basiese inligting van die Noord-Kaap nie, ten opsigte van die volgende: die
Noord-Kaap is verreweg die grootste provinsie in Suid-Afrika met die
kleinste bevolking; en dis ’n uitgestrekte, eindelose semi-woestynlandskap
van wilde topografie en wilde vlaktes, asemrowende natuurskoon en
panoramiese uitsigte.

Daarom, President Mbeki, dat ek dan net graag ’n paar van ons suksesstories
in die Noord-Kaap met hierdie Huis wil deel. Die ANC-regering het en maak
tans in my streek, Siyanda, ’n groot verskil in die lewens van bevolkings
daar. Hier dink ek spesifiek aan die opgradering van die Augrabieswaterval
Nasionale Park, wat verskeie werksgeleenthede aan die mense van Kakamas en
Marchant verskaf het, en die bou van ’n teerpad tussen Askham en die
Kgalagadi-oorgrenspark. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek wens die lede kon gesien het watter ontwikkeling en verbetering dit
teweeggebring het vir daardie arm mense in die middel van die Kalahari, en
of die opposisie dit nou wil weet of nie, die ANC-regering het ’n beter
lewe vir daardie mense gebring. [Applous.] En hoe wonderlik was dit nie om
die ongekende vreugde van die ouers en kinders te sien met die opening van
die brug tussen Kakamas en Riemvasmaak nie – waar die kinders voorheen per
boot deur ysige water moes skool toe gaan, gaan hulle nou per bus skool
toe. Dis dié verskille in ons mense se lewens waarvan die ANC praat.

Ten opsigte van die landbou beleef die Oranjerivierstreek tans ’n opswaai,
veral in die uitvoer van tafeldruiwe, met die gevolg dat ál hoe meer
seisoenwerkers hier begin werk het. Ek skat so ongeveer 40 000 van hulle
kom elke jaar daar werk, met die gevolg dat ander sosiale tendense ook daar
begin posvat het. Byvoorbeeld, die skole het oorbevolk geraak, die klinieke
het oorbevolk geraak en die hospitale was ook oorbevolk, maar, agb
President, ons werk in dié provinsie daaraan.

Ek hanteer daagliks klagtes van werkers op plase in die omgewing wat
summier afgedank word en wie onregmatig in baie gevalle onmenslik behandel
word. Byvoorbeeld, baie van die werkers word op Kuruman gaan haal om op
hierdie vrugteplase te werk, maar wanneer daar ’n probleem ontstaan, word
hulle langs die pad afgelaai om hul eie pad terug te kies Kuruman toe
sonder ’n sent in die sak. Dit is juis hierdie tipe minagting en skending
van die basiese menseregte van hierdie arm werkers wat ’n mens se bloeddruk
laat styg, maar dit eers daar gelaat.

Die opposisie is lief om aanhoudend te kerm en te kla ... [Tussenwerpsels.]
... oor die Minister van Landbou. Maar dit is ook nie altyd so lekker om te
werk met boere wat aanhoudend praat van die “f” en die “k” nie. Want dit is
hierdie boere wat dit nog steeds baie, baie moeilik maak om met die werkers
van daardie plase saam te werk. [Applous.]

Mnr R J KING: Dis darem ’n duur handeklap daardie, hoor!

Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Ek wil dus voorstel dat ons monitering en oorsig ’n
radikaal nuwe betekenis gee gedurende die res van die termyn. Ten slotte,
wil ek onderskryf wat die President met alle oortuiging aan ons en aan die
volk oorgedra het, naamlik dat ons nou ’n bevryde volk is en dat die
selfsug en eiebelang wat steeds in sekere kringe gekoester word, vervang
moet word met ’n gees van patriotisme. Agb President, dit was vir my ’n
voorreg om in hierdie debat te kon praat. Baie dankie. [Applous.]
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J J COMBRINCK: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President.
President Mbeki, the weekend following the delivery of your state of the
nation address, last Friday, was for me as an ANC member, especially while
reading the diverse comments in the editors’ columns in the weekend
newspapers, on the one hand disappointing and on the other ironic.

It was disappointing, as the mainstream press, English as well as
Afrikaans, focused on activities that bordered on sensation and they headed
in that direction in order to remain relevant; and this was ironic, for I
believe that millions of readers, as well as the general population, have
proved that the more they are exposed to these prophecies of doom, the more
their common sense is actually strengthened. The overwhelming ANC majority
in the 2004 election results is resounding proof of this.

But, in order to give perspective to and meet the challenge of our
President’s state of the nation address, it is critical that we give
expression, in no uncertain terms, to the President’s unparalleled
leadership in this regard – leadership, because in this democratic South
Africa we have had to make critical shifts that antagonised some of the so-
called public policy experts, as well as others who were disguised as
independent analysts.
Mr R J KING: Please!

Mr J J COMBRINCK: We have been governing for nearly 13 years, and in this
period of silent success we, as the ANC, have governed strictly according
to the congress resolutions of 2002 in Stellenbosch, pursuing our main
objective of alleviating poverty and a better life for all. Needless to
say, this policy of ours, in its entirety, is unparalleled in the history
of our country. It is an indisputable fact that, when the ANC government
assumed the reigns from the apartheid regime, South Africa was caught up in
inequalities, rising poverty levels, increasing unemployment figures,
unsustainable government debt and budget deficits.

Notwithstanding this crippling legacy this ANC government ensured the
following economic pillars: unprecedented high levels of trust and
stability and security, not only nationally, but also internationally; low
government debt and inflation; substantial growth in the export of
manufactured goods, especially in the motor industry, and minerals other
than gold; and increased productivity and improved human technological
skills in general.

For the first time in the history of this country we, in the Northern Cape,
were able to export grapes, wine, raisins and even meat. If it was not for
this ANC government, we would never have been able to do it. [Applause.]
This led to an increase in empowerment opportunities, especially for black
people in general, women and the youth; and to transformation in the labour
sector which gave rise to improved labour relations.

I would, however, like to emphasise the dynamic of my province, the
Northern Cape, to the President and to the other hon members who may not be
familiar with the basic information about the Northern Cape, with regard to
the following: The Northern Cape is by far the largest province in South
Africa with the smallest population; and it is a vast, endless, semi-desert
landscape with untamed topography and untamed plains, a breathtaking
natural beauty and panoramic views.

Therefore, President Mbeki, I would just like to share a couple of our
success stories in the Northern Cape with this House. The ANC has been and
is currently making a big difference in the lives of people in my region,
Siyanda. Here I am specifically referring to the upgrading of the Augrabies
Waterfall National Park that provided numerous employment opportunities to
the people of Kakamas and Marchant, and the construction of a tarred road
between Askham and the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park. [Interjections.]

I wish members could see the resulting impact of this on development and
improvement for those poor people in the middle of the Kalahari and,
whether the opposition wants to know it or not, the ANC government improved
the lives of those people. [Applause.] And, how wonderful it was to see the
unparalleled joy of the parents and the children on the opening of the
bridge between Kakamas and Riemvasmaak – where the children previously had
to travel to school by boat on the icy water, they now travel to school by
bus. These are the differences in our people’s lives to which the ANC is
referring.

With regard to agriculture, the Orange River area is experiencing an
upswing at the moment, especially regarding the export of table grapes,
consequently more and more seasonal workers have started to work here. I
reckon that approximately 40 000 of them come to work there every year,
which resulted in the fact that other social tendencies have taken root.
For example, the schools have become overcrowded, the clinics have become
overcrowded and the hospitals are also overcrowded, but, hon President, in
this province we are working on this problem.

I handle complaints from farm workers in the surrounding area who are
summarily dismissed and wrongfully treated in an inhumane manner in many
instances. For example, many of the workers are transported from Kuruman to
work on these fruit farms, but when a problem occurs, they are dropped off
along the road to find their own way back to Kuruman without a cent to
their name. It is precisely this kind of contempt and infringement of the
basic human rights of these poor workers that makes one’s blood boil, but
enough of that for now.

The opposition likes to whine and complain continually ... [Interjections.]
... about the Minister of Agriculture. But also, it is not always fun to
work with farmers who refer to the “f” and the “k” all the time. For these
farmers are the ones who still make it very, very difficult to work
together with the workers of those farms. [Applause.]

Mr R J KING: That was a costly round of applause.

Mr J J COMBRINCK: Therefore I want to suggest that we give a radical new
meaning to our monitoring and review during the rest of the term. In
conclusion, I want to confirm what the President conveyed to all of us and
the people with so much conviction, namely that we are now a liberated
people and that the selfishness and self-interest that are still cherished
in certain circles must be replaced with a spirit of patriotism. Hon
President, it was a privilege for me to be able to speak during this
debate. Thank you very much. [Applause.] [Interjections.]]

Mr M V NGEMA: Chairperson, President, Deputy President, members of the
House, a beautiful 14-year-old Thato Radebe was raped, stoned and killed
last week. This inhuman act of sadism brought my comprehension of life and
everything that I believe in to an abrupt halt. I am convinced that
something is seriously wrong with our society.

We live in an age that breeds violence, crime, immorality, poverty,
HIV/Aids, self-doubt, racial divisions, class divisions, and the list goes
on. Should our core message not be borne out of the notion of morality?
Instead, social deviance is the new trend that is rampantly spreading its
disease in the womb of our beloved country. Our young democracy is at the
mercy of the hand of the criminal, and South Africa can hardly enjoy the
fruits attained from a struggle of blood, sweat and tears.

Nadeco applauds the President for acknowledging that crime is a problem in
his 2007 state of the nation address. We support the notion of South Africa
joining hands as a nation to obliterate this demon before it defeats us
all. While we support this notion, we also believe that “deliberation and
debate is the way we stir the soul of our nation”, as once stated by Jesse
Jackson.

Therefore, we challenge the government to take a critical look at the
Department of Safety and Security and the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development in order to find synergy between these
departments, for the purpose of alleviating and eradicating crime in our
beloved country.

Lack of initiative typifies those who feel a certain hopelessness caused by
the belief that their best efforts won’t really make a difference, so they
do not strive to achieve anything in our lifetime of promise and light.
They see themselves as passive trade-ins in a South Africa that does not
belong to the underprivileged. These demoralised South Africans see
themselves as victims that are not masters of their own fate.

The Age of Hope which was the main feature of the state of the nation in
2006 called for a new, positive outlook on life. Nadeco is convinced that
we can reinstil a profound sense of hope within every South African
citizen, the very same hope that sustained our ancestors during the era of
slavery and desolation in our beloved country, the very same hope that
carried us from a place of bondage into a place where we realised our dream
of freedom for all. It is the same hope that will carry us through to a
place where there is no fear, no doubt, no hate or divisions.

Nadeco acknowledges the progress we have made, as reported in the
President’s speech, and again, we commend the government for the excellent
work done since the inception of our democracy up to this time. The
President quoted and gave us details of the report on achievements in the
past three years. All the data the President presented shows that the
nation has indeed done better than specific past years given as our
benchmarks.

Then the President voiced his dissatisfaction about the success he had
spoken about by saying: “We must remain concerned that these figures are
woefully low.” Quite clearly, the President was comparing the statistics he
had given in his address to the target figures he knows we must attain in
order for us to experience the kind of prosperity that causes the hills and
the trees to clap hands, as was foretold by the prophet Isaiah.

Our country, together with all others in the world, has a number of
appointments with our destiny – the 2010 Soccer World Cup and the 2015
Millennium Development Goals. These major events on our planning calendar
must begin to shape our daily plans to include strategies that will
eradicate issues that pose a threat to the success of these upcoming events
in South Africa.

Our alarming crime statistics, incidents of attacks on tourists and
repugnant but unfortunately, in most cases, accurate media headlines are
matters that government has to tackle decisively with the help of all
relevant stakeholders and citizens of South Africa in order to allay the
fears of tourists to rest and double the probability of a successful 2010.

Nadeco believes that we must be driven by our common vision and dream. All
the other minor challenges will be incorporated into our main objectives
and they will be eliminated as we move like an African elephant, lumbering
thunderously and ponderously through the jungle.

Robert F Kennedy once said:

   Few will have the greatness to bend history itself, but each of us can
   work to change a small portion of events, and in the total of all those
   acts will be written the history of this generation.

Much has been done by government to eradicate a number of vile issues that
prevent us from living together in harmony as a nation, and prevent us from
realising our full potential. But, much more needs to be done by the
private sector, civil society and all South African citizens to build our
country into a safe and better place for all.

This is the common dream that we must hang onto as South Africans in order
to realise our vision of a beloved country that caters adequately for all
of us.

“I will command a victory to excellence and to victory, and that is what
life is all about.” This is a quote once made by Vince T Lombardi. Nadeco
believes it is time to grant South African citizens the gift of a beloved
country that cares about the development of its people, a South Africa that
is determined to move away from the dependency approach, and fiercely
replace it with an ideology of inspired and industrious citizens who
believe in their abilities and excellence from a young age.

It is the duty of our beloved country to bless our people with a high moral
... [Time expired.] [Applause.]
MOTLATSA LETONA LA DITABA TSA KGWEBO LE INDASTERI: Modulasetulo,
Mopresidente wa rona, Motlatsa-Mopresidente, Matona, ba thusanang le
Matona, Ditho tsa Palamente le ba dutseng pontsheng ke a le dumedisa
kaofela.

Ho molemo hore ha batho ba batla ho kena ntweng ena ya hore re re, re
lwantsha jwang bofuma le bosenyi, ha ba ke baye mane diforamong tsa
sepolesa moo ba dulang teng. Mme Kohler-Barnard, ya qetang ho tloha mona,
ke kgolwa hore a ka amoheleha haholo ha a tsamaya le sephepheshwana sa hae
sa pampiri, a lo bontsha batho ba moo a dulang teng hore a ka etsa eng hore
a fedise ntho eo a e bitsang bosenyi.

A se ke a tlo re jwetsa mona phodiamong hore “pampiri ke ena e rometswe ke
mang mang”. Yena o etsa eng jwalo ka setho sa Palamente? Ha a tsamaye a lo
nka karolo ho dikomiti tsa diforamo tsa sepolesa a buwe ka ntho eo a buwang
ka yona mona. A seke a fella mona feela. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs
follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, our President,
Deputy President, Ministers, Ministers’ assistants, Members of Parliament
and the general public, I greet you all.

It would be helpful if the people, who want to take part in the fight
against poverty and crime, could attend police forums in their areas. Ms
Kohler-Barnard, the one who’s just left the podium, I believe would be
welcomed if she were to take her little piece of paper and go and show her
neighbours what she can do to end what she calls “crime”.

She shouldn’t come to this podium and tell us, “here is a paper which was
sent by so and so”. What is she doing as a Member of Parliament? She must
go and participate in police forum committees and talk about the issues
that she’s mentioning here. She must stop talking about it here only.]

Mr President, in the state of the nation address, you laid down a challenge
to us to promote the growth of the small and medium enterprises and to
implement detailed programmes as part of our response to fighting poverty
and underdevelopment.

Surely, some of the members of this House will choose to talk to some of
the issues that they feel are much better for them to talk to. Some of them
will talk to the issues that we feel make a difference in the people’s
lives.

These challenges are well known and are a visible reminder and remain a
legacy as one of the cruellest forms of social injury known to humankind.
How do you address these challenges as a collective: underdevelopment, a
weak social economic asset capital base, alienation from the mainstream and
global economy and untransformed first economy? We have progressive
policies in place and we also have the organisational structure in place to
rise to the challenges to intensify our programmes. But we now have the
will and the energy to commit ourselves to making sure that we can also
agree with you, Mr President, that those on the fringes of the economy
should also enjoy the happiness that comes with a growing economy.

Ke tla dumellana le wena haholo moo hobane ke tshepa hore rona ba Lefapha
la tsa Kgwebo le Mesebetsi ka tlasa moya wa hore rona batho re batla “A
people’s contract to create work and fight poverty”.

Selemong se fetileng re ile ra nka tletlebo ena, ra ba ra leka hore re bone
hore re ka etsa jwang hore re thuse batho ba habo rona ba hlophehang,
hobane re tseba tsela eo ba hlophehang ka yona. Ha re e bale dipampiring,
tlhopheho re a e tseba. Re hlahetse ho yona ra ba ra holela ho yona.

Ke ka hona re tsamayang re yang moo batho ba dulang teng re buisana le
bona. Selemong se fetileng Letona la ka, Ntate Mphahlwa, o itse kgwedi ya
Phupu e thonngwe hoba ya National Entrepreneurship. Ka tlasa programo ena
eo re e bitsang hore ke “Outreach Programme” e leng ya ho isa Lefapha la
tsa Kgwebo le Mesebetsi bathong.

Ha re qala ka programo ena re ile ra tloha Amersfoort, Mpumalanga ra
tswella Nkungumathe kwana mapolaseng, mme moo le teng re ne re sa ithute
mapolase re ne re ya teng hore re bue le batho, le mane eNkandla KwaZulu-
Natal. Re tsamaya le diejensi jwalo ka Khula, re tsamaya le bona ha mmoho
le ba diprofensi ho ditaba tsa moruo le ba diLED. Re ruta batho hore
menyetla e entsweng ke mmuso ka tlasa hao Monghadi, le hore ba ka kgona
jwang hore ba ngodise dikhampani tsa bona. Ba se ke ba tsuwa ka tlase ke
dinokwane tse qhekanyetsang batho ba bangata, ba bang ba bona ba teng ka
mona, ba ja tjhelete tsa batho.

Ho bona re re, tlohong Company and Intellectual Property Registration
Office – Cipro, le bolelle batho hore le etsa eng, le ba bolelle ka leleme
leo ba le utlwang e seng sekgowa se kenelletseng haholo, hore batho ba
tsebe seo ba se etsang.

Re boele hape re nke le tse kang bo dithuso tsa tjhelete tsa pele  “start-
up grand” hore motho o bone hore o etsa jwang hobane maikemisetso a rona ke
ho fedisa tlala. Mosotho o re “lepotlapotla le ja podi, lesisitheho le ja
kgomo”, hobane o a sheba o bone hore o ka etsa jwang hore o thuse motho.

Rona re le Lefapha la tsa Kgwebo le Mesebetsi re ikentse ka setotswana, re
batla hore re hafole tlala ena re sebedisana mmoho le batho. Moo re
tsamaileng Monghadi, ha re fihla bathong re fumana bothata hobane setjhaba
se lla ka hore se fuwa mangolo a thata a bileng a le matele. Re kopa hore
le lokise dintho tsa mofuta oo re tle re tsebe ho sebetsa ha bobebe.
(Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to concur with you fully on that issue because I believe that
we, in the Department of Trade and Industry, are of the sentiment that we
want “A people’s contract to create work and fight poverty”.

In the past year we took this contentious issue and tried to see how best
we could help our people who are suffering, because we know how much they
are suffering. We do not only read about suffering in the papers, we have
also experienced it. We were born and bred in poverty.

That is why we go around and visit the areas where people live to talk to
them. Last year my Minister, Mr Mpahlwa, said that the month of June was
chosen as National Entrepreneurship Month, under the programme called the
“Outreach Programme”, which was meant to take the Department of Trade and
Industry to the people.

When we started this programme we left from Amersfoort, Mpumalanga and went
on to Nkungumathe in the farmlands. However, we were not there to learn
about the farms but to talk to the people. The same applied to Nkandla in
KwaZulu-Natal. We travelled with agencies such as Khula as well as
provincial officials concerned with economic matters and LEDs. We informed
the people about the opportunities provided by government under your
patronage, Sir, as well as informing them about how they could register
their companies. This will help them to avoid being conned by fraudsters -
some of whom are amongst us - who swindle them out of their cash.

We advised them to come to the Company and Intellectual Property Office,
Cipro, to get information about what it’s about, and it should be explained
to them in a language that they can understand and not in very complicated
English; so that they can understand what they are getting themselves into.

We also give them base capital – start-up grand – for them to determine how
best they can use it because our aim is to eradicate poverty. There is a
saying that goes, “time and tide wait for no man”, because one looks around
to see how quickly one can help one’s fellow man.

We in the Department of Trade and Industry, in co-operation with the
people, are hard at work trying to halve indigence. Wherever we went, Sir,
we were met with complaints about how people were given long and complex
forms to fill in. We would like to ask that these forms be simplified so as
to facilitate our work.]

Communities have pointed out that there are problems with some of the
agencies that finance small businesses, as intermediaries are used to reach
such agencies. This has been proven to be a point of concern to these
communities. So, we need to sit down and see what we can do to make sure
that our people can access these services.
Having said all the above, the DTI has programmes that speaks to the second
economy and we have to ensure that our communities that are trapped in
these particular situations are able to be part of the mainstream economy.
This we have to do in partnership not only with government but also with
the private sector and these communities. For instance, in the Northern
Cape last year, Absa, together with the provincial and local government and
Umsobomvu, jointly established a Batsha Fund that allows young
entrepreneurs to access start-up capital. This is what we want. The speaker
before me stated the type of the region we are talking about and what
opportunities are available, in terms of making sure that those youth are
able to be part of the economy. So, these are issues that members of this
House should deal with.

The interventions we have are quite a long list, but I will try to talk to
just a few. We have Khula and Khula Start-up. The Apex Fund has been
launched in all the nine provinces, with 27 approved loan application
outlets in partnership with the village banks that exist in those areas.

All these Apex Fund offices have been opened in rural areas because we want
to make sure that, in these rural areas, people are able to make sure that
they form part of the greater scheme, and can access funds because, to
them, going to the banks is not just an easy target compared to people who
have cars and who just go there. It is a struggle for them to take long
walks or either use taxis or cars. We believe the Apex Fund will be able to
assist them because it is closer to them.

Last year alone, we were able to disperse approximately R200 million. We
think that if we have to increase the roll-out, we can even have a much
greater impact in those areas. We have also employed provincial managers in
all nine provinces. The fund offers products such as mobilisation through
co-operatives and other indigenous formations.

Siyazi ukuba kudala besisenza izinto zemishayelwano okanye imigalelo.
Besigalelelana anditsho? Besibeka le madlana yethu encinci, siyisebenzise
ukwenzela ukuba sibona singayisebenzisa njani na ukuze izale, ibe ninzi.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We know that we have been engaged in financial self-help schemes or co-
operatives or stokvels for a long time. We used to engage ourselves in
these financial schemes, isn’t it? We would contribute our little amount of
money and see how we could utilise it in order to accrue interest from it.]

Iyasiza-ke futhi i-Apex Fund. Abafuna ukuzobeka leyo madlana encane,
siyabavulela ama-akhawunti abo, sibabhale phansi. Kodwa labo abafuna imali
mboleko bangayithola futhi imali esukela ku-R10 kuze kufinyelele ku-R10
000. Le mali basuke bezobuye bayibuyise futhi siyabafundisa nokuthi
bangayisebenzisa kanjani.

Lokhu-ke sikwenza ngoba sifuna ukubona iSamafu neMafisa, Mongameli,
zisebenza zonke ngempela. Phela lezi zinhlangano zisebenza ngalaba bantu
abaphuma le, abakuthola kunzima ukufinyelela koma-FNB. Ngakho-ke senzela
ukuthi iMafisa neSamafu ibe seduze nabo, zibasize ukuze bakwazi ukuthi
ngempela baphucule izimpilo zabo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The Apex Fund is very useful. Those who want to invest whatever small
amount they may have are assisted when they open accounts and everything is
written down. And those who may need personal loans can get them, from R10
up to R10 000. These loans are repaid at a later stage and we teach people
how to use their acquired credit.

And we do all this Mr President, because we want to see both Samafu and
Mafisa working. You will remember that both these funds cater for those who
come from the remote rural areas who find it hard to go to institutions
like FNB. We therefore make sure that both Samafu and Mafisa are brought
closer to the people so that they can make people’s lives better.]

International experience indicates that women seem to benefit more from
access to micro finance and credit to a greater extent than men do. I said
“international experience”, but that is not the case as we speak now in
South Africa. The example of the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh and the women’s
self-help scheme that the Minister of Public Works was talking to, is one
example that has shown us that if we make sure that we have such schemes,
they do make a difference in terms of making sure that women access these
particular services and improve their households. These schemes could also
ensure that women can move out of poverty-stricken conditions.

So, Samafu and Mafisa to us are part of the important tools that we use to
eradicate poverty and underdevelopment. Seda was also rolled out in all the
provinces, but we hope we will finalise the opening of the offices such as
the Limpopo one in March.

The patriots of the Congress of the People in Kliptown adopted the Freedom
Charter. One of the clauses said and I quote: “The people shall share in
the country’s wealth.” I further quote: “All people shall have the right to
trade where they choose, to manufacture and to enter all trades, crafts and
professions.”

One of the means our people have been using to uplift communities over the
years has been co-operative units.

NgesiZulu-ke bathi “amakhophorethivu”. Besizibiza ngamanye amagama lezi
zinhlangano, njengoba bengishilo phambilini ukuthi besithi yizitokofela
nokunye. Kodwa-ke ziyilezi zinto ebezisiza kakhulu ngalezo zikhathi futhi
ziyasibonisa ukuthi ziyizinto ezisebenzayo kakhulu.

Ngalezi zinhlangano zobambiswano zamakhophorethivu thina singu-DTI siye
sabambisana neMeropa Heritage neNdimande co-operative. Sesenze imisebenzi
engaba ama-490, Mongameli.

Siqale ngonyaka odlule. Sisungule i-art and living co-operative
esisebenzela kakhulu. Siyiqale eMpumalanga sineNkosi uMakhosonke Mabhena.
Iyasebenza kakhulu ngoba manje asenzi izingubo kuphela kodwa sesenza
namakhethini nefenisha. IMinyango siyayicela ukuthi uma isifuna ukushintsha
ifenisha ize izobuza kithina ngoba le fenisha yakhiwe eNingizimu Afrika. Le
ngubo engiyigqokile nawe uyayibona Mongameli, futhi ngiyakholwa ukuthi
yinhle kakhulu. Uma nginyathela ngiyabonakala impela ukuthi ngingowase-
Afrika. [Uhleko.] Yenziwe yibo labo mama. [Ihlombe.] Yenziwe omama
basemakhaya abasebenza kanye nale nhlangano kamasibambisane engaphansi kuka-
DTI. Siyabaqeqesha, sibanike imali futhi ziyabonakala ukuthi zinhle impela
lezi zingubo abazithungayo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[It is interesting to note how they named “co-operatives” in isiZulu. We
had these things before but we had different names for them. As I have said
before, we called them stokvels, etc. But all in all these are the things
that helped us and showed us that they can be very handy indeed.
With these partnerships and co-operatives, Mr President, we as the DTI, in
co-operation with Meropa Heritage and the Ndimande co-operative, have
completed 490 projects.

We started last year. We started the Art and Living co-operative which is
doing pretty well. We started it in Mpumalanga together with inkosi
Makhosonke Mabhena. This co-operative is alive and kicking. It no longer
only makes dresses, but it also makes curtains and furniture. We would also
like to appeal to the government departments that should they need to
change their furniture, they should get some advice from us because this
furniture is made in South Africa. And I am sure, Mr President, you will
agree with me that the dress that I am wearing today is stunningly
beautiful. Wherever I go, everyone can see that I am indeed an African.
[Laughter.] This dress was made by those women at that co-operative.
[Applause.] It was made by rural women who are in partnership with the co-
operative under the DTI. We train these women and we also give them some
money and anyone can see how beautiful the dresses are that they make.]

Ntate Seremane, na ebe kobo ena ha e ntle? E entswe ke bomme ba hlahang
dibakeng tsa mahae, ba tshehetswang ke rona. [Mr Seremane, is this blanket
not beautiful? It was made by the women from the rural areas, whom we
support.]

Ngakho-ke lezi zinto ziyasebenza, Mongameli. Izinhlangano zobambiswano
ziyasebenza kakhulu. Uma sizisebenzisa thina ngokubambisana, zingenza
izinto ezinkulu, size sigcine phela sesingena ekuhwebeni namazwe
angaphandle. Kufuneka siyilungise le ndaba ukuze kuhambisane okungenayo
nokuthunyelwa kwamanye amazwe. Uma sizixhasa, kuyacaca ukuthi kukude lapho
sizoya khona nabo. Izinhlangano zobambiswano ngishilo ngathi ziyasebenza
ngempela. [Ihlombe].

Lo mthetho wezinhlangano zobambiswano waqala ngo-2004. Wadingidwa futhi
wagunyazwa ngo-2005. UMongameli wawushicilela wathi usuyasebenza. Ngakho-ke
sithemba ukuthi sizosebenzisana nawo lo Mthetho ukuze phela sengeze, zibe
ziningi lezi zinhlangano zomasibambisane. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Therefore, Mr President, these things are really working. Co-operatives
are doing a splendid job. If we can co-operatively make them work, they can
do wonders and we can even trade with other countries. We need to look at
this matter so that there could be a balance between what we export and
what we import. If we continue supporting these co-operatives, it is clear
that they will go places. I have already said that co-operatives are really
working.

The Co-operatives Bill was passed in 2004. It was discussed again and it
was passed in 2005. The President proclaimed it. We therefore hope that we
will use this legislation to add more co-operatives to our list.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, I regret that your time
has expired.

IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZOHWEBO NEZIMBONI: Sengigcina, ngizokhuluma
ngesikhwana samakhosikazi. Ngithi kuwe baba, njengoba uNgqongqoshe
eseshilo, sicela usifakele sona. Isikhwama samakhosikazi sizosisiza
kakhulu. Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: In conclusion I want to talk
about the women’s fund. I said to you, Sir, as the Minister had said, we
are pleading with you to start it. The women’s fund will be very helpful. I
thank you. [Applause.]]

Business suspended at 15:53 and resumed at 16:09.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, Mr
President, Madam Deputy President, members of this august House, the
challenges South Africa faces are not simple. Achieving democracy, securing
wide-scale societal transformation, ensuring economic growth, building one
nation out of a deeply divided society, closing the huge chasm between the
exceedingly rich and the desperately poor, these are not the kinds of
challenges that respond well to either this or that. We should not choose
between these, nor should we try to tackle them sequentially. We should
meet them all at the same time.

Our challenges are to extend services while transforming and building the
machinery to deliver such services. It is about growing the economy while
distributing its fruits. It is about finding the balance between economic
and social spending, not either-or.

Mr President, on Friday you showed how you created a delicate balance among
the gamut of policy goals we have set for South Africa. But listening in
this House, it seems that at least some of the people’s representatives are
intent on advancing a position where we are to do one thing at a time, in a
particular order, that will protect the advantages they have enjoyed as
long as possible.

I’d like to use my time to debunk some of these fallacies that keep on
being regurgitated by some. In the first instance, I want to address the
label of “bureaucratic” attributed to our President. This term has acquired
the quality of an insult under the neoliberal agendas for reforming public
administrations that conservative politicians such as Margaret Thatcher and
Ronald Reagan have hatched. It is therefore no surprise that this label has
been attributed to those who, if they could have their way, would do away
with the state, or at least minimise it, and roll it back in favour of the
market. Their agenda would be one of destroying the efforts that have taken
place under President Mbeki to strengthen the state to take up its rightful
place as the leading force in pursuing a developmental agenda for this
country, building the capacity of government in the interests of being the
leading and direction-giving partner in complex governance arrangements
that are to lead to the transformation of South African society - a partner
that would not be a push-over for private and individual interests, but a
formidable partner that would safeguard the interests of society as a
whole, interests of this generation as well as future generations.

This agenda has always been one for trying artificially to separate
politics from administration. In reality, politics and administration are
deeply intertwined and inseparable. They are two sides of the same coin.
Together they either introduce change or preserve the status quo. Together
their actions result in the allocation of the resources of society.
Administration might be a means to an end, but the means itself remains a
player, since it is responsible for the implementation of a political
agenda – an agenda they can either support or sabotage or scupper.

To retain oversight of this powerful machinery, to be in the engine room
where the controls are, is therefore by definition one of the most
political acts a head of state, a head of government can perform, and
President Mbeki is doing just that. He has demonstrated that he has his
hands on the key levers. The President understands the strengths and
weaknesses of the machinery under his control, and he shared these insights
unreservedly with every citizen in this country during the state of the
nation address.

The opposition, through their political utterances, demonstrate how they
underestimate the importance of the programme of action as a political
instrument. Trying to dismiss it as “technocratic” or, even worse,
“bureaucratic”, shows, surprisingly, a lack of insight into the overall
workings of government. The programme of action ought to be respected as a
tool, an indispensable point of reference that allows the President to keep
all parts of the government machinery focused. It should be recognised for
the fact that it allows the executive to allocate resources better and
account for its use to the nation better. It should be appreciated as a
mechanism for the executive to ensure that the administrative machinery of
this country is involved with activities that will result in us achieving
the policy and developmental goals we have set – the establishment of a
democratic order, where all citizens will be able to enjoy the fruits of
such democracy, not only in terms of political rights but also human and
economic rights, an order that would have transformed itself from the
discrimination associated with apartheid to one of inclusiveness and
equity.

In the second instance, let me deal with the issue of lack of leadership,
since it has been alleged that the President has said so little about
corruption. The President’s stance on corruption should not be seen in
isolation from the ANC’s position of an ethical and values-based approach
to the Public Service and governance institutions, more broadly speaking.
[Interjections.]

In the first instance, we need to be clear that corruption is not something
to be dealt with on an individual basis. Yes, individual cases sell
newspapers and make for saucy dinner table conversation, but the antidote
to corruption and the institutionalisation of ethical governance practices
are systems, strong systems - systems that are legitimate and can be
trusted, systems and institutions that constitute a reciprocal check-and-
balance on one another. Here I speak of institutions such as following due
process, the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary, innocence
until proven guilty, as well as the rule where everyone has the right to be
heard in defence of their own situation, particularly so when accusers have
the protection of anonymity and so forth.

We will continue to be involved, not only in South Africa, but also on the
continent and in the entire global community, to push an anticorruption
agenda. To this effect, we are hosting two landmark events in the domain of
anticorruption in the next few months.

But ethics is something much deeper than the systems I have mentioned just
now. Ethics is a system of values that guides behaviour. Mr President, your
oration at the funeral of Ma Adelaide Tambo on Saturday reminded us once
again of how deeply entrenched value sets have always been part and parcel
of ANC culture, how the spirit of ubuntu, the respect for every human being
regardless of race, colour, class, gender and age, have shaped the thinking
and doing of those in the ANC specifically, but also the broader democratic
movement. We might have been guilty of being short on the detailed planning
regarding the transformation of the Public Service at times, but we were
never short on the values we wanted the post-apartheid Public Service to
adhere to.

Mr President, you reflected on the hurtfulness of the perception some hold,
that the ANC, and those who lived and died for its ideals, and who are
still prepared to make immeasurable sacrifices:

   ... constitute nothing more than a dishonourable cabal and an effort
   that, in the end, serves purposes defined by immorality and amorality,
   that will give birth, inevitably, to a society whose unfortunate citizens
   are condemned to endure a fate not better than that visualised by Dante’s
   inferno.

We must guard against the habit that is setting in, of painting with very
broad strokes, generalising to large groups and entire institutions, when
we actually have in mind the example of one or a few individuals. As
disturbing or moving individual cases might be, they are just that, and
should not be seen as a pattern. They are the exceptions, rather than the
rule. When we generalise the entire systems from these anecdotal examples,
we are doing immeasurable harm, demotivating those who should be motivated
instead, and discrediting institutions that rather need strengthening. In
the end, it is the institutions that have to carry the day and provide
certainty and predictability when individuals falter, as they certainly do
at times.

We need to take note of what the President said at Ma Tambo’s funeral about
soiling inside the caves and under the solitary trees that are effectively
our safe harbours in times of need.

Dit was nog altyd my standpunt dat, indien ons die waardes van Suid-
Afrikaanse staatsdiensamptenare kan verander, ons ’n mag in hierdie land
kan loslaat wat sal lei tot transformasie tot in die kern van ons nasie.
Indien staatsamptenare ’n perspektief kan aanvaar dat elke mens respek
verdien, bloot vanuit die feit dat hy of sy ’n mens is, en dat elkeen van
ons bereid sal moet wees om individuele opofferings te maak ten einde ons
samelewing as ’n geheel te laat baat, dat ons voortdurend moet werk om te
verseker dat elke lid van ons gemeenskap gelukkig is, en dat spesifiek dié
van ons wat die geluk het om beter te lewe as die meerderheid, ’n
spesifieke verantwoordelikheid het. Indien ons staatsdiensamptenare kan
besef dat hulle ’n verpligting het om te strewe na die bou van ’n nuwe Suid-
Afrika, een waar mense die middelpunt van belang is, dan het ons ’n masjien
wat nie maklik gaan staan nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[It has always been my view that, if we were able to change the values of
public servants, we could release a force in this country that would lead
to transformation down to the heart of our nation. If public servants were
to accept a perspective that every person deserves respect, merely because
of the fact that he or she is a human being, and that each one of us should
be prepared to make personal sacrifices in order for the community to
benefit as a whole, that we have to work continually to ensure that every
member of our community is happy, and that those who are fortunate enough
to have a better life than the majority, in particular, have a specific
responsibility. If our public servants were to realise that they have an
obligation to pursue the building of a new South Africa, one in which
people are of primary concern, then we will have a machine that will not
come to a halt easily.]

With the re-orientation currently taking place in Samdi, we believe the
running of the compulsory induction course for public servants, the
rationale of which is, inter alia, the inculcation of a value system in
line with our Constitution, the Batho Pele principles and overall
philosophy of ubuntu in our public servants, will be a key initiative to
achieve the forging of a single organisational culture across the public
sector, in line with our developmental orientation.

The scope of it is now in the range where it could have adequate impact.
Previously, the thinking was just too limited to have any lasting impact.
In contrast to last year’s way of thinking that focused on inducting 3 600
public servants per year, we have raised the bar by thinking differently
regarding the supply chain. We are now putting plans in place to induct 100
000 public servants per year. We have established that the actual need and
demand for these courses, if we are to keep up with new entries and ongoing
promotions across the system, are of such magnitude that we will have to
run eight induction courses in every province and some additional at
national level every week of every year in perpetuity.

In the third instance, allow me to deal with the extremely regressive
position repeatedly put forward by certain representatives in this country.
This is that capacity problems currently experienced in government is a
direct result of government pursuing a policy of creating employment equity
as a key strategy to move away from the iniquitous situation that prevailed
under apartheid.

Só ’n posisie ignoreer die feit dat die aanvraag na dienste ná apartheid
met ongeveer 400% toegeneem het, so te sê oornag. Maar laat ons maar
hierdie realiteit ter syde stel vir die oomblik.

In ooreenstemming met die kritici van die gelyke indiensnemingsbeleid wil
dit blyk asof dit onmoontlik is vir enigiemand anders as dié wat in ’n wit
vel gebore is om bekwaam te wees in die pos wat hulle beklee.
Dit wil blyk asof daar min ruimte toegelaat word vir die feit dat sommige
swart Suid-Afrikaners en hul kinders, terwyl hulle bannelinge was, kon baat
vind by onderwysstelsels veel beter as dié wat selfs wit kinders in Suid-
Afrika geniet het, en dat hulle by hul terugkeer daardie kwalifikasies en
bekwaamheid, opgedoen in die internasionale gemeenskap, kon terugbring. En
hulle beskou dit as ’n voorreg om hierdie voordele wat hulle geniet het,
terug te ploeg tot voordeel van die breë gemeenskap. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[A position like this ignores the fact that the demand for services
increased by approximately 400% after apartheid, practically overnight. But
let us put this reality aside for the moment.

In accordance with the critics of the employment equity policy it seems
that it is impossible for anyone other than those who were born with a
white skin to be qualified for the position they occupy.

It seems as if little room is left for the fact that some black South
Africans and their children, while they were in exile, could benefit from
education systems which were far better even than those enjoyed by white
children in South Africa, and that on their return they could bring back
those qualifications and competencies they had obtained in the
international community. Furthermore, they regard it as a privilege to
plough back the benefits they enjoyed to the advantage of the broader
community.]
In a very foolhardy manner, there is an insistence that every black
appointment in the public sector could not remotely have met the
requirements of the job as objectively determined, nor could they have been
the best candidate in an open process of competing fairly for jobs.

Such a position is nothing else than a repetition of perceptions of racial
superiority that has underpinned regimes such as that of apartheid South
Africa and Nazi Germany, which prevents us from tapping into the diversity
of competence, skills and experience that are available through all South
Africans, through the diaspora, and from elsewhere in the international
community that has South Africa’s interests at heart.

I am surprised by the sudden amnesia that has set in within our so-called
liberal community. Affirmative action in the public sector has been a
policy agenda that they pushed even 14 years before the ANC became the
government. Allow me to remind you that it was PFP MP Helen Suzman who, in
1981, used the term “affirmative action”, passionately arguing for
accelerated entry of black South Africans into the Public Service. A PFP
leader, Frederick van Zyl Slabbert, and liberal academic, David Welsh, at
the beginning of the 1980s argued that, with respect to the above, and I
quote:

   The most suitable pattern of distribution would be that of
   proportionality – as far as possible members of each politically salient
   group should be employed at each level proportionately to the size of the
   group in relation to the others.

I want to ask the hon Leon, as he disappears into the sunset: Is there any
other manner that he would suggest? Or is he acknowledging that there is a
rethink on this policy issue in the liberal ranks? Or is he the one who
took the party on the more conservative and rightwing path, and that is why
he is disappearing into the sunset? Has the party rejected that? [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Rre I S MFUNDISI: Motlotlegi Modulasetilo, Mopresidente, Motlatsa-
Mopresidente le ditokololo tse di tlotlegang tsa Kokoano Bosetšhaba, ke a
leboga. Fa tlhogo ya naga e bua, pula ya maebana e nà jaaka mo bekeng e e
fetileng, go na le tsholofelo ya gore letlepu le mo tseleng mme batho ba
tla ja monate wa kobolela.

A jaanong ke re ... (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr I S MFUNDISI: Thank you hon Chairperson, President, Deputy President
and hon members of the NA, the fact that there was a drizzle this past week
after the head of the state has spoken symbolises that there is hope for a
world of abundance in which people will enjoy themselves.

I now want to say ...]

... the state of the nation address came forth as an in-depth result of
introspection by government after considering all its successes and
failures. We have noted that millions of people have access to social
grants. It should particularly be noted that the administration of this
exercise has been characterised by graft because of the unfortunate way in
which applications were made. More people will still have to appear before
the courts to answer for their misdeeds in this regard. We are not certain
whether all such recipients deserve court cases. We should also be on the
lookout that the country is not turned into a welfare state.

We, in the UCDP, have come to understand development as meaning that those
who have no services should have them, without necessarily depriving those
who have or had services before. It is sad that people who had ample
potable water prior to 1994, in the Ramotsheri Moiloa municipality in the
North West province, are now left without any because the new
administration opted for a source on the farm of someone with ties to the
powers that be. This was meant to earn this individual cash, but as fate
would have it, the source was unable to meet the needs of the area. This is
a sad lesson that reinventing the wheel is unnecessary.

Our matric results will keep vacillating like a yoyo if those charged with
education do not discharge their responsibilities with responsibility.
Teachers should teach and not cheat by bunking classes and attending
endless meetings. They should not always have excuses when they are shown
that they have not lived up to expectations. Clichés, such as lack of
resources, are outmoded because some schools in poorer areas produce better
results.

It is also unfortunate that officials in education tend to dance to the
tune of their subordinates. Appointments to promotions are influenced by
teacher unions. The latter call their meetings at any time of the day
during the week, and the district officials are either unaware of what is
going on in their schools, because they hardly visit the schools, or they
condone the situation as in some cases some come from amongst the same
ranks, and do not possess the necessary will and managerial skills to stop
the rot. It is an unbecoming situation in education where the tail wags the
dog.

The difficulties that go along with land redistribution are noted, but even
where efforts have been made, very little or no support has come forth to
assist the new occupants of the land. We have lost count of the emerging
farmers who have tried their hand at producing food like the former
occupants, but failed. Their livestock is left to die as there is an acute
shortage of extension officers and, therefore, cynics go on to say: “What
did you expect from these black guys?”

For any country to prosper, we in the UCDP believe that all role-players
have to stand up to this task. No group should be seen to be strutting like
a colossus, claiming everything as their own, to the total exclusion of
others.

Social integration will take place if people are not perpetually reminded
that they enjoyed privileges or that their forbears did this or that to
some group that was dispossessed. Comments and remarks like these tend to
polarise society. They tend to polarise society more, and those called
names frown and stand aside to remain spectators even where they could
help.

We agree that, 13 years into the new dispensation, we should forge ahead to
build the new nation. It does not do us any good to be still speaking of
the Afrikaner nation, the Bafokeng nation or the Zulu nation, when we have
only one Constitution, one national flag, and one national anthem. Perhaps
a new nomenclature has to be sought to designate those other groupings, but
for each to call itself a nation is out of order. This is surely one area
in which debates should start.

The resolve by government to deal with the scourge of crime is most
welcome. This will, however, succeed if the supposed law enforcers are not
lawbreakers themselves. It may be argued that such cases are few and far
between, but what do you make of police officers who are alleged to have
taken a marked police vehicle to go and commit robbery in broad daylight?
What do you make of police officers who are alleged to have reported to be
sick and left their station in Pretoria to go to extort money from a
businessman in Lusikisiki?

The resolve by government that those who commit crime will be dealt with
accordingly sounds like sweet music to South Africans with pride. Let us go
back to those days of Tangana - oh, may his soul rest in peace - who said
that criminals must know that they will be dealt with in the way a bulldog
treats a bone. When the need arises, let us, within legal parameters, meet
fire with fire. After all, some criminals act with obvious impunity.

Service delivery is compromised in most cases by the very people who have
to make sure that people are served. While it is not palatable, it is
common knowledge that it is, in most cases, members of the ruling party who
are at one another’s throats because of allocations of tenders,
appointments to certain positions and jostling over who should be doing
what. Fifty per cent of municipalities in the North West, Mr President,
have no senior management. This is not only because of rare skills, but
because some have been purged as they do not belong to the same stable as
those in power.

The President’s speech is a wake-up call to government departments that
they should complement one another and not compete against one another. It
is unfathomable that the Ministers of Education and Labour have, since
2002, not had time to meet and deliberate on relooking at the National
Qualifications Framework. Such delays affect the progress and the
development of our country.

We appreciate that the government has at last come to see that the days of
wishful thinking are gone. The realisation by government that monitoring
and evaluation across all spheres of government have to be strengthened is
a bold admission of shortcomings. We accept that 2009 has been pencilled as
the time by which all these things should have been done, because close
deadlines have proved to be difficult.

The word “ubuntu” is being bandied around as if it will go out of fashion,
but it is clear that some people say things that they do not mean. How can
our people who have ubuntu go on national television or any available media
source to insult the President? People have to learn that, in any
situation, you win some and lose others. Therefore, if the judiciary made
findings against one, it is not because they are obsessed with the
apartheid mentality or whatever. It is because the facts at their disposal
show that. The big question to such people is: Why do they not refuse to be
acquitted by a white judge?

Let us rise to the clarion call by the President and, as one nation, strive
for social cohesion. We should be one another’s keepers, and while we
debate, should not put forward our numbers, but our brains; not brawn. Our
unity in diversity should strengthen us. After all ...
popapopa e a ipopaganyetsa, phatlaphatla e a iphatlalaletsa [... waste not,
want not.] Ke a leboga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, hon President, given our past, relentless
transformation is the one thing we cannot and will not waver from. Your
remarks last Friday, Sir, emphasised its need both at personal and societal
level, thus your reference to ubuntu, botho. As we say in Sesotho, “botho
ke ntho ya rona [We are known for humanity”.]

I thought our debate today would benefit from observations made by one
Pedro Luis Sotolongo about Ernesto Che Guevara in 2002, in a book subtitled
Ethics and Aesthetics of Living.

   Thus, to Che, purposes for which he struggled do not have, as their sole
   end, the transformation of the great objective structures of society. But
   also, firstly, the transformation of man, the creation of a new
   revolutionary man and unselfish man guided by a moral conscience, who
   prioritises serving society instead of himself.


Given the legacy of the past, the stubborn poverty and inequality in our
country, I cannot see how the tasks emanating from such challenges can
yield to any other persons but those described by Pedro that we should all
aspire to be.

The discomfort some hon members of the DA and others are feeling about
societal changes that advance black people, women - black and white -
people with disability, arises because they never heeded our call. Permit
me a brief detour from the need for humility at all times. I cannot resist
the temptation to err.

Sasho sathi balibambe lingashoni. Sasho sathi akuzukuba mnandi uma
sesibabuyisela endaweni yabo. [We warned them to make hay while the sun was
shining. We even said that it would not be pleasant when we finally put
them where they really belonged.]

This matter has been explored sufficiently by my colleagues earlier on and
I think this was enough from me for today.

The backbone of poverty and inequality, including their negative
manifestations, will only be broken effectively by a well-functioning state
machinery that co-ordinates its work; maximises its resources; builds
partnerships with communities and civil society organisations, which
include labour and business groups; plans for long-term situations;
monitors and evaluates its performance; and takes urgent but deliberate
corrective and remedial steps.

The design of our intergovernmental relations, giving expression to co-
operative governance provision of the Constitution, seeks to help us to
learn lessons to achieve the above-mentioned objectives.

Sir, you described the challenge before as being that our state system must
be innovative, enterprising and conduct its business in a people-centred,
people-driven manner, with local government playing a key role in the
system. Last Friday, Comrade President, you referred to work in progress
and, in line with that, the National Spatial Development Framework and its
piloting in 14 districts is crucial.

Without effective alignment of our plans, informed properly by people on
the ground and by the potential of their neighbourhoods, our efforts will
come to nought. But the real challenge lies in learning fast from our
experiences across the country and infusing such lessons in our ongoing
practices.

Local government is well placed to push for integration from below. The
systems Act conceives of the integrated development plans properly as a
platform for others, national and provincial departments, including public
entities, to make their share of sectoral, financial and management support
input for the realisation of the priorities identified as such.

Last week, the cities network, which is the coming together of six metros
and three cities, held a seminar to reflect on the challenges of bringing
together effectively issues of transport, housing and land in order to
effect better integration at local level. That discussion was quite crucial
and its timing appropriate.

We would like to ask: In addition to everything else that local government
reports on, should local government not also be reporting regularly to the
PCC about the quality of performance of the external public sector partners
that it invites to participate in fulfilling their integrated development
plan requirements? Are our monitoring and evaluation tools currently sharp
enough to produce the results we wish them to? Is the system of delegation,
both political and administrative, overall, working well in producing the
accountability and performance we require? I think focused attention on
these questions by government across the three spheres, and added
visibility and consistent provision of strategic leadership, instead of a
crisis mode of operation in some instances by senior managers, will make a
huge difference.

Infusing urgency and a quick turnaround on these matters appear to me to be
key to intensifying our campaign against poverty. There is no doubt that
the work we are doing in the processes of the summit that will emerge from
the alignment processes, as you told us last week, will produce very
crucial lessons for the work that we need to do. These alignment processes
that we are working towards are saying to us that the capacities that exist
in these areas of our work need to be taken advantage of much more
effectively. To avoid duplication, we should take advantage of other
capacities that exist. But also in doing so, we should be mindful that they
work in a manner that is informed, as I said earlier on, by the integrated
development plans.

We said in our assessment that the credibility of these IDPs will be
improved tremendously by people’s input, but equally by the input of
provincial and national departments, including public entities. It is that
work that we believe is going to be very crucial when the reports emerge
from what you told us last week. That will be key, as I said, to the
intensification of our campaign against poverty. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, Mr President, you
have spoken of perceptions about crime. I want to tell you that there is
another perception and that is that, when it comes to the application of
the rule of law, there are ANC citizens and ordinary South Africans.

The perception is that ANC citizens have a much better time in prison than
ordinary inmates. [Interjections.] I refer, among others, to Tony Yengeni.
This offender was sentenced originally to eight years’ imprisonment for
fraud. The sentence was halved on appeal. He benefited from a special
amnesty even though he hadn’t even started his sentence and was released
after 20 weeks.

Mr Yengeni began his sentence on 20 August last year. He was given a hero’s
send-off by the high and mighty in the ANC, including the Premier of this
province and the Speaker of the National Assembly. He was immediately
transferred to the Malmesbury centre of excellence, one of our newest and
least crowded facilities.

Because he is an ANC citizen, Mr Yengeni was admitted to a single cell in
the hospital section on the grounds, we are told, that he suffered from hay
fever. Yet there are many thousands of inmates, ordinary citizens, who
suffer from Aids and TB, who cannot be accommodated in the hospital
sections of our correctional centres for lack of space.

He was allowed out of his cell, alone and unsupervised, for exercise in the
mornings before the inmates had been counted by the morning shift. Although
the prison regulations, and I have them here, specify clearly that category
A inmates are allowed only five visits per month, with a maximum of two
visitors per occasion, because he is an ANC citizen, Mr Yengeni received
more visitors more frequently than this – apparently 17 on Christmas Day
alone. [Interjections.] Although section 15(1)(a) of the amenities
regulation states very clearly that “no food may be received from family,
friends and relatives”, he received and consumed such food.
Eighty days after his admission, Mr Yengeni was allowed out on weekend
parole. Despite his parole conditions expressly prohibiting him from
consuming alcohol, and this fact was confirmed by Minister Balfour in a
reply to my parliamentary question, he was pictured having a party with his
friends with a beer in his hand. The Department of Correctional Services
investigated this incident and, bizarrely, reported that it could not be
proved that the beer bottle contained beer! [Laughter.]

Most ordinary inmates would have forfeited their chances of early release
for such a transgression, but not Mr Yengeni. On 15 January this year he
was released into community correction. Every other inmate that I’m aware
of is either released as a phase-one or a phase-two parolee.

This is standard procedure followed by the parole boards. But, because Mr
Yengeni is an ANC citizen, he was released as a phase-four parolee, meaning
that he enjoys greater freedom than other offenders in his situation.

The Minister of Correctional Services himself went to this inmate to
explain these parole conditions. But, apparently, not clearly enough. My
information is that he has reported only once to the Educare centre at
which he is supposed to perform community service. [Interjections.] This is
a parole violation which would mean rearrest if he had been an ordinary
inmate. [Interjections.]
The message, Mr President, that this sends out is that there is one set of
standards for ordinary inmates and another set of standards for the
politically connected. The message is that some criminals pay less for
their crimes than others. The message is that the ANC looks after its own,
even when it comes to bending or disregarding prison regulations. And no
amount of advertisements, like the advertisement the Minister put in the
newspaper yesterday - this fatuous advert on correctional supervision and
the parole system - will change that perception. It is only when there is
one law that applies and is seen to apply equally to the rich and the poor,
to the high and the low, to black and white, that this perception will
disappear.

Mr President, I know you don’t approve of what has gone on in this
particular circumstance and I look to you to give leadership to ensure that
it doesn’t happen again. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M R BALOYI: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers and
Members of Parliament, when giving feedback to my constituents on the state
of the nation address for this year, I quoted the concluding section of the
speech that goes:

   And so, let us roll up our sleeves and get down to work, fully
   understanding that the task to build a South Africa for which we yearn is
   a common responsibility we all share.

I did this as I was calling on them to participate in analysing the
President’s characterisation of the state of the nation for what they think
it means to them. They all agree that they may each tell a success story or
more on the government’s visible record of performance in the delivery of
services towards the betterment of the lives of the people.

They talk about it loudly and clearly, for they say that, for the first
time, they see tarred roads constructed to connect even the most remote of
rural areas neglected during the apartheid rule.

Loko ha ha ri eka mhaka leyi, Meyara wa Masipala wa Ba-Phalaborwa u hi
tsundzuxa leswaku makungu ya ku kunguhata hi nkatsakanyo(IDP) ya nga
antwisiwa loko hi nga herisa tindlela to leha to pasisa timhaka loko ku ri
na mintirho ya mfumo, ku fana na ku endla mapatu, laha na loko ri ya hela
ri endliwa, vanhu valavo a va ha wu voni na nkoka wa kona. Va languta
ntsena leswaku ri hlwerile ku ya hi xitshembiso lexi va nga nyikiwa xona
loko ku endliwa ti-IDP toteto.

Meyara u ri hi nga kota ku korhokela vanhu hi xihatla loko ho nyika
vamasipala matimba yo nghenelela eka mapfhumba yo hluvukisa ya mfumo, hambi
ya endla hi mani kumbe mani.

Hambi manyala ya van’watikontraka lava tsutsumaka va siya mintirho ya vona
yi nga si hela kumbe va endla mintirho ya xiyimo xa le hansi a hi ta swi
kota ku yi lulamisa. Pfhumba ra Single Public Service Murhangeri, ri ta hi
pfuna. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[The Mayor of Ba-Phalaborwa Municipality has reminded us that IDP
programmes can only be improved if we do away with long routes of approving
government-related projects, such as the construction of roads, where at
the end of that particular project local communities do not enjoy its
benefits. People would only talk about the long process followed in
completing a given IDP project.

The Mayor stated that service delivery could only be improved if
municipalities are vested with the powers of being directly involved in
government’s development projects, irrespective of who is in charge of such
projects.

We would also have the ability to deal with contractors who abandon certain
projects before they are completed or contractors who do shabby jobs. The
programme of a single Public Service would assist in this regard.]

They say, for the first time the government protects the rights of workers,
including domestic workers and farmworkers previously exploited by their
bosses with the blessing of the apartheid regime.

Nkulukumba Nyepe Sono u vula leswaku ku yisa emahlweni migingiriko ya mfumo
eka ku sirhelela timfanelo ta vatirhi swi lava ku endliwa tani hi tsima.

U ri vathori va fanele va khoma vatirhi va vona kahle, kasi vatirhi va
fanele va tirha hi ku hetiseka.

Loko a vulavula hi swa mphakelo wa mati, u hi tsundzuxa hi ta pfhumba ra
swa Masakhane, leri ri lerisaka leswaku vakorhokeri va vanhu va fanele va
enerisa vatirhisi va swiphakeriwa swa vona hi migingiriko ya vona, leswaku
na vona vanhu va ta tidyondzisa ku amukela leswaku mati ya fanele ku
hakeleriwa. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Nyepe Sono indicated that we need to work as a collective in order to
protect workers’ rights.

He says that employers should treat their employees with dignity and
employees in turn should be dedicated to their work.

With regard to the provision of water, he reminds us of the Masakhane
Project which shows that service providers should satisfy the needs of
their clients, so that people should also get into the culture of paying
for services rendered.]

They say, for the first time the government has introduced such poverty
relief schemes as the school nutrition programme, the various social
grants, the food parcels, the no-fee school programmes, the free basic
water and electricity services and other interventions.

Grace Malatji loyi a nga mutirhi wa swa nhluvuko wa muganga - community
Development Worker- u hlamusela leswaku vunyingi bya swiphiqo hileswaku
kun’wana vanhu va tsandzekisiwa ku fikelela ti-grant hi ku pfumala mapasi
na switifikheti swo velekiwa, xikan’we na migingiriko ya vatirhela-mfumo
van’wana la va tirhaka hi ku koka milenge. (Translation of Xitsonga
paragraph follows.)

[Grace Malatji, a community development worker, is worried because many
people fail to access grants because they do not have identification books
and birth certificates as well as government officials not being dedicated
to their work who also compound the problem.]

They say, for the first time government gives support and pride to the
institution of traditional rule.

Hosi Ngove u ri hi nga swi kota ku antswisa matirhele ya mfumo na ku herisa
vusweti loko ho luka mano ya ku hlanganisa matirhele ya khale lawa ya kahle
na lama ya sweswi.

U ri hi lwisa vusiwana hi ndlela yo rima, laha munhu un’wana na un’wana a
nga nyikiwaka ndhawu ya yena yo rima, a dyondzisiwa na ku seketeriwa hi
mfumo hi tlhelo ra swikomu, timbewu na ntokoto.

Ku endla tano Presidente, swi nga nyika nseketelo wa kahle eka leswi u nga
swi vula eka nkanelo wa wena wa tiko, leswaku lembe leri ku ta humelerisiwa
nawu wa Communal Land Rights.

Kona swi ngo be! President, loko wo endla na leswaku ku hatlisisiwa na ku
hetisisa swikoxo swa misava hikuva yin’wana ya yona a yi tirhiseki hikuva
ya ha ri emilon’weni.

Xin’wana lexi Hosi a hi tsundzuxaka i ku dyondzo ya vurimi eswikolweni yi
lava ku rhangisiwa emahlweni leswaku vana va vona nkoka wa vurimi va ha ri
vantsongo.

Xitsonga xi ri rigogo ri songiwa ra ha tsakama. Na le ka timhaka ta
ndhavuko a swi ve tano. Kahle-kahle mhaka leyi yi nga humelerisaka nkoka wa
swilo swo tala i ku vuyisa mintolovelo ya njhenjhekisano eswikolweni na le
tihubyeni. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Chief Ngove says that we could improve the performance of government and
eradicate poverty if we combine methods that were used in the past with
those identified for use nowadays.

He is of the opinion that we could alleviate poverty if we provided people
with a piece of land which could be used for ploughing. Government should
also provide people with the necessary skills and experience as well as
resources such as hoes and seeds.

This will be in line with what you indicated in your state of the nation
address that this year would be the year in which the Communal Land Rights
Bill is passed.

It would be better if the President could expedite the processing of land
claims since some of them cannot be done as they are sub judice.

He also advised that the agricultural sciences should be promoted so that
children should see its value.

There is a saying in Xitsonga which says that children need to be taught
while they are still young. It would be of great value if debates were
brought back to schools and councils.]

Understanding that we have not yet arrived where we want to be in creating
a situation of a better life for all, the people agree that we should not
be complacent about the clean record of service delivery and that we need
to strive to do more.

A swi laveki leswaku hi tekela ehansi mintlhontlho leyi hi nga langutana na
yona ya ku antswisa matirhelo ya mfumo hikuva yi nga tshuka yi hi phija.

A hi lemukeni leswi Xitsonga xi hi tsundzuxaka swona loko xi ku eka
swivuriso le-bya nyarhi leyo, u nga ku ndza yi vona hikuva u ta wela
emavokweni ya yona. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[We should never underestimate the challenges we face with regard to
improving service delivery to our people as these could create problems for
us.

There is a saying in Xitsonga which goes that if somebody reminds you of a
hole in front of you, never just say that you are aware of it and yet you
are not doing anything about it, because you will fall into it.]

One local businessman, Mr Masekwameng, advised us to pay more attention to
monitoring policy implementation. He called for the establishment of
constituency-based monitoring watchdogs to ensure quality service delivery
and fight corruption, and to help the government implement the Code of Good
Practice for BEE.

Vanhu va vulavurile na hina hi nkarhi wa loko tiko ra Afrika Dzonga ri
nghenela migingiriko ya ku tixopa-xopa ya Pfhumba ra ku Xopa-xopa hi
Vuntangha ra Matiko ya Afrika- African Peer Review Mechanism. Hi dyondzile
leswaku hi nga antswisa matirhelo ya mfumo loko ho tihlanganisa na vanhu.
Hi vonile leswaku ku antswisa migingiriko ya mfumo swi vula ku korhokela
vanhu. Hi lemukile leswaku hi nga antswisa migingiriko ya mfumo hi ku
antswisa matirhelo yo landzelerisa vukorhokeri hi tiphalamende ta hina
hinkwato, leyi, na ya swifundzha hinkwaswo. Ntshayiii xa mina i ku
korhokela tiko. Xa wena i yini ke? (Translation of Xitsonga paragraph
follows.)

[We had an opportunity to interact with South Africans during the African
Peer Review Mechanism exercise. One lesson we learnt during this exercise
is that such interactions with our people would help improve services
rendered to communities. We can better our government’s function by
rendering services to people. We also learnt that through oversight and
accountability programmes of Parliament we would be able to monitor
services provided to our people. My responsibility is to provide services
to my people, what’s yours?]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, our hon President, hon Deputy
President and hon members, the leader of the MF, Mr A Rajbansi, has
requested me to convey his warmest greetings to our hon President, which I
hereby do.

Firstly, certain persons in the country had predetermined ideas to be
severely critical of our hon President before the state of the nation
address was delivered. The receptiveness of the country can be measured by
the comments made on radio or in phone-in programmes, and newspaper
editorials.

The editorial of the Sunday Times over the weekend is, in the opinion of
the MF, a very fair reflection that the hon President’s address was indeed
a frank and honest assessment of the successes and problems our country is
facing.

The MF also holds the popular view that the road to socioeconomic freedom
is long and hard, because, unlike other countries that have been under
colonial rule, the suppression of the masses in our country has been
extreme on all fronts.

Poverty, job creation, HIV/Aids and a climate of peace, crime free, have
been highlighted as our highest priorities. Let us take a leaf from
Germany’s book as a country united in the years that led up to the 2006
World Cup final. Our country should unite behind the President and the
Premiers in a true spirit of loyalty to deliver the greatest sporting event
in Africa.

Mr President, after the G8 countries, the Big Three are surely set to take
over – China, India and Brazil. Let us not talk of agrarian revolution, but
let us achieve it. We cannot find any excuses for the massive number of
civil service vacancies when we are 13 years into the new South Africa.
Countries in similar situations have skilled their people and concentrated
on the small business and informal sectors; have abandoned Western rules
and introduced their own rules.

India, for example, has created 400 million persons in the middle class,
and the professionals of the United States are now imported from India.

We must prepare to ensure that, immediately after the Big Three, the rise
of Africa takes place. Mr President, you have in one of your structures Mr
Ratan Tata, who has become an economic giant and is investing in South
Africa. Mittal is already in our country. They are the finest example of
reverse globalisation, and Africa must be prepared to be an important
player in reverse globalisation.

In order to compete and not lag behind the Big Three, we must not lose one
or more South Africans in the ``brain drain’’. Europe, London and the
American states, including the Middle East, are grabbing qualified and
trained South Africans through fantastic salaries, and they cannot be
accommodated in spite of vacancies in our own country because they belong
to minority groups.

The MF strongly suggests that, after 13 years, a review of the affirmative
action policy requires positive debate. We asked this question regarding
KwaZulu-Natal: How is it that the first and second provincial Police
Commissioners of colour in Gauteng are persons of Indian origin from
Chatsworth, when they cannot play a role in lower positions in their very
own province?

How is it that successful matriculants are hailed and paraded as great
achievers, only a few weeks later to be turned away from universities
because they happen to come from minority groups? How is it that highly
trained persons from Chatsworth are turned away from jobs, only to be
grabbed by England after presentation of their CVs?

Mr President, everyone wants to be of service to the country, to join you
in this fight against poverty, illiteracy, for job creation and economic
upliftment.

On 11 February 2007, we celebrated the 17th anniversary of the release of
the hon Nelson Mandela, the father of our democracy. We take this time to
commemorate all those who have led us to freedom. It is with much dismay
that I express our condolences on the loss of a magnificent heroine of
South Africa, Mama Tambo. May she rest in peace!

One of the greatest pandemics in South Africa is the horror of poverty
creeping into every corner of our country. The conditions poverty imposes
on citizens inspire our determination to deliver our people from the
shackles of poverty. The majority of our people are poverty-stricken, and
unemployment is the number one cause. It is encouraging to note that from
March 2005 to March 2006, 300 000 jobs were created in the formal sector.

However, the unemployment rate has not really come down due to the fact
that the rate at which new entrants are entering the job market is faster
than the rate at which jobs are being created. South Africa has the biggest
economy in Africa, and has an official unemployment rate of 25,6%.

The MF is encouraged that since 2001 the number of South African households
– 4,1 million - that were living below the poverty line dropped to 3,6
million in 2004. We are, however, curious as to what the poverty line has
been determined as.

South Africa suffers severe skills shortages that we are trying to service.
The MF expresses its concern that between 1995 and 2005, 68% to 72% of
persons holding secondary diplomas and certificates were employed, and 43%
of people with incomplete secondary schooling or technical college
certification were employed.

Our graduate unemployment rate in 2005 stood at 10,5%. Seventy per cent of
these graduates are from the business, management, mathematics, computer
science, education and training, manufacturing, engineering and the
technology sectors. The MF places its confidence in the database system
that is set to service this shortfall. However, a more effective method
needs to be induced to ensure the incorporation of all graduates and
students in the registry.

We feel that contributing to this graduate unemployment problem are the
further education and training institutions and the system of technikons.
We are certain, though, that the FET recapitalisation programme and the
redesign of its curriculum may deliver the skills our society needs.

The skills we are experiencing a shortage of need to be identified and
marketed at school level so that we may make available people as a resource
for potential career fields.

The programmes of the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa, under the auspicious leadership of our hon Deputy President, have
shown progress and growth in all the right corridors. The progress made
with social grant beneficiaries is remarkable, from 8 million in 2004 to 11
million to date. We, however, desire the child support grant to be extended
up to the age of 18 years.

The introduction of the new social security provisions shall now unveil a
compulsory pension which is to the benefit of all our people, rich and
poor. The MF, once again, calls for an increase in pension allocations to a
more liveable amount to meet the cost of living of our aged.
Government’s commitment to transforming the education system, addressing
learning under the trees, teacher shortfalls and expanding the no-fee
schools is reassuring.

Whilst statistics indicate that crime had increased by 7% between 1994 and
2001, and has decreased by 6% since, the situation of crime in our country
remains a harsh reality, and is an extremely serious issue for our people.
The MF denounces all forms of crime and unites in the fight to eradicate
it. The MF believes crime to be a consequence of poverty and that its
eradication is partly dependent on the alleviation of poverty. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mnu S E ASIYA: Ndiyabhotisa kule Ndlu yoWiso-Mthetho, ndizicamagushela
ndisithi makudede ubumnyama kuvele ukukhanya. Sinenyhweba thina
singamalungu kaKhongolozi asadla amazimba ngoba kwiminyaka emihlanu ezayo
ukusuka kulo umiyo, lo mbutho uza kube ubhiyozela i-100 leminyaka. Kucace
gca ukuba ookhokho kunye noobawomkhulu bawuseka kumhlaba ochumileyo lo
mbutho waza wanehlumelo elisithi. Enye yeenjongo zabo yayikukuba isininzi
sabantu silawule, ukuze kuzaliseke iimfuno zabantu. Oko kuyinyaniso emsulwa
engenakuphikiswa.

Kwiminyaka eli-12,5 edlulileyo abantu beli lizwe bazinyulela urhulumente
wentando yesininzi okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC. Ngomnyaka wama-2004
ukuya kowama-2006 abantu bahlaziya igunya lokuba lo mbutho ulawule. Ngoko
ke senza njalo. Silawula ngezandla ezingenamikhinkqi.

Njengelungu lale Ndlu ehloniphekileyo, Mongameli, kufuneka ndithathe zonke
iinkqubo ezigqitywe apha kule Ndlu nakwiikomiti zale Ndlu ndizise
ebantwini, ukuze nabo bandiphathise umphako.

Mandithethe njengomthunywa okhutshwe ngumbutho wesizwe ukuba ndiwumele
kwisithili saseMsobomvu, esibandakanya iidolophana iColesberg, Noupoort
kunye neNorvalspont, kwiphondo loMntla Koloni. Mongameli ohloniphekileyo
ophethe thina malungu abambe iintambo, bathi abantu bomzi waseMsobomvu
manditsho ukuba kule minyaka ili-12,5 noko izinto azifani nayizolo, kwaye
banethemba lokuba ingomso labo liza kuba ngcono kunanamhlanje.

Mongameli ohloniphekileyo, kukho amakhaya amabini andicele ukuba ze
ndiwakhankanye xa ndisenza le ntetho. Elokuqala ikhaya lelomntwana
oyintombazana oneminyaka elishumi elinesibhozo. Bathi abazali bakhe
ngelegcakamela ilanga ekhaya ukuba bekungelo ncedo lwalo mbutho okanye
rhulumente weli lizwe, kuba babengenamali yokumsa edyunivesithi umntwana
wabo ukuze aye kwenza imfundo enomsila. Namhlanje usedyunivesithi ngenxa
yalo rhulumente. Ngaphambi koko babekhe beza kukhalaza kuthi, ndaza ke mna
ndadlana indlebe noSekela-Mphathiswa wezeMfundo, ongazange ajikeleze, koko
wasuka wamnceda lo mntwana. Abazali balo mntwana bathi mandithi:
Maz’enethole! [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Ngexa sasiphume iphulo njengamalungu kaKhongolozi amele abantu, siye
ezikolweni ngexa bezivulwa, siye kukhuthaza abafundi ukuba bafunde ngakumbi
izifundo ezinjengezibalo kunye nezenzululwazi. Sikhuthaze nabafundi bebanga
leshumi, ngokwalaa nkqubo yakudala, ukuba bazifunde ngenqanaba eliphezulu
okanye iHigher Grade, ezi zifundo. Ndithetha nje namhlanje omnye wabo
bafundi useCuba uye kufundela ubugqirha ngenxa yokuba walisabela ikhwelo
lethu. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Mongameli ohloniphekileyo, iinkonzo zikarhulumente zisondezwe ebantwini
kwezaa dolophana ndisebenza kuzo. Ndingabalula nje isibhedlele esakhiweyo,
esinobugcisa bale mihla, esikufutshane ebantwini. Uthi nje tsii gxada,
ufike kuso. Isibhedlele ebesikho ngaphambili, xa sichaza imbali,
besikumgama ongange-15 leekhilomitha ukusuka ebantwini. Kambe ndithetha nje
abantu bazithela chuu ngezikaTshiwo ukuya kubona abantu babo abalele kwesi
sibhedlele. Kwakhiwe ichibi lezempilo, okanye ikliniki, kodwa ugqirha,
ufika emini emaqanda ze asebenze iyure nje ibenye. Abantu bacela ukuba
ukuba le iNdlu inako ukunceda, zongezwe zibe ne ubuncikane ezi yure, ukuze
abantu bakwazi ukufumana unyango. [Uwelewele.]

Kwesaa sithili saseColesberg kukho iprojekthi edibanisa amaphondo
amathathu, iMpuma Koloni, iFreyistata kunye noMntla Koloni, ndawo ezo
eziphawulwe nguMongameli njengeendawo ekufuneka ziphuhlisiwe kwezoqoqosho.
Ingxaki ekhoyo phaya yeyokuba abantu abanemihlaba ngamadlagusha, ngoko ke
bathi abantu bakowethu xa kufuneka befumene elo cham aza nalo lo
rhulumente, befuna ukusebenza, suke imihlaba ithengiswe ngexabiso lentloko
kaloliwe. Abantu bandithume ukuba ndize kuchaza le ntlungu yabo ukuze
urhulumente akwazi ukungenelela bafumane loo mihlaba, ukwenzela ukuba nabo
bakwazi ukuxhamla kuba kule ndawo kudlula abakhenkethi abaye balale
nokulala.

Enye into ekufuneka ndiyichazile kukuba kukho umzi omkhulu woonongqayi,
okanye isikhululo samapolisa oselokishini phaya. Abantu bathi bayabulela
ngokuziswa kwalo mzi elokishini kuba oku kuthe kwehlisa inqanaba
lobundlobongela. Amapolisa akhona phakathi kwabantu, ngoko ke izinto
ezininzi ezimbi azisenzeki kakhulu.

Ndithunywe nanguSodolophu, umasipala, abemi bezaa dolophana kunye
noosomashishini ukuba ndibabuzele apha kulo mzi ukuba kwenzeka ntoni na,
Mongameli. USekela-Mongameli ebeyile eDiyala kulo nyaka uphelileyo, wafika
wathetha kakuhle. Savuya xa esithi umzila kaloliwe osuka eDiyala uye kutsho
eNopoliti uza kuvuselelwa. Isivuyisile yasichulumancisa loo nto kuba
besibona ukuba ikati iza kusuka eziko; abantu bakuthi baza kudalelwa
amathuba emisebenzi. Camagu! [Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of isiXhosa
speech follows.)

[Mr S E ASIYA: I greet everyone in this House. I would like to thank you
and wish you peace and prosperity. As surviving members of the ANC, we are
fortunate because in the next five years this party will be celebrating its
100th anniversary.

It is quite clear that our grandmothers and grandfathers established this
party in this fertile land, of which we are the products. One of their
objectives was that the majority of the people should govern in this
country and thereby fulfil the people’s needs. This is an indisputable
fact.

Twelve and a half years ago people of this country elected for themselves a
democratic ANC-led government. From 2004 to 2006 people reviewed the
authority, which states that this party must govern. We are indeed doing
exactly that. We are governing without any doubt whatsoever.

As a member of this honourable House, Mr President, I feel duty-bound to
inform the people on the ground about all resolutions taken by this House
and its portfolio committees.

Let me speak as a representative sent by the ANC-led government to
represent them in the Msobomvu district, which includes small towns like
Colesberg, Noupoort and Norvalspont in the Northern Cape province. Hon
President, the residents of Msobomvu at least acknowledge that in these
twelve and a half years of democracy, things have changed for the better
and they believe that tomorrow will be better than today.

There are families that have requested me to cite a few examples about them
during my presentation. The first family is the one of an 18-year-old girl.
It says that she would be basking in the sun if it were not for this party
or government of this country. They had no money to put their child through
university to obtain a degree. Today the child is at the university through
this government. Before that, they had complained to us whereupon I spoke
to the Deputy Minister of Education who did not hesitate to assist her. The
family of this child has requested me to thank you on their behalf.
[Applause.]

As members of the ANC, representing the people, we went on a campaign to
motivate learners to study hard, more especially in subjects like science
and mathematics. Furthermore, we motivated std 10 learners - according to
the old system of education - to take their subjects on Higher Grade. As I
am speaking now, one of those learners is in Cuba studying medicine. It is
because of the call we had made. [Applause]

Hon President, service delivery has been brought closer to the people in
those small towns that I work in. One of the examples thereof, is a
hospital that has already been built which has modern technological
facilities, and that is closer to the people. The hospital that was there
before used to be 15km away from their homes. As I am speaking, people are
able to visit their relatives.

The clinic is there but the doctor arrives at noon and only works for an
hour. People request, if possible, that this House recommends these hours
to be increased to four instead of one in order for them to get treatment.
[Interjections.]

In Colesberg, there is a project that combines three regions, ie the
Eastern Cape, the Free State and the Northern Cape. The President has
identified these three regions for economic growth and development.

The problem they experience there is that land is exclusively owned by
whites. When our people are supposed to benefit from the government land
redistribution programme, land is sold at an unaffordable price. Therefore,
people have sent me here to present their painful experience, so that
government can assist them with regard to their land acquisition efforts.
This will enable them to benefit from this region that boasts a variety of
cultural tourist attractions.

Furthermore, I would like to make mention of a police station that is
situated in the township. People are grateful that it has been brought
closer to them, and that the rate of crime has now been reduced. Police
patrol the area all the time.

Mr President, I have been sent by the Mayor, the municipality, the citizens
of these small towns and the entrepreneurs to enquire about the progress
that has been made thus far. The Deputy President, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka
went to De Aar and Noupoort last year and promised that the railway line
between De Aar and Noupoort would be reopened. We were happy at the good
news for we believed that that would help eradicate poverty and also create
jobs for the people. I thank you. [Time expired.]]

Mnr S E OPPERMAN: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, agb President, ek stem saam met
die stelling in u staatsrede dat ons land te lank reeds ’n bergplek is vir
dit wat afskuwelik en walglik is. Die vraag vanmiddag is waarom ons weier
om ontslae te raak van dit wat walglik is. Waarom verkies ons om as
verdrietvrate reservoirs te bly vir die stinkende etter wat die ou wonde
omspoel?

Dr Batarseh se wekroep by PW se begrafnis was: “Ons moet die verlede
begrawe.” Daar is egter een belangrike voorwaarde vir so ’n begrafnis:
Elkeen in hierdie land moet presies weet hoe lyk die verlede wat ons wil
begrawe. Die naakte waarheid moet besigtig word, en die waarheid
verskillende kleure, al het sommige in hierdie land meer respek vir ’n
Nobelprys as vir die waarheid. Ons kan ook nie selektief met die waarheid
omgaan soos dit ons pas nie. Ek het weer vanmiddag gehoor hoe Ministers
skerm vir dinge wat waaragtig verkeerd is.

’n Bastervriend van my – nou reeds ’n oupa – vertel my onlangs, en hy
onthou dit soos gister, hoe sy wit maatjie kleintyd verbied is om met hom
te speel. Die rede, het die wit mammie verduidelik, was omdat my vriend
Andreas eintlik ’n “hotnotjie” was met “menshare”, iets wat die wit
seuntjie nie kon agterkom nie. Wat die wit mammie nooit aan haar seuntjie
verduidelik het nie, was waar die “menshare” vandaan gekom het.

’n Vrou is seksueel misbruik en die produk van die misbruik is boonop
verwerp deur ’n verteenwoordiger van dieselfde groep wat vir die seksuele
immoraliteit verantwoordelik was. Dan lees ons nog in die gedig Trou van
Jan F Celliers van ’n man wat die bastergeslag in sy siel verag.

Die bewuswording en bewusmaking in ’n soeke na identiteit onder bruinmense
het ’n bruisende stroom geword. As ons heel en genees anderkant wil uitkom,
sal ons onverskrokke moet deel met die etter rondom ons eie wonde. Ons moet
gereed wees om vry te spreek en vryspraak te aanvaar by die simboliese
begrafnis wat ek u vandag vra om te reël.

Die gesprek oor eerstenasiestatus en historiese grondeise vir bruinmense
waaroor in 2004 gerapporteer is, moet nou asseblief momentum begin kry.
Akademici wat die kunsmatige nomenklatuur gebruik en voorgee dat die
geskiedenis van bruinmense sinoniem is met die slawegeskiedenis aan die
Kaap moet wegkom van hulle ideologiese agendas. Terloops, die term
“Khoisan”, wat in 1928 geskep is deur die Duitser Leonard Schultze, is deel
van die kunsmatige nomenklatuur.

Bruin ondersteuners van die party, veral in die Wes-Kaap, het die afgelope
tyd in groot getalle hulle rug op die ANC gedraai. Hulle is
tweedeklasburgers wanneer dit kom by aanstellings in senior poste, en swart
ekonomiese bemagtiging is net beskore vir ’n klein groepie alreeds stinkryk
ANC-kaders en ons taal word met minagting bejeën.

As die ANC blindelings voortsteier op dieselfde pad sal die uitslag in
Houtbaai en die naam Hangberg binnekort meer as net simboliese betekenis
vir daardie party kry, ongeag wat die imbongi of die profete soos Zuma,
John Ncinane en Winnie Madikizela-Mandela voorspel het. Die skrif is reeds
aan die muur en die profete se plek is ook leeg. Baie dankie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, I agree with the
statement in your state of the nation address that our country has for too
long been a storage place for that which is ugly and revolting. The
question this afternoon is why we are refusing to get rid of that which is
offensive. Why do we choose, like gluttons for affliction, to remain a
reservoir for the disgusting pus that surrounds old wounds?

Dr Batarseh’s appeal at the funeral of PW Botha was: “We must bury the
past.” There is, however, one important condition to such a burial: Each
one of us in this country should know precisely what it is in the past that
we want to put to rest. The bare truth must be scrutinised and the truth
has different shades, though some in this country have more respect for the
Nobel Prize than the truth. Also, we cannot be selective about the truth
when it suits us. I have heard once again this afternoon how Ministers are
moaning about things that are actually wrong.

A Baster friend of mine – already a grandfather now – recently told me, and
this he remembers as if it happened yesterday, how his white friend was
forbidden to play with him during their childhood. The reason given by the
white mother was that his friend, Andries, was in fact a “hotnotjie” with
“human hair”, something which the white boy had failed to notice. What the
white mother did not explain to her son, was where the “human hair” had
come from.

A woman had been sexually abused and to add insult to injury the product of
this abuse was rejected by a representative of the same group responsible
for the sexual immorality. Furthermore, we read in the poem “Trou” by Jan F
Cilliers, of a man that despises the Baster race in his soul!

Being aware and creating an awareness of the search for identity among
coloured people has become a roaring stream. If we wish to be healed and
reach the other side intact, we will have to be fearless when we deal with
the pus in our own wounds. We should be prepared to speak our minds and
accept freedom of speech at the symbolic burial I am asking you to arrange
today.
I am pleading that the discourse around first nation status and the
historical land claims of coloured people, as reported in 2004, should now
gain momentum. Academics who use artificial nomenclature and pretend that
the history of the coloured people is synonymous with the history of
slavery at the Cape, should get away from their ideological agendas. By the
way, the term “Khoisan” is part of the artificial nomenclature created by
the German, Leonard Schultze, in 1928.

Coloured supporters of the ANC, especially in the Western Cape, have in the
recent past turned their backs on the party in droves. They are second-
class citizens when it comes to appointments to senior posts, and black
economic empowerment is only meant for a small group of ANC cadres who are
already very wealthy and our language is treated with contempt.

If the ANC continues blindly on its existing path, the outcome in Hout Bay
and the name Hangberg will shortly have more than just symbolic meaning for
that party, irrespective of what is predicted by the imbongi or prophets of
doom of the likes of Zuma, John Ncinane and Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. The
writing is already on the wall and the seats of the prophets are empty.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: Hon President, hon Deputy President and hon colleagues, I wish
to start by quoting from the January 8 Statement delivered by the President
on 13 January 2007, and I quote:


   As we work to bring into being a broad front for development, we should
   continue to support the work to build and strengthen the Progressive
   Women’s Movement as a powerful force against sexism and patriarchy.

Immediately after the Progressive Women’s Movement of South Africa launch
in August 2006, in a declaration handed to the President, the women said:

   We note that democracy provided the voices of women space to be heard on
   matters of concern to their lives, their wellbeing and that of society.
   We note that the patriarchal system is the ideology, beliefs, values and
   practices underpinning the organisation and structure of society,
   resulting in unequal power relations between men and women, and the
   subordination of women in all spheres of life from the private sphere -
   mainly the family. Patriarchy is spread throughout and continuously
   reinforced by the whole society, including through education, work,
   religion and the media. So much so that it is assumed as natural, God-
   given or part of our culture.

The declaration goes on to draw attention to some problems which women
face. It points to the feminisation of poverty, underdevelopment and
unemployment. It draws attention to the women living in the informal
settlements, rural and farm areas and working class women, who are
particularly worst affected by poverty, and so are among many who have
never tasted the fruits of liberation.

The declaration talks about how the democratic state and its institutions
must take note and prioritise the resolution of the situation, whereby our
economy is growing at an impressive rate, but women are largely relegated
to the entry levels and are trapped in the informal economic sphere. They
don’t own the means of production and are in the lowest ranks in the job
market.

Comrade President, in your January 8 Statement you hit the nail on the head
on the matter of building and strengthening the PWMSA. In that context, I
wish to give some feedback on the work of the past six months. The first
point has been to ensure that there is sectoral and as broad a spread of
representation as possible in the movement; to bring on board not only
women from the political sector, but also those from different trade unions
and labour federations, faith-based organisations – not only Christians,
rural and social movements on violence against women, youth, business,
children and, cultural organisations and others, some of whom had already
been engaged towards the launch.

Many more were approached after the launch, including Jewish women and
women who operate within the context of institutions of traditional
healing, as well as in the broad traditional communities.

The national steering committee took three months to come together because
each of the sectors and national organisations first had to convene,
deliberate and decide whom to second to the PWMSA. In that context, the
women in the Muslim and Hindu faiths have been getting organised and are
temporarily represented in the national structure.

The first full meeting and strategic session of the PWMSA national steering
committee took place on 26 November 2006. All provinces continue to be
represented by interim co-ordinators, some of whom are hon members of this
House. A small working committee appointed by the Bloemfontein conference
has been meeting regularly to attend to ongoing business in the absence of
full-time personnel and in the absence of offices.

The PWMSA is now registered as a nonprofit-making organisation and it is
busy formulating financial policies and other relevant policies to enable
it to have the capacity to engage properly in measures dictated by its
founding principles and values.

In building and strengthening our movement, we are now focusing on the
provincial level. We must ensure that the approach to provincial launches
is informed by the same principles and the spirit of opening up and
encouraging women ... [Interjections.] Yes, indeed, Mr Leon ... encouraging
women to come together to fight against poverty and underdevelopment.

Although we had initially asked provinces to launch by the end of February,
our analysis in the past week has reflected a need for more deliberative
work and careful preparations to ensure sustainable structures. The support
of all South African leaders – in and outside the state sector - is needed
for this unglamorous behind-the-scenes work.

While this Parliament has passed gender-sensitive laws, thousands of women
continue to face huge daily obstacles to real emancipation and access to
full human rights.

The minimum platform for action that came out of the Bloemfontein
conference was highlighted in the resolutions on education, the economy,
patriarchy, crime and the media. This is the mandate that will inform our
engagements in building a broad front for development.

While the sectors and organisations will continue with their areas of
focus, we, as a movement, will work in partnership with the state sector
and other stakeholders to ensure a better life for our women. We will
embark on a road show in March and hope to be welcomed by various hon
Ministers and the Presidency. Together, we must identify programmes and
activities around which we must co-operate.

In order to enhance the opportunities and create a better atmosphere for
women’s participation in the multifaceted programmes and strategies in the
broad front for development, there are measures we must take that are
within our grasp. In this regard, I wish to quote the 1954 Women’s Charter,
which called for:

   ... the removal of all laws, regulations, conventions and customs that
   discriminate against us women and deprive us in any way of our inherent
   rights to the advantage, responsibilities and opportunities that society
   offers to any one section of the population.

I wish to take the opportunity to use the time I am left with - just for
the record - to pay tribute to a woman who worked very hard. She is a woman
who was at the Malibongwe Conference - back in 1990, where a decision was
taken by South African women, including more than 100 women who came from
inside the country - a woman who engaged with women who were in exile, that
we needed a progressive women’s movement.

That woman is the same one that gave leadership in the sterling work that
was done from March 2006 to August 2006, when the Progressive Women’s
Movement was launched. I am talking about a former member of this House,
Mavivi Myakayaka-Manzini. I think we ought to note her leadership,
acknowledge it and pay tribute to her. [Applause.]

I also wish to, again for the record – although I did speak the other day
at the memorial service – pay tribute to a former member of this House, our
late grand lady and mother, Adelaide Tambo, who also in her lifetime has
contributed enormously to the work towards the emancipation of women, but
also in bringing about a better life for women, the youth, the elderly and
all poor South Africans, without discriminating against those who have
always been privileged. She was really a worthy South African and we must
note her exemplary life. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, Deputy President,
Ministers and colleagues, much has been said on a variety of matters by
previous speakers, of which everyone considers his or hers as being the
most important. The nature of these responses reflects that there are a
number of issues on which government and the rest of the nation do not
share the same level of concern.

I, however, wish to focus on issues that have been omitted from this year’s
state of the nation address. The state of the nation address has in the
past few years produced a number of repeated commitments to ensure a better
life for all, with the emphasis on “all”. Allow me to briefly stand still
at this principle of “all”. It is my experience, and not just a perception,
that, as in the old South Africa, not ``all’’ our people have enjoyed the
same priority. I’ll come back to this point.

The repeated commitments by the hon President in his state of the nation
addresses the past few years, as we all know, have in many cases not been
achieved. The hon President and government have, over time, reluctantly
acknowledged capacity as a major problem in this regard.

But before I elaborate on capacity, I want to deliberate on the second
equally important problem or catalyst of the apparent inability to
implement commitments made by the hon President’s team. This is what I
refer to as the existence of a distance between the Presidency and the rest
of the executive in terms of their respective comprehension of our national
socioeconomic challenges and the subsequent methods for their resolution.

The contradiction between this year’s theme of deepening the debate and
high levels of intolerance from a number of Ministers underlines this
point. So, for instance, when I attempted to address in this House the
unfavourable effect, the unjust application that the Employment Equity Act
has on brown or coloured people, amongst others, the hon Minister of Labour
responded in an arrogant and insensitive manner by stating: “This thing
about coloureds is your problem, not ours.” This is nothing short of
blatant animosity towards the plight op brown or coloured for social and
economic equality. It thus leaves no prospect of truly deepening the
debate.

Also, the much-reported response of the hon Minister of Safety and Security
telling the people to leave the country when a debate on crime was started,
reflected an unwillingness to enter into a debate, so too by many in the
executive. The recent reaction from even the Public Protector confirms the
intolerance of those in authority, and sheds a dark cloud over many aspects
of “deepening the debate”.

I believe that the issue of capacity is the single most important
contributing factor to poor service delivery at all levels of government.
The first problem is with capacity that is solely considered a quantitative
issue. This is but one side of the coin. The other side is that capacity is
also a qualitative issue. In other words, not enough emphasis is put on the
quality of people entering the labour market, thus creating a lack of
skills and experience. Instead, the Employment Equity Act is being applied
in a manner that seeks to put more weight on achieving national demographic
targets, making the creation of an effective and efficient labour market a
secondary consideration.

If we wish to create a labour force that is effective, efficient and
delivers good levels of economic results, I believe, government has to
rethink the manner in which the Employment Equity Act is being implemented,
given the undesirable consequences. Failure to get the labour market
working endangers the success of Asgisa.

I nonetheless wish to commend the President for giving concrete direction
in resolving major public concerns. I, however, cannot neglect to express
concern over whether it will become a reality in the near future, for
actions speak louder than words. I thank you.

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President,
Ministers, Deputy Ministers, members of this House and distinguished guests
...

... ngale njikalanga intetho yam ndiza kuyiqala ngokunika imbeko kwiimveku
ezithe zalala ubuthongo baphakade ngenxa yezifo ezibini, i-kwashiorkor
kunye nemarasmus. Ngamafutshane, ukucacisa nje kancinci, xa sithetha
ngekhwashiyoka sithetha ngokunqongophala kweprothini okumandla emzimbeni.

Okwesibini, imarasmus... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... this afternoon I will start my speech by paying tribute to the infants
who died of kwashiorkor and marasmus. To explain briefly, when we speak of
kwashiorkor we speak of the dietary deficiency of proteins.

Secondly, marasmus... ]

... is defined as an extreme malnutrition and emaciation, especially in
children, which can result from an inadequate intake of food.

In the Eastern Cape, a severe malnutrition continues to be seen in the
province, with 350 new cases per month spread across the province. It is a
contributory cause of hospitalisation and mortality of young children.

Loo nto ibonakalisa mhlophe ukuba indlala lutshaba lwesizwe, kwaye
ayinalusini. Ngamafutshane, , ngonyaka wama-2005 nowama-2006,  sabhujelwa
ngabtwana abali-162 eFreystata, abangama-587 KwaZulu-Natala, abangama-386
eLimpopo, abali-17 eMpumalanga, nabangama-21 eMntla Koloni. Loo nto ibeka
inani labantwana ababhubhileyo kwi–1 113.

Kuyakhwankqisa ukufumanisa ukuba ngapha ngasekunxele kwam abayiboneli
ntweni le ngxubakaxaka, kuba bona ayibachaphazeli. Xa uMongameli
obekekileyo uThabo Mbeki ebesithi thaca intetho yakhe yokuvula iPalamente
kwiintsuku ezimbalwa ezidlulileyo, uyibeke yacaca gcaa okwekati emhlophe
ehlungwini indima edlalwe ngurhulumente we-ANC ukuphucula impilo yabantu
baseMzantsi Afrika kule minyaka imbalwa siyizuzile inkululeko.

Kananjalo, urhulumente uzikhankanyile neengqinamba athe wahlangabezana
nazo, waqwela ngokunika umkhombandlela kuye wonke ubani onyuliweyo ukuba
aqinisekise ukuba iinkonzo zifikelela ebantwini ngokubanzi. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[This clearly indicates that poverty is the enemy of the nation and doesn’t
compromise. In short, Free State experienced a child death rate of 162
between 2005 and 2006, 587 in KwaZulu-Natal, 386 in Limpopo, 17 in
Mpumalanga and 21 in the Northern Cape. That gives us a total number of 1
113 children.

It is surprising to realise that the people on my left do not take this
into consideration, simply because it does not affect them. A week ago,
when hon President Thabo Mbeki presented his state of the nation address,
he clearly outlined the role that the ANC-led government has played to
better the lives of the South African people within a few years of our
liberation.

Furthermore, the government pointed out the difficulties that it had
experienced and concluded by giving guidelines to those elected to ensure
that all access service delivery.]

The President has called upon all sectors to intensify the struggle against
poverty. To carry out this mandate successfully requires a collective and
concerted effort across all sectors of society.

It is imperative to highlight that since 1994 ...

... kwantlandlolo urhulumente ebesiwa evuka esilwa intlupheko kunye
nendlala.  Oko kungqinwa yimithetho nemigaqo yeenkqubo zikarhulumente.
Kwakhona, masingalibali ukuba ... [... government has been trying very hard
to push back the frontiers of poverty and hunger for a while. This is
confirmed by laws and government policy processes. Furthermore, let us not
forget that ...]

... this government inherited a society characterised by racial and gender
inequalities in the distribution of wealth, income and skills. By gender
inequalities, I mean skills and employment, especially, amongst others,
black women.

Although government has made remarkable progress in addressing this matter
in the economic sphere, a holistical approach is of critical importance in
taking the transformation agenda forward. In pursuit of this oversight
function, Members of Parliament should embark on massive mobilisation of
people through their parliamentary constituency offices, PCOs, to access
opportunities for development and fight the scourge of poverty, joblessness
and inequalities. They must ensure that these initiatives are people-
centred and driven by them.

ANC branches shall take a lead in monitoring such processes. Therefore, it
is important that the existing development initiatives are known to our
constituencies as well as those institutions that have been set up in the
Constitution to promote democracy and a culture of human rights in the
country, such as the Commission on Gender Equality, the Human Rights
Commission and all Chapter 9 institutions.

Working closely with local government structures, state organs, ward
committees and community development workers, CDWs, will be beneficial in
advancing the struggle in building a better life for communities.
Initiatives that government has taken with co-operatives will be able to
develop human resource capacities, increase savings and investments, and
also improve the socio-economic wellbeing of the people. Communities must
also be encouraged to utilise public facilities.

Meanwhile, on the other hand we appeal to our Ministers that these
institutions should continue to provide quality services. We welcome the
announcement by the President regarding the training of additional
professionals, salary improvements as well as conditions of employment for
Public Service employees and further skills development programmes. Hence,
the latter is an integral part of economic development.

The Public Service is always in dire need of dedicated patriotic and action-
oriented men and women, intellectuals who can contribute towards building
the kind of prosperous and successful society that is without poverty and
underdevelopment, and where men, women and young people live in dignity
with access to opportunities that make their lives better and meaningful.
We hope that these initiatives will assist employees to discharge their
responsibilities with clear consciousness, to correct and analyse the
challenges faced by the country and suggest workable sustainable solutions
that are informed by Batho Pele consciousness and supported by time-
honoured value systems and ways of doing things differently rather that
being obstacles in delivery.

Zithi izazi, ulwazi ngundoqo. Xa ndiqoshelisa intetho yam, ndinqwenela
ukubulela amakhosikazi angamalungu ombutho owaziwa ngokuba yiPhilisani
Community and Family Support Group akulaa ngingqi yaseMhlolwaneni
eMatatiele, athe ngeKrisimesi edlulileyo yonyaka wama-2006, anikela
ngeyunifomu yesikolo kubantwana abangama-25 abashiywa ngabazali ngenxa
yesifo uGawulayo, kwa nokudla kumakhaya angathathi ntweni nakubantu abadala
abangama-30. Kubo sithi: Maz’ enethole!

Kwelinye icala, sibulela inxaxheba ethathwe ngamasebe karhulumente, iSebe
lezoLimo naMahlathi kunye neSebe loPhuhliso loLuntu, ngokuxhasa isakhiwo
salo mbutho kulaa ndawo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Experts say knowledge is power. In conclusion, I wish to thank the women
who are members of the organisation known as Philisani Community and Family
Support Group of the Mhlolwaneni District in Matatiele, who, on Christmas
Day, donated school uniforms to children who lost their parents to HIV and
Aids, and food to poor families and the aged.

We would also like to thank the Department of Agriculture and Forestry, and
the Department of Social Development for the role they have played in
supporting the establishment of this organisation.]

With due respect to hon Comrade President, Minister of Education and the
Minister of Minerals and Energy ...

... uluntu lucela ukuba kujongwe ngeliso elibanzi umba wenkqubo yesondlo
ezikolweni jikelele, kunye nesingqi sonwabu oluhamba ngaso ubonelelo
lombane ... [... may I inform you that the community requests that the
school nutrition programme and the slow pace at which the provision of
electricity is moving, be given the necessary attention ...]

... especially at the Alfred Nzo municipality, which has been declared one
of the presidential nodes.

Nangona kunjalo, Qabane uMongameli, abantu abathandabuzi. Bonelisiwe
ngurhulumente kaKhongolose. Bamthembile. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
[Notwithstanding that, Comrade President, people have no doubts. They are
satisfied with the ANC-led government and they have confidence in it. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers and
members, I concur with the sentiments of the President when he spoke on the
issue of crime and when he quoted the following from the 1994 RDP White
Paper:

   Promoting peace and security will involve all people. It will
   build on and expand the national drive for peace and combat the endemic
   violence faced by communities ... with special attention to the various
   forms of violence to which women are subjected.


   Peace and political stability are also central to the government’s
   efforts to create an enabling environment to encourage investment.
   Decisive action will be taken to eradicate lawlessness, drug trafficking,
   gun running, crime and especially the abuse of women and children.

This commitment of decisive action was given to the nation 13 years ago.
The FD concurs with the Leader of the Opposition, the hon Leon, when he
said yesterday that crime was the crisis of the hour and that crime should
be placed on top of government’s agenda. The hon Tony Leon is correct in
this regard. There is a widespread perception amongst the public, both
black and white, that our present government is unable effectively to
contain and eradicate crime.

The policies, strategies, sentiments and intentions expressed by our
government are noble and good. But this is small comfort to the millions of
law-abiding citizens who bear the brunt of the ever-increasing wave upon
wave of crime on a daily basis.

My comments are not based on the reactions of a few individuals who may be
traumatised by personal tragedy, but on crime and lawlessness that is
pervasive and endemic in our society. Criminals have become so brazen that
nobody is spared, not even the President. In Arcadia in Tshwane, where the
President resides, criminals do their regular rounds to rob even those who
are not generally considered soft targets. The President must be aware that
Arcadia has experienced at least seven armed robberies in one month,
according to the Arcadia community police forum.

What is even worse is that diplomatic missions have not been spared from
attacks by criminals. Isaac Mahlangu wrote the following in the Sunday
Times of 11 February 2007, in an article called “Open season in Mbeki’s
backyard”:


   Embassies are now warning each other of attacks and this year some of
   them met Department of Safety and Security officials about crime, both
   within their secure enclaves and the broader areas of Arcadia, Sunnyside,
   Garsfontein and Hatfield.

The Sunday Times found that at least seven embassies have had staff, and in
some cases their main residential offices, attacked. On January 3, the
First Secretary of the Gabon embassy, Elizabeth Mathongo, and her three
children were robbed by four armed men at the gate of their Garsfontein
residence.

On 7 January at 7 pm in Groenkloof, the bureau chief of the Islamic
Republic of Iran Broadcasting was robbed at gunpoint. On 28 January, at
about 6 pm, a defence attaché from the Greek embassy was robbed by two
gunmen in Garsfontein. On 30 January, three armed men broke into the house
of the Pakistani High Commissioner. The robbers bound the hands and feet of
the official and his family before locking them in a room and fleeing with
jewellery, money, cellphones, watches and electrical equipment. On the same
night, the house of an administration officer from the Pakistani High
Commission was broken into. On 4 February at 10 pm five armed men entered
the house of a US embassy employee in Waterkloof Ridge. The official and
his friends suffered head injuries after being attacked with a spanner.

So, Mr President, the point I am trying to make is that this is not just a
few individual poor people. This is, in fact, so pervasive that it has
reached the embassies, and it is a very disconcerting thing for all of us.

In conclusion, criminals seem to have no fear for the consequences of their
actions. There is nothing that deters them and nothing that restrains them;
they fear neither God nor our government. We do not want the fabric of our
society to fall apart. We do not want our country to become a haven for
organised criminals and druglords. Mr President, now is the time to stop
crime. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon member. Could I also
appeal to the House to try to maintain the decorum and the dignity of the
House. The level of talk is too high, and I think the President is also
getting disturbed by this level of noise.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
Ministers and hon members, last Friday in the state of the nation address,
our President gave a befitting honour to Mama Adelaide Tambo, not because
she was the wife of our struggle hero Comrade O R Tambo, but President
Mbeki gave honour to Ma Tambo because in her own right she had been the
living embodiment of ubuntu.

Ubuntu is the deepest African value of human solidarity, endurance,
respect, honesty, compassion, human dignity, wisdom and collective unity.
Again, in his oration on Saturday in Benoni, the President elaborated on
why Ma Tambo will and must continue to be a living example for all South
Africans; to draw on the lessons of ubuntu that Ma Tambo taught throughout
her political life, not only through her words, but also through her deeds.

Had it not been for the deep-seated belief in ubuntu, a value system
entrenched in Ma Tambo’s very soul - the understanding that umntu ngumntu
ngabantu [a person is a person through others] – many people who came
knocking at her door would have been destitute or lost in the hardships of
living in exile. She understood the relief that comes with human
solidarity.

We, too, as Members of Parliament, are challenged to place the needs and
interests of our people at the core of our responsibilities. We must, for
instance, ensure that there is timely distribution and that enough
information is given to our communities and constituencies on the vast
number of poverty alleviation and eradication services and projects
government has introduced over the years.

It is an undisputed fact that the policies and programmes of the ANC-led
government, programmes which, in fact, derive from the Freedom Charter, are
based on the value systems encapsulated in ubuntu. So, too, is the
transformatory legislation that has been passed by this Parliament since
1994, thanks to the foresight of the now 95-year-old ANC, which has ensured
that ubuntu is entrenched as one of the founding principles of the new
South Africa. This is acknowledged even internationally.

The Batho Pele campaign, of which the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration spoke, ensures that public servants are service oriented. It
is yet another tool that ensures that service delivery is based on values
of selflessness, social consciousness and solidarity. However, there is an
urgent need to fight against the corrosive role of corruption as it erodes
democracy, public confidence, good governance and social stability.

Working as a collective, our Public Service can make a difference and give
effect to this year’s theme, that is “to intensify the struggle against
poverty as we advance in unity towards 2012”. As Members of Parliament,
when doing oversight work, we must ensure that the mission to create people-
centred and people-driven service delivery is continually characterised by
a strong code of ethics.

Under an ANC government, unlike the secrecy of the past, citizens have a
right to hold public servants accountable for the level of service they
deliver. The public is free to blow the whistle at any time and at any
level, should instances of corruption be identified.

It is important too that MPs constantly monitor and evaluate the
implementation and effectiveness of our anticorruption strategy, as yet
another tool to ensure transparency and honesty, and to entrench the spirit
of ubuntu.

The purpose of ubuntu has always been to promote co-operation among people,
to promote honesty, to ensure that people are accommodative, that they
share, that they save lives at all costs and that there is respect for both
the young and the old. Some sectors of our communities, as seen among women
especially, do look after each others’ wellbeing through activities such as
stokvels, oomasingcwabane [burial societies] and umngeniselwano
[stockvels/savings groups], and they support each other in times of grief.

Therefore, that is why I want to disagree with the Rev Meshoe that ANC
leaders do not visit or support victims of crime. I want to let him know
that. Inherited from the struggle for liberation, such compassion comes
naturally to us.

However, there are signs that society is losing its anchor on ubuntu.
Patriotism, a crucial part of ubuntu, sacrifice and selflessness, is being
eroded by individualism and the desire for self-enrichment. We have
witnessed public servants, the supposed custodians of Public Service
delivery, plundering social grants through fraud and corruption; benefits
meant for the distressed and poverty-stricken citizens.

We have seen corrupt service providers stealing the only day’s meal meant
for a poverty-stricken schoolchild because of greed and selfishness. We
constantly witness neglect, ill-treatment and abuse of the elderly by their
own children and grandchildren. Surely, such criminal behaviour, as just
mentioned, represents much that is ugly and repulsive in human society, as
the President observed in his state of the nation address.

Ngale ndlela ke Somlomo, amalinge karhulumente okwenza ubomi boluntu bube
ngcono agxojwagxojwa ngala matutu. Asibobuntu ukurhwaphiliza imali
elungiselelwe ukuphelisa ubuhlwempu nentlupheko kubantu bakowethu.
Ingebobuntu nokuhlutha emilonyeni yabantwana elo nqathana baliphiwa
ngurhulumente esenzela ukuba bafunde ngcono. Yinkohlakalo egqithisileyo
ukuba amachiza ezibhedlele nasezikliniki.

Asibobuntu ukutshonisa urhulumente azibone ehlawula imali eyamkelwa
ziziporho, aba baziwa njengee-ghost employees, ngabula makhumsha Apha
sikwathetha ngeziporho zeevenkile zeencwadi ezithengisa iincwadi
ezingekhoyo. Kubalulekile ngoko ukuba abo bayibonayo le nkohlakalo xa
isenzeka, babethe ikhwelo, bangayifaki ekhwapheni. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[In this manner, Speaker, government’s efforts to improve the lives of
people are being thwarted by these thieves. It is inhuman to steal money
that has been set aside to fight poverty and hunger in our communities. It
is also inhuman to take away what the government is giving to the children
to improve themselves educationally. It is a serious act of cruelty to
steal medicine from hospitals and clinics.
It is not good to make the government bankrupt by paying ghost workers and
non-existing bookshops. It is therefore important that those who witness
this cruelty do not to keep quiet, but report it.]
We also need to rekindle the spirit of human solidarity and mutual respect,
which is central to the concept and practice of ubuntu. To achieve social
cohesion and human solidarity, we must continue to vigorously confront the
legacy of poverty, racism, inequality and sexism that we inherited from
apartheid.

As President Mbeki said, we must continue to work for national and social
cohesion among our people and to restore the integrity of our social
fabric. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Before I call the next speaker, that
is hon C M Morkel, could speakers take note of the changes that take place
at the Table and be gender-sensitive please. The last time I checked I was
still a “he”, not a “she”. Thank you. [Laughter.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Mr Chair, last week I lost my paternal grandfather and thus
shared my condolences in an intimate degree of empathy and sympathy for all
those members of the late Adelaide Tambo’s immediate and extended family,
especially her grandson and daughter. They spoke intimately of someone who
persevered out of hope for a better future for herself and her husband, who
was her lover and best friend, her children and her broader community.
This begs the question: Are we living in the age of hope that Mama Tambo
fought for? What have many of us, by various ways and means, fought for,
other than to see our loved ones and our broader communities have the
opportunity to thrive to the best of their abilities? Are we now living in
an age of denial or an age of reality, when they have lived in hope for
ages?

I still have hope and confidence in this country for myself, my children,
my loved ones and our broader community. I say this having experienced the
reality of apartheid and knowing that as painful as the reality is now, it
is better than the reality of our past. We cannot deny that crime levels
are high enough to be a major cause for concern to business leaders,
investors and ordinary citizens. We cannot deny that sincere and honest
efforts are being made by government in terms of policy, strategy,
programmes and projects to prevent and combat crime and poverty, among
others.

The reality is that the challenge is at the implementation level - not only
by the SA Police Service, but also by communities that are affected most by
crime. The reality is that community policing that falls under the
governance of both the ANC and DA, at various levels of governance, is open
for criticism. But it must be constructive criticism. The major challenge
is community participation to offer real and implementable solutions.

We need to see eye to eye and establish common ground on the basis of our
common patriotism and our love for this country - as we did with the
National Peace Accord structures prior to 1994, when our inaction would
have led to a fate too ghastly to contemplate.

Some may say that the candidness of the President on this issue and other
issues and the apparent reaching out by the leader of the largest
opposition party - with his marked change of tone and attitude - may be too
little too late as they may not be around to see the fruits of their
labour. But it is up to us all, in this House and beyond, to play an active
role in fine-tuning the implementation of an essentially sound anti-crime
policy and other policies. We must approach crime as if we were at war with
an external third force. We must put aside our ideological differences to
deepen the debate on issues such as crime. We need to go to the level, for
example, where we discuss how we should deepen the debate on poverty-
related crime and drug-related crime. We believe that if the tradeable
commodities and proceeds of crime are removed as much as possible, then we
could see significant reduction in turf wars between gangs and crimes
committed to sustain the drug habits of addicts.

Regarding race and class, we need to recognise the need to segment
government products and services according to a more closely and narrowly
defined living standards measurement, so that we move beyond the government
products and services that merely target the extremes of the first and the
second economies. For example, with the rapidly growing middle classes, we
are finding that many are too wealthy to qualify for state housing
subsidies but too poor for commercial bonds and other financial products.
This results in growing numbers of backyard dwellers and tenants being
abused by inner-city landlords, with all the associated challenges.

This challenge of group areas defines perceptions of race and class along
the old group areas of grand apartheid. These de facto group areas will
define our consciousness along apartheid lines as long as they remain. So,
too, will the slow pace of land restitution.

Mr President, we therefore encourage you to persevere and inspire further
hope within this age of reality, as you did in your state of the nation
address, because hope without realism is a fool’s paradise.

On this day of love, I want to wish everyone love and happiness. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr M SEFULARO: Mr Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, comrades and hon members, let me first
apologise as I see I am listed as intending to speak in Setswana
exclusively. In fact, my main submission will be in English, but I will
make remarks in all of the languages.

My entry into this debate is in response to the part where the President
addressed the nation on matters of social cohesion, national unity, value
systems and identity. To this end, I shall devote significant attention to
the question of what the challenges of moral regeneration are in the
context of ubuntu.

For a clearer sense of the challenges of values and social cohesion that
face us today, I turn to the words of the President when he delivered the
2008 January 8 Statement of the NEC of the ANC in Malahleng on 13 January
this year. The President said then:

   Yet, existing alongside, and contrary to the values and norms that we
   inherited from the apartheid past are the values and norms that have also
   resided among our people and which have held together our communities
   from ancient times to the present. These values contained in the
   worldview known as ubuntu emphasise society, community and family as
   critical elements of personal development, security and fulfilment.


   These are the essential values that informed the formation of the ANC 95
   years ago ...

The statement goes on to challenge us that, and I quote again:

   We need to engage, with neither tame nor timidity, in an intensive
   struggle to engender progressive social values among our people and
   within all social institutions as part of a broader moral regeneration.


Perhaps we should read these words as a call upon us to seriously take
stock of how we are performing in the front of moral regeneration and what
the odds are that we may attain greater progress in this serious national
undertaking. More specifically, we need to review our flagship project, the
Moral Regeneration Movement.

A related question is whether, in calling for a return to the values of
ubuntu, we are calling for anything new or separate from the call
previously made by President Mandela when he called for the ``RDP of the
soul’’, a call that gave birth to the moral regeneration project.

My submission is that President Mbeki is not calling for anything new.
Rather, the call by him and the national executive committee of the ANC is
a call for a major correction to the root cause of what has thus far
constrained and hobbled the Moral Regeneration Movement. I believe that a
careful assessment would lead to an inescapable conclusion that, to date,
the Moral Regeneration Movement has neither delivered on the promise it
implied nor matched the hopes and expectations it ignited among South
Africans when it was first launched. In fact, it is floundering on the
periphery of national attention and effort.
In her monograph Crime Prevention and Morality: The Campaign for Moral
Regeneration in South Africa, Janine Rauch states the following about the
origins and challenges facing the Moral Regeneration Movement, colloquially
known as MRM:

   At the first national workshop in February 2000, the campaign approach to
   moral regeneration emerged strongly. What was envisaged was a mass
   mobilisation, harking back to the glory days of the liberation struggle,
   to a time when a large majority of people and organisations would be
   united against the common enemy. However, there were and are many debates
   about morality among the diverse groups that make up South African
   society ... hence no easy basis for mobilising a united front against it.

This would be followed by the high-profile launch of the MRM in April 2002,
where a declaration was made that:

   The ultimate objective of the Moral Regeneration Movement is to assist in
   the development of a caring society through the revival of the spirit of
   botho or ubuntu and the actualisation and the realisation of the values
   and ideals enshrined in our constitution ...

I want to argue, Chairperson, that one of the persistent fault lines that
run through the MRM is the inclination by the presenters, interpreters and
the receivers of the messages of the MRM, to cloak or imbue them with
religious subtext and predominantly Western perspectives and value systems.
We have failed to centre ubuntu as the defining value system for moral
regeneration for our nation. The net result has been the alienation of the
majority of our people from the MRM.

In a separate but related discussion on why we have failed in the above
areas, Cedric Mayson, the ANC’s head of the Commission for Religious
Affairs offers the following explanations concerning the key sectors and
potential partners in the MRM. On religion – it’s a pity that Rev Meshoe is
not in the House – he says fundamentalism has become a negative influence
in nearly all the religions, prompted by influences from overseas. It
usually encourages self-centredness which diverts people from the
collective concern for others. Some religious leaders – at all levels –
hunger for power and prestige and use their ecclesiastical or pastoral
concerns to promote private political agendas.

In this regard, I believe all good believers and patriots should distance
themselves from the persistent negativity of the hon Rev Meshoe, the leader
of the ACDP. In his response, he chose to take upon himself the task of
amplifying the voices that insist that the President, the government and
the ANC do not care about the tragedy and the pain of those who fall victim
to crime. Like the Pharisees, he wants the President to wear sack cloth and
flagellate himself in public. And that, for him, would be a minimum
indication of care, ignoring the many times that the President has spoken
on this matter and the many statements of action that the President has put
before this House, including on Friday during the state of the nation
address.

On liberals and many of our fellow citizens, Cedric Mayson says:

   Too many are trying to appease their conscience without disturbing their
   comfort zones ... rooted in wishy-washy liberalism, with no courage of
   their convictions ... being simply anti, especially anti being involved
   in responsibility, and finding satisfaction in the negative principle to
   avoid involvement, criticise government.

Finally, he says on moral regeneration:


   We shall make little progress if we follow the Western approach of
   downgrading the role of spiritual power, or allow the spiritual life of
   our communities to be restricted by competitive religious industries, or
   move away from the commitment to banish poverty. We need a collective
   secular spiritual discourse related to the experience of the marginalised
   people transforming society ... and like the political and economic
   revolutions, it has to come from the demands and insights of the
   oppressed people themselves.

Mr Chairperson, I’m running out of time, but I want to argue that the
biggest challenge is how we centre ubuntu as the central message and
project of our moral regeneration. And, in fact, this has to be done in the
language of our people, the language of the marginalised and oppressed.

Hon member Nombeko Liwane says that it is imperative to translate all the
essential ideas and practices from foreign languages into relevant local
languages, because language and nationality are the strongest primary form
of identity among Africans.

In an equally relevant study, The Report on Macro-social Trends in South
Africa – A Nation in the Making found that language identity seems to be
strongest among those in the lower income bracket, with lower educational
qualifications.

We therefore have to seriously review our approach to the MRM and we need
to centre ubuntu. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mna L N DIALE: Modulasetulo, mohlomphegi Mookamedi, le Motlatši wa gagwe,
Ditonakgolo tše di hlomphegago, gammogo le Maloko a Palamente, ke a le
dumediša ka moka ga lena ka mo Ntlong e kgethwa. Ke thaba go tšea karolo mo
ngangišanong ye ya go alwa ke Mookamedi wa naga. Yona ke tlo e kgokaganya
le ba bangwe ba rena bao ba ilego ba tšea lesolo la leeto leo lehono re
iphsinago ka lona re dutšego kamo. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph
follows.)

[Mr L N DIALE: Hon Chairperson, hon Mr President and the Deputy President,
hon Ministers as well as hon Members of Parliament, I greet you all in this
honourable House. I feel honoured to participate in this debate that the
President of the country has presented. I relate it to those of us who have
travelled the long journey to freedom; the freedom that we enjoy today, as
we have seats in this House.]

Comrade President, 40 years ago, in 1967, sons and daughters of our land
crossed the Zambezi in a place that was rocky with strong, determined
currents. Having crossed the Zambezi, these high-spirited uMkhonto weSizwe,
MK, combatants were determined to reach the deeper paths of Zimbabwe and
eventually enter South Africa.

Combined with the Zapu fighters, these combatants were determined to fight
against and defeat the combined racist forces of the apartheid South Africa
and of the then Rhodesia. Of course, these combatants were engaged in the
Wankie campaign, during which, in battle after battle, the racist forces
were overwhelmed by the high spirits, courage and fire power of our gallant
combatants. Having been overwhelmed, the racist forces ran away, leaving
behind their weapons, communication equipment, their injured and dead.

Comrade President, as we commemorate the Wankie campaign this year, we
must, in the words of the late Comrade Oliver Tambo:


   ... pay special tribute to those illustrious combatants who fell on the
   sacred fields of Zimbabwe with the warrior cry “victory or death” on
   their lips; immortal fighters such as Peter Mhlongo, Delmas Sibanyoni,
   James Masimini and Basil February, their names are endless, who, in
   several battles, refused to retreat, fought the enemy to the last bullet.


Fellow South Africans, let us pause and reflect on the sacrifices made by
these men and women, some of whom even gave up their lives in the noble
cause of our revolution. Let us salute them and thank their fathers and
mothers and their friends for allowing these heroes and heroines of our
land to make sacrifices so that today we can, without fear, stand at this
podium and talk about campaigns such as the Wankie campaign and some of our
experiences during our struggle. [Applause.]

Indeed, Comrade President, there are lessons to be learnt from collective
approaches and successes of uMkhonto weSizwe combatants and Zapu fighters
during the battles of Wankie. We can draw lessons from the spirit of
working together of these combined forces, which lessons must then give
content to our approach to the fundamental challenges of poverty and crime
in our society.

When reflecting on these experiences, the late Chris Hani wrote of the
magnificent spirit of cohesion and unity between MK and Zapu. Without any
doubt, Comrade President, the people of Africa require a spirit of unity in
tackling poverty, security and other challenges that continue to face the
African continent. Processes such as Wankie indeed constitute an important
part of our history.

Mookamedi, “šikiša dira le molapo, mphago wa dira ke meetse”. “ Moya leeto
tlama dieta di tie, moo o yago o tlo fihla”. Ke rata gore ke re “motšwa
gabo ga a laele”. [Hon Mr President, it is very important to look after the
people who work for you. They must be provided with the necessary resources
to do the job well. It is very important that people thoroughly prepare for
what they are going to do, which ensures that they will manage to get
there. Let me just say: We meet to part and we part to meet.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Re a leboga. [Setshego.] Thank you.
[Laughter.]

Mr R COETZEE: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, at the
conclusion of this debate it has become clear to us that the ANC Cabinet
and caucus simply do not get what people out there are saying about crime
and about what they want this government to do about crime.
[Interjections.]

It is no good coming up here, having done your best to draw all power unto
yourself, and then say: “Crime isn’t our fault and it isn’t our
responsibility to deal with crime; it’s something that everybody must take
responsibility for.” That’s a non-point.
Of course, everybody must take responsibility and everybody must pitch in,
but everybody doesn’t have a budget of billions, everybody doesn’t control
the SAPS, everybody doesn’t control the prisons in South Africa. And, if
you want power, then you must accept the responsibility, Minister, and you
have the responsibility to protect the people of this country.
[Interjections.]

And you mustn’t complain when an example is brought up, or a few examples
are brought up, because it would take five days of this House’s time to go
through every single example of over 18 000 people who are murdered in
South Africa every year on your watch. [Interjections.]

What South Africans want and what they deserve is a government that shows
that it cares, not just a government that outlines certain programmes of
action with which to deal with crime. It is possible. Indeed, it is
imperative for leaders to be angry about crime and to grieve with their
people without becoming reckless in their policies or stupid about the way
in which they approach the problem.

In the words of Joan Armatrading, and I say this for the Minister of Arts
and Culture because he is very interested in songs lately, “Show some
emotion” – because he’s the last speaker in this debate. I wonder if the
Minister can actually show South Africa not just that there is a plan - and
one accepts that things are happening - but that there is real care and
concern about how people feel about crime.

It is also not good enough to blame apartheid and engage in amateur
sociology lectures. [Interjections.] Of course, there is a link between
apartheid and the circumstances of South Africa today. And, of course, the
social dynamics of any society determine to an extent the nature of crime
in that society. But, again, what people want aren’t explanations or
excuses, but solutions that are driven by a passionate leadership that
cares about how they feel.

The Minister for the Public Service and Administration made the shocking
mistake of bringing up the ANC’s approach to dealing with corruption. So, I
want to quote for her what the secretary–general of the ANC said about
corruption in the ANC:

   This rot is across the board. It is not confined to any level or any area
   of this country. Almost every project is conceived because it offers
   opportunities for certain people to make money. A great deal of the ANC’s
   problems are occasioned by this. There are people who want to take it
   over so that they can arrange for the appointment of those who will allow
   them possibilities for future accumulation.


That comes from the secretary–general of the ANC. Why was there silence
when Douglas Gibson brought up the subject of Travelgate? Why is there
silence in this House? Why can’t we just play open cards with the people of
South Africa, and say: “These are the people who stole from you and these
people, in fact, didn’t steal; there’s some other explanation for it.”

Is there something that is being hidden? And why do the Cabinet Ministers,
who allegedly paid back R300 000 to the state, say nothing about it when
they get a chance to speak? [Interjections.] Maybe you can answer that
question some time, instead of heckling me. [Interjections.]

There is a film on circuit at the moment called The Queen, in which Helen
Mirren brilliantly portrays a stubborn, tin-eared Elizabeth II who
dangerously misjudges the mood of her people. I recommend The Queen to the
chief and to the other VIPs sitting on this side of the House. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Mr Chairperson, Mr President, Deputy
President and hon members, 13 years of democracy have brought impressive
changes on the South African landscape. These 13 years have meant that, for
the first time in over a century, South Africa has enjoyed relative
internal peace. This last decade is the first, in more than 100 years,
during which there was no major political upheaval. These 13 years have
meant more than a decade of steady economic growth, not sufficient to be
sure, to eradicate the poverty, joblessness and deprivation that degrade
too many of our people; but steady growth nonetheless.

These 13 years have witnessed the steady improvement of the living
standards of the majority of South Africans, especially the poor and the
most vulnerable. Research indicates that between 1998 and 2004 more than 2
million people moved up the social ladder, whereas in 1998 the poorest
categories represented 48% of our population and that figure had come down
to 42% by 2004.

During these past 13 years, we have seen an expanding floor of rights and
entitlements unfold for the historically disadvantaged. South Africa’s
fiscal deficit, which stood at 40% of the gross domestic product, GDP, in
1996 has now been reduced to 1,5% of the GDP. In 2004, South Africa
celebrated the electrification of 7,5 million households, that is 4 million
new electricity connections since 1994. By 2005 access to electricity stood
at 71% of all households. These are impressive achievements and to pretend
otherwise is to bury one’s head in the sand.

We must acknowledge and celebrate what we have achieved, yet we are
introspective enough to recognise how much still needs to be done. We, on
this side of the House, have said and recognised that it is of no comfort
to a citizen who has lost a loved one to crime to know that the rate of
murder in South Africa has dropped dramatically since 1994. It is of no
comfort to a citizen whose home is violated by criminals to know that the
statistics indicate a steady decline in this type of crime.

It is not very helpful to a victim of pickpockets, muggers, thieves and
other robbers to hear that we now have new modern methods of detection that
can lead to the arrest and conviction of the perpetrators.  But it is
equally unhelpful to use the issue of crime as a political football. The
challenge before all of us is how to take the war to the criminals. To
sneer at the measures that the government has put in place - to do
precisely that is to be childish and petty. [Interjections.]

This government, elected with an overwhelming mandate – and I repeat,
elected with an overwhelming mandate - in 2004, has reached its mid-term.
[Applause.] That mandate included the acceleration of the growth and more
equitable development of our country and its people, as well as the
promotion of sociocohesion and the nurturing of a shared national identity.
The issue of identity has assumed a special significance in our country,
because of our extremely fractured and conflicted past. What we aspired to,
as a country and society, was summed up in the Constitution we collectively
adopted in December 1996.

The admirable principles contained in that document represent the
commitment by all of us to strive for greater mutual understanding and
acceptance, not despite our differences but rather by embracing the
diversity of the South African people as one of our great strengths. I
consequently want to underscore the President’s call for pluralism and
inclusivity, not as a grudging recognition of difference, but as the
positive affirmation thereof as both healthy and edifying.

It is that understanding of the spirit of our Constitution that persuades
me to take issue with the hon Rev Meshoe for his misguided homophobic
attitudes, which he once again voiced in this House yesterday. The
suggestion that there are some South Africans who should enjoy fewer rights
than others by virtue of their sexual orientation, clearly runs counter to
the letter and spirit our Constitution.

Equally reprehensible is the idea that the rituals observed by some of our
people can lightly be castigated as “savage”, “barbaric” and “uncivilised”.
Each individual South African’s preference regarding these matters is not
at issue. Whether I approve or not, these are constitutionally protected
rights which we are all obliged to respect and defend. [Applause.]

The year 2007 marks a number of important anniversaries on both the
continent and South Africa’s own political calendar. Fifty years ago, Ghana
became the first sub-Saharan African country to reclaim independence from
colonial rule. Under the leadership of Dr Kwame Nkrumah and the Convention
People’s Party, Ghana took a place among the family of free nations,
helping to accelerate the pace at which the people of Africa undid the
outcomes of the 1884 Berlin Conference, when our continent was shared out
amongst rapacious colonial powers.

South Africa will join the other countries of Africa in marking this
significant milestone. The 50 years of progress since Ghana’s independence
have not been without serious reverses and tragedies. Under the leadership
of the ANC, South Africa has made a sterling contribution towards healing
the wounds of our continent. This year, for the first time in more than 45
years, the people of Congo have been able to hold free and fair elections.
[Applause.]

The SA National Defence Force, created by our democratic government after
1994, has become one of the greatest factors for peace and stability in the
continent. Men and women of the SA National Defence Force, wherever they
have been deployed, have done us proud. Democratic South Africa’s role on
the African continent is not premised on flexing our economic and military
muscle to bully and browbeat others to do our bidding. Patient, quiet and
often unseen persuasion and discussion is how South Africa goes about its
diplomacy and how it attains its objectives. [Applause.]

Those who imagine that shouting and extravagant gestures can change
anyone’s mind would do well to examine the interesting diplomatic
breakthroughs of recent days and contrast those with the impasses some very
powerful countries find themselves in at present. Here at home, we will
also have occasion to note and commemorate our own national figures
associated to South Africa’s struggle for freedom.

In 1947, the presidents of the ANC, the Natal Indian Congress and Transvaal
Indian Congress concluded an agreement, later dubbed the Three Doctors’
Pact, in terms of which the three organisations agreed to take common
action on issues of common concern. That pact laid the basis for what was
to grow into a powerful mass movement during the 1950s, the Congress
Alliance, which still serves as a lodestar for the Tripartite Alliance
today.

Chief Albert John Luthuli, then president of the ANC and South Africa’s
first Nobel Peace Laureate, met his still unexplained death 40 years ago
near his home in Groutville, KwaDukuza. Inspired by his patriotism and his
deeply held Christian principles, Chief Luthuli led the liberation movement
for 13 years. And, as he often recalled, for decades the oppressed people
had very patiently knocked at the constantly barred door without any
response.

In marking the death of this great patriot, South Africa will be honouring
both the man and the values and principles he had fought for all his life.
Those are the very principles contained in our democratic Constitution. Ten
years later, in 1977, yet another great patriot met an untimely death.
While the circumstances of Steven Bantu Biko’s death absolutely explain
that he was literally beaten and tortured to death by his jailors, the
courts of those days held no one accountable for his death. Perhaps some of
the hon members should be reminded that while the judges of the apartheid
regime might well have been very sober, they were anything but honourable.
[Applause.]

The brutal murder of that young patriot shocked the world. The callousness
of the judiciary that refused to hold anyone accountable for that dastardly
deed bears testimony to the moral bankruptcy of that regime.

The 30th anniversary of Steven Biko’s murder will be appropriately marked,
not to point fingers at anyone, but by way of affirming the democratic and
liberatory thrust of the politics he represented. The massive assault on
media freedom that coincided with the murder of Biko should also serve as a
timely reminder to all of us of the high price exacted from the people of
this country for the freedom our media enjoy today.

Thomas Paine once wrote that we esteem too lightly that which we gain
rather cheaply. The tears, the blood and the very lives of the martyrs who
were sacrificed so that our journalists, editors and  newspaper owners
today no longer have to nervously peer over their shoulders before putting
pen to paper are well worth remembering. [Applause.]

How many of our latter-day journalists even consider that cost? It was in
that spirit that I responded to a query from the Afrikaans magazine, the
Huisgenoot, about Bok van Blerk’s song De la Rey. Whatever coded message
others might attribute to Van Blerk’s song, he says it has no contemporary
political relevance. And I reiterate my best wishes for the success of his
song and may he compose and sing many more. [Applause.]

South Africa has left behind the previous bilingual dispensation that
entailed the promotion of only English and Afrikaans to the exclusion of
other languages spoken in our country. Government has accepted its
obligation to promote and advance all of South Africa’s official languages.
I once again want to underscore that Afrikaans, like the other official
languages, will be actively promoted and protected by this government
notwithstanding the hysteria in certain quarters.

The reaffirmation of this country’s African identity by correcting the
corruption of African names, the resurrection of African names that have
been arbitrarily abolished and displaced by previous regimes is not a
threat to any of our language communities. [Applause.] Contrary to the
popularly held urban legend, the overwhelming majority of name changes
approved by me and previous Ministers entail not Afrikaans place names, but
African names that had been misspelled, corrupted or otherwise done
violence.

As we cast our eyes back over these past 13 years of democracy, all South
Africans, all of us, on either side of this House, can justly say “not bad,
not bad at all”. We are indeed creating a better life for our people. We
are contributing to the creation of a better world.

I want to end off, Mr Chairperson. Chairperson, Comrade President, Deputy
President, I want to end off with the word to the hon leader of the DA. We
have been told that the hon Leon will be leaving political life during the
course of this year. And I want to wish him well in his future endeavours,
but I also want to say that we will sorely miss him on our side of the
House. It is true the hon Leon raised the DA, which used to sit over there
– four lonely members - to what they are today.

An HON MEMBER: Seven.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: They were seven! Were they? Oh, I didn’t
see the other three. Sorry! He raised it to what it is today. But if you
think about what his impact has been on this side of the House! We came in
here in 1994 with 63%, we are now over 70%. Thank you very much, Tony Leon.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! That concludes the debate for
today. Can members please sit. The President will reply tomorrow.
The House adjourned at 18:36.
                                 __________


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bill to be referred to Mediation Committee

      (1)   Bill, as amended by National Council of Provinces, and rejected
           by National Assembly on 13 February 2007, to be referred to
           Mediation Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186 (2)(b):

           (a)   Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill
                 [B 35D–2005] (National Assembly – sec 76)


National Assembly



The Speaker


1.    Membership of Committees

      (1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of
      Portfolio Committees:

           Finance

           Appointed: Marais, Mr S J F (Alt)

           Public Enterprises


           Appointed: Van Dyk, Dr S M


           Discharged: Stephens, Mr J J M


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
      Tourism on the request for approval of the Proposed exclusion of
      Portion 1 of Farm Mozib 279, the farm Drooge Veldt 292 and Portion 1
      of the farm Than 280 from the Vaalbos National Park in terms of
      section 21(1)(a) of the National Environmental Management: Protected
      Areas Act, 2003 (No 57 of 2003), dated 13 February 2007:
          The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
          having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
          Proposed exclusion of Portion 1 of Farm Mozib 279, the farm
          Drooge Veldt 292 and Portion 1 of the farm Than 280 from the
          Vaalbos National Park in terms of section 21(1)(a) of the
          National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (No
          57 of 2003), referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms
          of section 21(1)(a) of the National Environmental Management:
          Protected Areas Act, 2003, approves the said request.


Request to be considered.


