---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 November 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-11-01
---

THURSDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                               CONDOLENCES ON

                 DEATHS OF PATRICK MYNHARDT and MOIRA LISTER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:

   That the House-

      1) notes with profound sadness the death of actor Patrick Mynhardt at
         the age of 75 on Thursday, 25 October 2007, and the death of
         actress Moira Lister, at the age of 84 on Saturday, 28 October
         2007;


      2) recognises the major role both these performers played in placing
         South Africa’s theatre and television industry in the international
         spotlight;


      3) acknowledges that these deaths are a massive loss to South Africa’s
         theatre and television industry and that both of them will be
         sorely missed;

      4) recognises that both these performers have been an inspiration to
         all young South African actors and actresses who will continue to
         carry forward the legacy they have left behind; and

      5) conveys its condolences to the families of Patrick Mynhardt and
         Moira Lister.

Agreed to

                INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS IN BRUSSELS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House-
      1) notes that the countries of the South are patiently waiting to
         receive good news from the current trade negotiations taking place
         in Brussels between the European Union and the African, Caribbean
         and Pacific states;


      2) further notes the resistance and glaring unfairness on the side of
         the developed countries with regard to international trade and
         negotiation, especially the current review of the ACP-EU Economic
         Partnership Agreement;

      3) believes that the current government position in the negotiations
         is correct and should be supported, as the acceptance of this
         position will move us closer to the goal of a better Africa and a
         just world; and

      4) commends the government on its prioritisation of the efforts to
         fight poverty and to help build economies of developing countries.

Agreed to.

           CONDOLENCES ON THE PASSING AWAY OF PROF HARRIET NGUBANE
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs I MARS: Thank you, Chairperson, I move the motion as printed on the
order paper as follows:

   That the House -


      1) notes with deep sadness that Prof Harriet Ngubane  passed  away  at
         the age of 78 last week;


      2) further notes that Prof Ngubane was considered one of the  foremost
         African scholars of her time and that her book  Body  and  Mind  in
         Zulu Medicine is still the  seminal  work  on  traditional  African
         belief systems;


      3) pays tribute  to  this  formidable  scholar  who  had  a  PhD  from
         Cambridge University and who held  academic  positions  at  Oxford,
         Yale, Edinburgh and Cape Town Universities;


      4) acknowledges the role Prof Ngubane  played  as  an  IFP  Member  of
         Parliament and a member of the Pan-African Parliament; and


      5) extends its deepest condolences to Prof Ngubane’s family and  loved
         ones.

Chairperson and colleagues I have had the privilege of knowing Harriet
Ngubane for more than 30 years, a period over which we went through many
great challenges and victories. It was a period, at first, of great
difficulties under apartheid, but her perseverance and belief led her to
becoming one of the world’s foremost anthropologists and social scientist.

Like so many others, Harriet started her professional career as a teacher.
She was in Durban before becoming a research assistant at the University of
Natal. In those days, as you all know, it was very difficult to access
quality education, but she (Harriet) managed to -do so and won a bursary to
study at the Cambridge University. Already then, it was obvious that she
would be one of the finest scholars of her time. So it proved and she went
on to study and lecture at a range of the most prestigious universities. In
particular, her work on traditional African belief systems and Zulu culture
and her work made her a renowned expert much in demand in the international
academic community.

Professor Harriet Ngubane was a colleague and a good friend to many of us
in this House. Although she had been ill for some time it still came as a
great shock, I think, to all of us when we heard of her death. I think we
can all agree that Harriet had a brilliant mind. But she was also a very
passionate and caring person who was fiercely loyal to her family and
friends and this was one of the qualities I admired the most. The fact that
her children showed the same academic excellence and dedication is an
obvious pointer to their mother’s nurture and care. The contribution she
made as an IFP Member of Parliament to her respective committees, Land
Affairs and Water Affairs as well as to the party will always be remembered
and appreciated. She was dedicated, hardworking and disciplined, traits
that clearly emanated from her academic background. She tackled all
political and policy issues with the same determination to get to the
bottom of the truth as one would have expected from a top academic.

We all learned a great deal from Harriet, but I do believe that there was
still a lot more we could have gained from her vast experiences and
knowledge had we but taken the time to visit and interact with her more
often, after she left Parliament.

Harriet Ngubane was an inspiration and a good friend who will be sorely
missed by all of us. She was loved and respected by many and we offer our
deepest condolences to her families and friends. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon member. I now call
the hon M A A Njobe. Hon members, can we have order in the House? This is a
motion of a very special kind, and I see there are a lot of other
discussions that are going on in the House. Prof Ngubane was a member of
this House.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Thank you, Chairperson. I do feel honoured to be able to
make a contribution to this motion on behalf of the late Prof Harriet
Ngubane.
The life of Prof Harriet Ngubane was a life well lived in the service of
our country and humanity. She was a scholar and an activist. As a Member of
this Parliament, she served with dedication and commitment. Her
contribution to the work of this House in the areas of arts, culture,
science and technology - and in other areas that have already been
mentioned by the previous speaker and also in issues of social development
as it affects our people – in this Parliament is well documented.

I remember that she was part of the first delegation to attend the launch
of the Pan-African Parliament in Addis Ababa in 2004. She was very
passionate about participation in the Pan-African Parliament. I’m sure had
she had her choice, she would have been happy to have been made a permanent
member of the PAP. When we left Addis Ababa she was full of ideas of how we
could contribute as South Africa to the Pan-African Parliament.

Harriet was a prolific writer and a dedicated hard worker. She worked for
numerous institutions, served in many consultancies including some
government commissions. She authored and co-authored various books and
papers and served on a number of boards. Indeed, hers was a very busy life.

Today we celebrate her life and all that she has done for her country and
its people. She has been exemplary and her life presents us, and our youth
in particular, with a challenge to learn and match the high standards that
she set. Her life tells our youth that commitment and dedication to a cause
is the best contribution one can make to one’s community.

We indeed share the pain of her loss. However, we cannot allow the great
things she did in the service of humanity to receive less prominence. It
was her fortitude and great achievements that will always inspire today’s
and future generations to take theirs and humanity’s destiny into their own
hands.

Prof Harriet Ngubane also dedicated her political life to the cause of
women’s emancipation regardless of political or sectoral affiliations.
While a member of the IFP Women’s Brigade and together with women such as
the late Faith Gasa, she supported all efforts that women made to establish
the SA Women’s Coalition at a time when things were difficult for us in the
country because the tensions were still high.

Now, the SA Women’s Coalition is the predecessor of the current SA
Progressive Women’s Movement. So we can see and we can say that Prof
Harriet did contribute towards the establishment of all of the current
women’s movements in the country.

In a world dominated by patriarchy, social injustices and exploitation, it
was her bravery and hard work that will communicate to the girl-child, for
example, the message that nothing defeats the human spirit and human
solidarity.

Thus, we are grateful to Prof Harriet Ngubane for the immense contribution
she made to the efforts to build a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and
prosperous South Africa. We extend, on behalf of the ANC, our deep-felt
condolences to her party the IFP, all those who worked with her, her family
and all her loved ones. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I want to say to the House that I had the
privilege of knowing Harriet Ngubane before 1994. She always struck me as a
remarkably fine lady, who conducted herself with great pride and dignity at
all times.

It was a privilege knowing her, and when she arrived in Parliament in 1994,
she made a very real impact in this House through her dedication to her
work and her genuine conviction in her beliefs, and her love and loyalty to
her party, the IFP.

As we know, she served on a number of portfolio committees, including the
Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry, and the Committee on the
Quality of Life and Status of Women, and her great work in that regard,
which the hon Njobe has just mentioned.

But I want to say that, as a party, we will always remember her for the
mark she made in the field of land affairs, serving not only as the chief
IFP representative on the Land Affairs portfolio committee, but also as the
chairperson of the IFP study group on land affairs and as that party’s
spokesperson in that field.

I think that many of us have had the opportunity of reading Harriet’s CV,
and it certainly is very impressive indeed. The honours and awards she had
won are truly amazing. Her employment career, from being a new teacher at
St Saviour’s Primary School in Durban, to that of being Professor of Social
Anthropology at UCT, and then going on to becoming a member of the first
democratically elected Parliament of South Africa, is really a very real
tribute to a lady of great intellect, of great character, great charm and
great determination.

Her published research articles, and the consultancies she was given are
impressive, as was her appointment to the selection panel for the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission by the President in 1995.

She was a remarkably capable and extremely able politician, who, at all
times, believed in the causes she espoused.

Again I say, personally, I will remember her for the fine person she was: a
woman of great dignity, of great determination, of great affection for
those close to her, and of real respect for those who were her political
foes.

There can be no doubt that she will be sorely missed by all who knew her,
and, as the DA, we do offer our sincere condolences to her family and to
her party, the IFP, in the sure knowledge that they have lost someone of
immense importance. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mnu J BICI: Mhlalingaphambili, umbutho i-UDM nawo uyayamkela imbono
yokugqithiswa kwamazwi ovelwano kumzi, izihlobo nezalamane zakwaNgubane,
kwanokuba kwenziwe amagqabantshintshi ngoMama uNgubane.

Ixesha lokushiywa ngumntu wakho lixesha elibuhlungu kakhulu; lixesha apho
uthi uzive okanye uzibone ukwalunkcwe, uzifumane ukwisithokothoko
sobumnyama.

Anga la mazwi angacaphula kwintlungu nenzima eniyivayo. Sithi kwizihlobo
nezalamane: “Lalani ngenxeba; akuhlanga lungehliyo.” UThixo akathathi nto
angashiyi nto. Masimyeke aphumle uSisi Harriet.

KuSisi Harriet sithi: Sizivile izingqi zakho; sibubonile ubugorha bakho.
Hamba kakuhle, ntombazana! Imizamo emihle uyizamile Ugqatso ulufezile.
Wanga uSomandla angawusikelela umphefumlo wakho. Phumla ngoxolo; nathi
siyeza. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mr J BICI: Chairperson, the UDM also joins in expressing our condolences
to the Ngubane family and relatives, and in paying our tribute to the late
hon Mrs Ngubane.

When a member of your family passes on, then it is very sad. It is a time
when you find yourself alone and devastated. You really find yourself under
a dark cloud.

We hope these words of condolence are going to ease the pain and sadness
that you feel. We say to her family and relatives, may her soul rest in
peace. God does not take something from us and leave us with nothing. So
let us release Sister Harriet from our hearts.

To her we say, we have heard your footsteps; we saw your bravery, farewell
girl! We attest to your good work. You have finished your journey. May God
bless your soul. May your soul rest in peace. We are also coming. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr M H HOOSEN: Chairperson, it is truly a privilege on a maiden speech to
have to pay tribute to somebody of this calibre. Therefore, as the ID, I
would like to extend our deepest condolences to the Ngubane family for
their loss and wish them strength and courage through the very difficult
days ahead.
Professor Ngubane, at the age of 78, touched the lives of thousands of
people internationally – not only through her motherly and caring nature,
but also through her teachings that she acquired from several educational
institutions around the world.

At the launch of the Afro-Indian relations workshop in Durban, Ma-Harriet
was not afraid to highlight the privileges that Indian people enjoyed under
apartheid as a means to encourage dialogue and debate between Indian and
African communities as it is only through this healthy debate and dialogue
that we shall build a stronger bond and a united South Africa. Her
expertise in various cultures will be solely missed by many South Africans
and international communities. We therefore like to pay tribute to Ma-
Harriet, the mother of our land. Hamba kahle, Ma-Harriet [Go well, Ma-
Harriet]. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Voorsitter, soos wat dit die gebruik in hierdie Huis is
wil ek geluk sê aan die agb lid van die ID wat sopas sy eerste toespraak
gehou het. [Chairperson, as is the custom in this House, I would like to
congratulate the hon member from the ID who had just made his maiden
speech.]

I also welcome him on behalf of all the members of the House. You are most
welcome.

Voorsitter, die agb Harriet Ngubane het ons almal geken as ’n lid van
hierdie Parlement en van hierdie Huis. Sy het ’n lid geword van die
Parlement in 1994 en het vir 10 jaar gedien saam met ons in hierdie
Parlement tot 2004.

Dit is inderdaad so dat sy in haar eerste toespraak reeds haar aandag
gevestig het op die dinge wat vir haar en haar gemeenskap van groot belang
was en ek het gaan kyk na die eerste toespraak wat sy in hierdie Huis gehou
het op 1 Julie, 1994 waar sy haar reeds uitgespreek het oor behuising wat
haar na aan die hart gelê het en sy die volgende gesê het:


  Ek beklemtoon sosiokulturele aspekte van behuising. In die verlede is
  behuising hoofsaaklik rondom die gesinskern beplan en dus is daar nie
  rekening gehou met die groot aantal maatskaplike formasies in die land
  waarvan die kulturele praktyke en maatskaplike organisasie gegrond is op
  uitgebreide gesinne nie.

Sy het daaroor ook verder gegaan. Dit is interessant dat sy haar eerste
toespraak, haar nooienstoespraak, afgesluit het deur onder andere te verwys
na die dood, en ek haal aan waar sy aan die einde van haar toespraak as
volg afgesluit het:


  Nog ’n voorstel wat ondersoek moet word is dat huise gange moet hê.
  Wanneer ’n begrafnis in ons gemeenskap plaasvind kan ons nie ’n doodskis
  in die huis inkry nie. Dit is ’n standaardpraktyk dat die oorledene voor
  die begrafnis in staatsie lê. Daarom moet ons huise hê wat vir ons
  voorsiening sal maak selfs wanneer ons dood is.

Dit het sy gesê in die heel eerste toespraak wat sy in hierdie Huis gehou
het. Dit is ironies dat ons vandag daaraan dink. Ek wil graag namens die VF
Plus ons medelye en simpatie uitspreek met die IVP wat ’n kollega verloor
het, maar ook met die gesin van prof Harriet Ngubane. Ons het haar goed
geken, ons respekteer haar en ons wens hulle baie sterkte toe. Baie dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, we all knew the hon Harriet Ngubane as a member of this
Parliament and House. She became a Member of Parliament in 1994 and served
in Parliament for 10 years until 2004.

It is indeed so that she, in her maiden speech already, focused her
attention on the things that were of great importance to her and her
community. I looked at the first speech that she made in this House on 1
July 1994 when she spoke about the issue of housing, that was close to her
heart, and on which she had said the following:


   I am spelling out sociocultural aspects of housing, because this
   dimension of life in housing has been conspicuous in its absence over the
   years. In the past housing has been planned essentially for nuclear
   families, thus disregarding a large number of social formations in the
   country whose cultural practices and social organisation are based on
   extended families.

Afterwards, she went further on this issue. It is interesting that she
concluded her first speech, her maiden speech, by among other things,
referring to death and I quote where she concluded her speech as follows:


   Another suggestion that must be investigated is that houses must have
   passages. When a funeral takes place in our society, we cannot manage to
   get a coffin into the house. It is standard practice that before the
   burial the deceased lies in state. Therefore we must have houses that
   will accommodate us even when we are dead.

This she had to say in the very first speech she made in this House. It is
ironic that we think of those words today. On behalf of the FF Plus, I
would like to convey our condolences to and sympathy with the IFP who lost
a colleague, but also with the family of Prof Harriet Ngubane. We knew her
well, we respected her and we wish them all the best. Thank you very much.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the loss of Prof Harriet
Ngubane through death is one thing to think about for a long time to come
because she had established herself as an authority in Zulu culture. For a
septuagenarian of her calibre to depart from this earth, is a great loss of
wisdom because people at that age are wise. They have seen it all.

When I saw her in 1999, when I first came to Parliament, I was struck by
her stature, composure and authority with which she went about her
business. Taking into account that an African woman of her age had
progressed academically to hold a PhD and become a professor, spoke volumes
about her determination in life. This reminded me of Monyaise’s Setswana
book I read which, among others, says: “Thuto e tswa Natala, bongaka bo
tswa Bopedi”. [Educated people come from Natal, whereas traditional leaders
come from the North.] This meant she had sipped from the educational
fountain.

I always marvelled at her debate on indigenous knowledge systems,
particularly when it came to how to avert hunger among poor people. Her
knowledge of survival strategies was second to none. That even in her last
days she was associated with Freedom Park, is proof enough that she lived
for this country.

Professor Ngubane was a prolific writer and she has left a legacy in a
trail of literatures. We in the UCDP have no doubt that in her case death
is really a promotion to glory. We therefore pass on our commiserations to
her family and the IFP, which was her final political home. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, on behalf of the MF we extend our heartfelt
condolences to the family, friends and loved ones of our beloved Harriet
Ngubane. At a good age of 78, it is certain that Prof Harriet Ngubane has
experienced South Africa through the difficulties of apartheid to the
liberation of democracy. We are each given this life for a reason, purpose
and meaning.

We convey our condolences to the IFP on the loss of this great comrade and
pray that her work and influence will be carried through. Professor Harriet
Ngubane is also reported to have been a great academic and an activist in
politics. May she be an example to so many South African women and families
to see the value in investing in female education and academia. We pray
that the deceased may rest in peace in the heights of heaven.

Hamba kahle, uphumule. Usuphelile umzabalazo wakho mama. Siyabonga. [Go
well, have a rest. Your struggle is accomplished. Thank you.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, the PAC joins in paying tribute to Professor
Harriet Ngubane. She is certainly a great loss to our nation. She was not
only a great scholar who studied in famous universities such as Cambridge.
She has truly spent her life in the service of this nation, this continent
and humanity. She will remain a dynamo of inspiration to our country for a
long time. The PAC sends condolences to her family and to the IFP.

Professor Harriet Ngubane is a challenge to all the educated people of this
country, especially in the field of writing and research. African
epistemology lies buried like gold, desperately needing scholars like
Professor Ngubane. May she rest in peace! [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, South Africa has lost a formidable scholar and
cultural activist. Through her great intellect she showed that people from
all groups had a contribution to make to the development of knowledge in
society. I had the privilege to meet the hon Dr Harriet Ngubane in 1994
when she came to Parliament. What impressed me most about her was a quiet
and unassuming attitude and yet she was an intellectual giant who always
spoke with great wisdom.

Professor Ngubane was a world renowned academic. She held a PhD from
Cambridge and she also held senior academic posts at Yale, Oxford and at
the University of Cape Town. She is also credited to have written many
publications in isiZulu.

As South Africans we are proud to have had people of such calibre in our
society and we hope that the legacy will be emulated by many scholars and
public servants throughout our country.

The FD honours the departed hon Dr Ngubane, and we extend our sincere
condolences to her family, friends as well as the IFP who have lost a
valuable member. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, on behalf of the NA, I wish to convey our
sincere condolences to the family of the late hon Harriet Ngubane and to
the IFP.

The previous speakers have given appropriate depictions of the person
Harriet Ngubane and the NA supports them. I wish however to note that this
is the time when intellectual power is sorely needed, the passing on of the
late Hon Ngubane is to say the least; a loss to Parliament and to South
Africa. This, with a deep appreciation of cultural values in a diverse
society, is a quality that needs to be taught to many others.

On a personal level, I got to know the late hon Ngubane whilst serving on
the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs as a sensitive, pleasant and soft
spoken woman. May her soul rest in peace!  I thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! I take it that there are no
objections to the adoption of the motion by the House. The condolences of
the House will be conveyed to the Ngubane family.

Motion agreed to.

             DEATH OF FORMER COMRADE EDGAR NGOYI IN EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N B FIHLA (ANC): Chairperson, today we grieve the loss of a
revolutionary, Comrade Edgar Ngoyi, a man who was involved in the beginning
of the first phase of our struggle, during the times of mass mobilisation
in the ‘50s. He was always in the forefront, leading under Comrade Mkwai.
During the time of the Freedom Charter, he was also in the forefront doing
the door-to-door mass mobilisation of the people.

He was also in the forefront during the time of the arms struggle, which
later led to his arrest and was sentenced to 17 years at Robben Island.
When he came back, he continued with the struggle. He continued to fight.
He was also one of the first presidents of the civil organisation in the
country that is the Port Elizabeth People’s Civic Organisation, Pepco, in
1979. He became the first deputy chairperson of the former Eastern Cape
when the ANC came to power.

                        SKILLS SHORTAGES IN EDUCATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE (DA): Chair, it is with mixed feelings that we read
Trevor Manuel’s concerns expressed at the Institute of International
Finance in Washington acknowledging that:

  In South Africa we are not making sufficient progress in maths and
  science in our schools.”

He furthermore said: “Education and training were investments in the long
term.”

The DA has for a long time expressed the same concerns regarding education
and skills in South Africa after more than a decade of ANC’s stewardship,
and we derived no comfort in the fact that the most competent government
Minister agrees with us. Let us hope that the comrades in the Cabinet
responsible for education and skills training will not only heed the
Minister’s concerns, but act on them expeditiously and effectively in the
broad interest of all South Africans. Too much talk, plans and a positive
action have too long been the government’s modus operandi. It is time to
revisit the issue of skills training in the interest of all of us.

                 DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE MISLED THE HOUSE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE (IFP): Chairperson, I want to refer to a statement by
the hon Deputy Minister of Justice during the Justice debate on 29 May
2007, in which he sarcastically said:


  The Human Rights Commission itself, which if you don’t know, Mr Van der
  Merwe, is all the commission of the commissions. That’s the Human Rights
  Commission. Now, the Human Rights Commission has never taken a decision
  on this matter.

I have a written proof that the hon Deputy Minister misled the House with
that statement. The chairperson of the Human Rights Commission has
confirmed to me in writing that that decision was in fact a formal decision
by the Human Rights Commission. I have the letter and that means that the
Deputy Minister of Justice has violated the human rights of hundreds of
prisoners. I have that proof and it cannot be challenged. The Deputy
Minister misled the House.

In conclusion, I wish to state that the word I used in this House on the
previous occasion to describe that hon Deputy Minister remains as accurate
today as it was then, it is in fact his perfectly abbreviated CV.

                 IMPROVEMENT OF LIVING CONDITIONS IN MOQHEKA
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L P KHOARAI (ANC): Chairperson, on 4 October 2007 in Viljoenskroon a
march was organised by a disgruntled group of protestors and members of the
DA against Moqheka municipality, expressing their discontentment with
respect to the municipality’s plan to develop the land they currently
occupy. They also threatened to continue to possess the land illegally. The
Free State government addressed the issue raised by this group of
protesters and assured them that government is working hard to provide
access to land with proper infrastructure and that all South Africans need
to contribute to eradicate the injustices of the past.
The Premier of the Free State also consulted the group and requested them
to allow the municipality to develop the land; that they should also
respect the laws of the country; should form part of the consultative
processes; should take cognisance of the fact that the injustices of the
past created the inhuman conditions we find ourselves in today; that we all
have responsibilities as the citizens of the country; and that we must all
work together for the better life for all.

It is unfortunate that the court interdict expired yesterday, 31 October
2007. The municipality had no option but to invade and demolish the
informal settlement. It is our belief as the ANC that South Africa belongs
to all who live in it; black and white. [Applause.]

                 TREATMENT OF RUGBY COACH BY ADMINISTRATORS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): The UDM notes with dismay that the sport
administrators of this country seem to destroy the goodwill and nation-
building that our sporting success achieved on the field. Only few days
ago, this House rose in unity to give praise to the Springboks for their
success and to pay tribute to the way they lifted the spirits of the whole
nation.

Indeed, we were merely reflecting that which could be seen on the streets
of every city that the Springbok tickertape parade visited. But hardly two
days later, we are faced with the unbecoming spectacle of the national
coach being treated with total disregard by the senior administrators of
rugby in this country. What is their agenda? Because surely, they have not
taken note of what the overwhelming majority of South Africans have had to
say about Mr Jake White.

In the halls of power of football administration, we have witnessed the
gratuitous bonuses that caused such uproar, being renamed “tokens of
gratitude”, and still being handed over to people who are already earning
huge salaries and were only doing their jobs. We need to ask why those
millions of rands could not be invested in developing the game among the
poorest of the poor who play on dusty thorn-strewn fields across the
country.

We are disgusted by these displays of disregard for the talent and
aspirations of those who play and support these sports. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                   CHABAAN’S CONDUCT AT CITY OF CAPE TOWN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (FF): Voorsitter, kiesers wat ’n persoon tot ’n lid van die
Parlement, ’n provinsiale wetgewer of ’n plaaslike bestuur verkies, verwag
die hoogste etiese optrede van so ’n lid. Verskeie finansiële skandale en
veral die wyse waarop sommige lede die oorloopwetgewing misbruik het, het
daartoe gelei dat politici se beeld die afgelope tyd groot skade in Suid-
Afrika gely het.

Gister het die Kaapstadse stadsraad mnr Buddy Chabaan na ’n volledige
ondersoek skuldig bevind aan ses ernstige oortredings van die gedragskode
van raadslede soos deur die munisipale stelselwet van 2000 bepaal. Die
klagtes behels onder andere die omkoop van raadslede met groot bedrae geld,
die aanbied van gratis motors in ruil vir gunste, rassistiese opmerkings
teenoor ID raadslede en mev Patricia de Lille, doodsdreigemente en
opmerkings soos “you will need more than two bodyguards when I’m finished
with you.” [Jy sal meer as twee lyfwagte nodig hê wanneer ek klaar is met
jou.] Die effek hiervan was dat sekere persone slegs bereid was om te
getuig en bewyse te bring as hulle anonimiteit gewaarborg kan word.

Behalwe vir hierdie oortredings van die gedragskode is daar ook vier
kriminele klagtes teen mnr Chabaan wat buite die jurisdiksie van die raad
val. Die VF Plus wens in besonder die Speaker, mnr Dirk Smit, as VF Plus
raadslid geluk met die sterk en vreeslose wyse waarop hy teen mnr Chabaan
opgetree het. As mnr Chabaan se tipe optrede ongestraf gelaat sou word sal
dit op alle verkose posisies in Suid-Afrika uiteindelik reflekteer.
Die VF Plus doen dan ook ’n beroep op die ANC om die demokrasie en die
etiek vir openbare verteenwoordiging te respekteer en sy LUR te vra om die
ontslag van mnr Chabaan ingevolge klousule 14(2) van die gedragskode te
bekragtig. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Chairperson, voters who elect a person as a
member of Parliament, a provincial legislature or a local government expect
the highest ethical conduct from such a member. Various financial scandals
and especially the manner in which certain members abused the floor-
crossing period, has lately caused damage to the image of politicians in
South Africa.

Yesterday, after a thorough investigation, the Cape Town City Council,
found Mr Buddy Chabaan guilty on the charge of six serious transgressions
of the councillors’ code of conduct, as set out by the Municipal Systems
Act of 2000. The complaints comprise, among other things, the bribing of
councillors; offering free motor vehicles in exchange for favours; racist
remarks aimed at ID councillors and Ms Patricia de Lille; as well as death
threats and remarks such as “you will need more than two bodyguards when
I’m finished with you.” The consequence of this was that only certain
people were willing to testify and bring evidence on condition that their
anonymity would be guaranteed.

Apart from these transgressions on the code of conduct, there are also four
criminal complaints against Mr Chabaan that fall beyond the jurisdiction of
the council. The FF Plus wishes to extend its congratulations to the
Speaker, Mr Dirk Smit, a FF Plus councillor, for the steadfast and fearless
manner in which he acted against Mr Chabaan. If Mr Chabaan’s type of
conduct were to be left unpunished, it would, eventually, reflect on all
elected positions in South Africa.

The FF Plus calls on the ANC to respect the democracy and ethics for public
representation and to ask its MEC to confirm Mr Chabaan’s dismissal in
terms of clause 14(2) of the code of conduct. I thank you. [Applause.]]

              COUNTERFEIT RUGBY CLOTHING SOLD AT INTERSECTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M N NTULI (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC wishes to align itself with the
concerns expressed by rugby kit manufactures and Cosatu on the number of
fake clothing in circulation on our streets. [Interjections.] The matter of
counterfeit clothing was recently highlighted during the 2007 Rugby World
Cup, especially after South Africa won the tournament. The huge demand for
Springbok jerseys and kit resulted in a surge of fake clothing being sold
on street corners and traffic lights.

According to the official manufacturers, Canterbury, for every 10 supporter
items sold over the last weeks, eight were counterfeit. Although it was
tempting to purchase a fake rugby shirt for under R200 at a traffic light,
this had negative consequences for South African rugby and the local
clothing-manufacturing industry. If fakes are allowed to be sold, workers
making the normal products would lose their jobs. In the Western Cape
alone, this can result in 300 job losses.

The quality of the original was superior, and 15% of the sales from the
originals go to SA Rugby for rugby development in South Africa. Fakes are
usually smuggled in with no customs duties or VAT paid on the items. The
ANC calls on the South African Revenue Services, Sars, and the law
enforcement to clamp down on these illegal activities in the light of the
negative consequences to the country’s economy and the upcoming 2010 Soccer
World Cup. We further welcome the announcement by Canterbury Clothing to
launch a cheaper range of clothes to cater for those who could not afford
the more expensive items. I thank you. [Time expired.]

    LAWYERS DEFRAUDING THE ROAD ACCIDENT FUND’S VICTIMS SHOULD BE EXPOSED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD notes with concern that contribution from
the Road Accident Fund does not reflect the true damage claims meant for
the victims of road accidents. My experience as a Member of Parliament for
my constituency in Jan Kempdorp, in the Northern Cape, is that funds are
being siphoned from the victims by lawyers making Road Accident Fund claims
on behalf of their clients.

Lawyers have been pocketing money which amounts to charging exorbitant
legal fees, leaving victims with barely any funds to help them to rebuild
their lives. Members are also asked to sign forms giving the attorneys the
right to withdraw fees from compensation funds, and that moneys are not
always paid out early enough since the victim is not always sure what
compensation funds are available.

I have recently gone to my constituency office in Jan Kempdorp and I am
very impressed with the Road Accident Fund’s assistance and support to hold
a workshop to educate our people on how to process claims as well as to
bring to their attention, how to expose those lawyers who prey on the
vulnerability of the victim’s need for assistance to access the appropriate
funds.

Finally, the Road Accident Fund controls a huge fund and the FD would like
to suggest that any lawyer found guilty of unlawful and unethical practices
be blacklisted as unsuitable to represent clients for damage claims. I
thank you.

                   CONDITIONS IN CERTAIN PUBLIC HOSPITALS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Chairperson, a recent environmental health report by the
Nelson Mandela Bay Metro into the conditions of local hospitals revealed
the following: at the Livingstone Hospital a washing machine has been
installed in the sluice rooms for all wards. However, these machines have
never worked, resulting in dirty linen being contaminated with urine, human
faeces and sometimes blood.

Some of the sewerage pipes in the sluice rooms have been broken for more
than two weeks. On inquiring, it was found that these concerns had been
reported, but with little or no response from the maintenance department on
site.

The areas where the vehicles off-load bodies in the mortuary before placing
them into fridges are always covered in blood because the bodies and body
parts are washed at the entrance. This water runs into the streets and into
a drain some 20 metres further away.

At the Joe Pearson TB Hospital the situation is worse. The hospital does
not have the necessary isolation facilities for the drug resistant TB cases
and XDR patients who are also accommodated at the facility.

A number of cats were observed on the premises and there were also some in
the wards. It was indicated by the infection control sister that the cats
are fed by patients and currently the hospital doesn’t have enough budget
to control the cats. Cats are causing a health nuisance as they urinate
inside the wards, attract flies and spread germs.

The relevant politicians and officials need to be held accountable and to
take full responsibility for this ghastly situation. There is no point in
calling for the Minister or the MEC of Health to resign in this regard but
the DA does call on the Health Minister to take immediate and effective
action. Thank you. [Applause.]

         FORUM SET UP IN CACADU MUNICIPALITY IN PREPARATION FOR 2010

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu M JOHNSON (ANC): Umbutho wesizwe i-ANC, oxhuzula imikhala  kurhulumente,
wathi kwasekusekweni kwawo  wazimisela  ekusebenzeleni  abantu  beli  lizwe.
Wathi wakubamba imikhala yolawulo waqhubela phambili ezo mbono.

Kwiphondo leMpuma Koloni, kude kufuphi nesiXeko saseBhayi, sixeko eso  esiza
kuba nenyhweba yokusindleka eminye  yemidlalo  yendebe  yehlabathi  ka-2010,
kukho uMasipala  weNgingqi  iCacadu.  Sithetha  nje  lo  masipala  ukwiphulo
lophuhliso ukuzama ukutsala abakhenkethi kunye  namaqela  ebhola  ekhatywayo
aza  kuthabatha  inxaxheba  kwiNdebe  yeHlabathi  yeFifa  ukuba   asebenzise
amabala neendawo zokuhlala ezikule ngingqi.

Ukukhawulelana nale njongo, umasipala useke  iqonga  apho  kuphekwa  iqhinga
lokuthengisa ingingqi yaseCacadu. Kweli qonga kukho oosomashishini,  umbutho
webhola ekhatywayo, imibutho yasekuhlaleni kunye noomasipala bendawo.

Thina singamalungu ombutho wesizwe siya kuthi  gqolo  sisebenzisana  nabantu
ukuzama ukwabelana ngobuncwane beli lizwe. Enkosi.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M JOHNSON (ANC): The  ANC-led  government  on  its  inception  aimed  at
working for the people  of  this  country.  When  it  started  governing  it
advanced those aims further.

In the Eastern  Cape  Province  -  not  very  far  from  the  city  of  Port
Elizabeth, which is going to have the privilege of hosting some of the  2010
World Cup matches  -  there  is  Cacadu  Municipality.  As  we  speak,  this
municipality is involved in a development project,  which  aims  to  attract
tourists and soccer teams who will be participating in the  Fifa  World  Cup
to use stadiums and residential areas in this region.

To assist in this project this municipality has set up a forum that will
come up with a plan to popularize the Cacadu area. In this forum there are
business people, a soccer association, and local organizations together
with local municipalities. As members of the ANC, we will continue working
together with people to share the wealth of this country.]

                 STATE OF DRINKING WATER IN LOUIS TRICHARDT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkul M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Chairperson, IFP ya swi tiva leswaku mati yo tenga
i vutomi. IFP ya swi tiva leswaku mati ya thyaka i vuvabyi, i ndlala na
leswaku i rifu.

Hi titwa hi khumbekile ngopfu loko hi vona eka TV ni ku twa leswaku mati ya
le Albasini Dam kusuhi na xibheldlele xa Elim ya thyakile ngopfu lero vaaki
va le Louis Tritchard, vaaki va le ka Malamulele, na Yunivhesithi ya Venda
va hanya hi mati yo thyaka. Leswi hlamarisaka ngopfu hi leswaku vari a kuna
man’wana mati lawa va nga ma kumaka hanhle ka yalawo wo thyaka.

Hina va IFP hi kombela leswaku ndhzawulo ni masipala wa ndhawu yaleyo va
humesa malori ya ku ka mati va phakela vanhu va swiyenge sweswo swi
khumbekaka eka mhaka leyi. Hi ku hatlisa va kota ku lavisa xivangelo xa ku
thyaka ka mati lawa. Kutani va yi ololoxa leswaku vanhu va ta kota ku hanya
kahle. Inkomu. [Nkarhi wu herile.]
(Translation of Xitsonga member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): The IFP knows that clean water is life. The IFP
knows that filthy water causes disease, hunger and death. We were shocked
to learn on television that the water in the Albasini Dam near the Elim
hospital is filthy and communities in and around the area of Louis
Trichardt, Malamulele and the University of Venda have to survive on filthy
water. What we find shocking is that it is said that there is no any other
water available other than the filthy water.

The IFP would like to ask the department and the municipality of that area
to provide trucks carrying clean water to the affected areas while they
immediately investigate the cause of this matter and solve that problem so
that people can have a better life. Thank you. [Time expired.]]

                          CORRUPTION IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA (ANC): Chairperson the ANC-led government is committed
to ensure efficient functioning of all anticorruption structures and
systems including whistle-blowing and blacklisting of corrupt companies,
the implementation of laws to ensure exposure of action against private
sector corruption and a quicker process to deal with any corrupt civil
servants and officials.

An Mpumalanga housing contractor has been sentenced to three years’
imprisonment for defrauding the provincial, local government and housing
department of R100 000. Mr Surprise Mphokama of Mangosuthu Construction was
contracted to build 25 Reconstruction and Development RDP, houses in Thaba-
Tsoeu municipality and he claimed for work that was never done.

The ANC is committed to the principle that all South Africans have a right
to a secure place in which to live in peace and dignity. Housing is a human
right. I thank you. [Applause]

                DYSFUNCTION AND LACK OF DISCIPLINE IN SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Chairperson, education cannot progress as desired.
Good academic results will remain a pipe dream:  if the Department of
Education allows schools to degenerate into maternity wards without
midwives; when learners giving birth in toilets, classrooms, school grounds
and on their way to schools are assisted by fellow learners - as midwives;
and whilst, in the same breath, learners in South African schools are
engaged in a low-intensity war to the extent that in five working days five
learners die at the hands of fellow learners - as happened in August.

Schools in this country have ceased to be institutions of teaching and
learning but become places where complete anarchy is displayed by learners
whilst hamstrung educators are watching helplessly.

According to Paul Colditz, chief executive of the Federation of Governing
Bodies of South African Schools, 23 000 of the country’s
25 000 schools were dysfunctional and failed to produce good academic
results - partly because governing bodies were ill-equipped.

The DA is highly concerned about this total collapse of discipline in South
African schools and therefore calls upon the government to restore
discipline in schools by restoring power to teachers and parents to run
schools and put punitive measures in place for learners who may be found to
be in breach of the school policy. Thank you. [Applause.]

                        ERADICATION OF BUCKET SYSTEM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T E LISHIVHA (ANC): Chairperson, the theme of the ANC this year is to
intensify the struggle against poverty as we advance, in unity, towards
2012. Amongst the tasks the ANC committed itself to do this year, is to
ensure that no community is still using the bucket system in informal areas
for sanitation.

All communities must have access to clean water and decent sanitation by
2010. More than 100 Ekurhuleni residents, who have been subjected to the
unhygienic bucket system, celebrated with the Gauteng provincial government
as they have all received new ventilated toilets. A further R200 million
has been committed, by the Gauteng provincial government, to the
eradication of the dehumanising bucket system.

The ANC commends the collective efforts of the Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry, the Department of Provincial and Local Government, the
Department of Housing and the South African Local Government Association,
Salga, as well as other stakeholders who continue to work hard to ensure
that the bucket system is eradicated.

The ANC understands that democracy means more than just a vote. It must be
measured through the quality of life of ordinary people, women and men, old
and young, rural and urban. I thank you. [Applause.]

      PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AND ICDL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms W NGWENYA (ANC): Chairperson, as the ANC, we want to acknowledge and
appreciate the partnership between the Department of Correctional Services
and International Computer Drivers Licence, ICDL. We further notify the
House that ICDL has been nominated for the best practice award by the
European Computer Driving Licence, ECDL foundation for their partnership
with the Department of Correctional Services. This is the first of its kind
in the entire world.

The objective of the best practice award in the ECDL foundation is to
recognise and acknowledge a licence initiative project that they consider
to be a successful example of the best practice in the implementation of
the ECDL foundation programmes.

The ICDL programme is run in over 150 countries worldwide and has 7 million
candidates registered for the programme.

The SA Department of Correctional Services is the first correctional
institution in the world to offer an international computer literacy
certificate to offenders. The offenders are also the first candidates in
the world to be tested on the open source automated testing software. This
software was developed in South Africa. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]
[Time expired.]

                        skills ShortageS in education

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I have two responses. The
first one is in relation to the issue of skills shortage. Quite
interestingly, already in 1987 the NP had identified skills shortage as an
important area that government should look into. However, the fallacy in
terms of what they did is that they looked at skills development only in
the context of the white community and grossly neglected the vast majority
of our people.

As a result of that we are paying the price. For example, in terms of
Mathematics and Science there was an over-or exclusive emphasis in the
social sciences under Bantu Education in black schools and there was an
utter neglect of Mathematics and Science in these schools. What we had to
do as a democratic government was to correct the imbalance.

Already in 2002, an initiative was taken and adopted by government under
the stewardship of the former Minister of Education, Prof Kader Asmal,
where we initiated a national strategy of Mathematics, Science and
Technology. The result thereof was that 102 schools dedicated to
Mathematics, Science and Technology were established in rural areas and
nodes. These are poor areas where children do not have access to
opportunities in Mathematics and Science. These schools have now been
extended to 476. We can say that this year there are 12 000 learners from
those schools that have enrolled for Mathematics and Science in the higher
grade – a remarkable achievement. [Applause.]

The legacy that we faced is that less than 20% of our schools had libraries
and less than 40% had laboratories. We cannot speak about lack of skills in
the context of the fact that we are ignorant of the distortions that
occurred in the past.

With regard to teacher development in these 476 schools alone more than 2
500 teachers have received training in Mathematics and Science in terms of
content, knowledge and application. Beyond that, we have revitalised the
Further Education and Training sector. We have established 50 FET colleges
countrywide and, have redesigned the curriculum content of these
programmes. There are three areas of Engineering that are being offered,
namely General Management, Financial Management and Tourism and
Hospitality.

So, these new curricula speak directly to the skills challenges that we
have. In this year alone, with the introduction of the new curriculum
content, more than 25 000 learners have enrolled – the target was 25 000
and we have enrolled more than that.
Government has set aside R120 million for opportunities within the FET
colleges and this will be increased to R200 million. Indeed, government is
fully aware of the challenges that we have with regard to Engineering,
Mathematics and Science. Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa and the Joint Initiative Priority Skills Acquisition programme have
identified Mathematics and Science as a key area.

With regard to the second response ... [Time expired.]

                    correcting the imbalances of the past

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, we will not be trapped
into discussing the prerogatives of sports administrators and hide behind
immunity of this Chamber. We should leave that to them because we do not
want to interfere in spheres that we do not have anything to do with.

What we want to raise though is that we should not be so forgetful as not
to remember why our children in the rural areas do not have facilities.
They were deliberately excluded by the regime and its satellites to which
some members who are now articulating the needs of our people have
participated in. What we are doing is to correct those imbalances, and
there is no one before us who planted more sports facilities in the rural
areas than we have done and continue to do.

We urge all members to come forward with their requests. We will not be
able to deal with them all at once, but we are doing far more than anyone
before us has ever done.

What we also want to emphasise is that we should also be even-handed, as
this House. As we ride on the crest of the successful Springbok team from
the Rugby World Cup, we should also not forget that none of us was there
yesterday when our other children went for their world cup.

The largest sport played by females in this country is netball and there
was nobody there except for a few of us. I hope parents will also give
those children the same support that they gave to the other children, win
or lose! Let us take a leaf from Bloemfontein Celtics - Phunya Sele Sele -
and support our children for whatever efforts they put in to place our
country on the map. [Applause.]

                        ERADICATION OF BUCKET SYSTEM

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
would like to respond to the statement tabled by a member from the Free
State regarding the demolition of shacks that were actually built on an
undesirable piece of land. I am happy that they have raised this concern
because the propaganda out there is that this government doesn’t care about
the people. This is a caring government. There is a reason why people would
be removed from a piece of land where they occupy it illegally.

The same thing applies to the issue of Alexandra. What happened is that
people were seen being forcefully removed from Alexandra, and this was
because those people were actually living on dangerous grounds. That is why
they were moved out of that piece of land.

However, the propagandists out there are saying that this government
doesn’t care; it is forcefully removing people from their shacks, and all
that. I am very happy that the Free State government is on top of that
matter and we will continue working together with them. We are not going to
have toilets in the veld anymore in this country. [Applause.] We are not
going to have that! What we are going to do is that whenever we do anything
in any given community we will plan together with those people and not plan
for them. Thank you. [Applause.]

      PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AND JCDL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The  DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I want to
respond to the statement made by the hon Ngwenya, but also let me thank the
member for acknowledging some of the good work and best practice that comes
out of Correctional Services.

Secondly, just to inform the House, our centres in Malmesbury and Pollsmoor
have registered a 100% pass rate of inmates who have been on this
particular computer programme and I think that they need to be applauded as
well. [Applause.]

Thirdly, furthermore, this is an example of our commitment as the
Department of Correctional Services to skills development of those inmates
who are in our care so that upon their release they can actually live
better lives and become upright citizens of this country.

Lastly, it also gives meaning to our slogan in Correctional Services that
we often use and that is, “Correctional Services - A place of new
beginnings”. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I saw very good applause on my
left by one of the members of the correctional services committee! The next
ministerial response, is from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry.

                        ERADICATION OF BUCKET SYSTEM
                 STATE OF DRINKING WATER IN LOUIS TRICHARDT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I would like to
respond to two statements; the first one is from the hon member Lishivha. I
would like to thank her for the support and encouragement to the Department
of Water Affairs and Forestry, DPLG, the provincial government, the
municipalities as well as Salga in our efforts to eradicate buckets in
formally established settlements.

The member is correct that it is a collective effort involved in these
massive efforts to eradicate buckets. I would like to thank her especially
for pointing out that reaching our targets is not just a numbers game, it
is about a better quality of life for our people, it is about dignity for
our people, it is about security, it is also about health and hygiene.

I would like to say that we have been working very hard to ensure that the
remaining 78 500 buckets are eradicated from these formally established
settlements and plans are afoot to make sure that we reach this target.

Construction is under way to remove these buckets and weekly reports are
posted on my department’s website. A few provinces are left with
challenges, but we have measures in place. We are moving people, resources
and everything to make sure that the targets are met in these provinces.
As you know, the removal of the buckets from formally established areas
will be a major victory in our efforts to create a better life for our
people. We are aware, though, that there are still millions and millions of
people who still don’t have access to sanitation in our country and we are
working to ensure that we reach those people by our target dates of 2010 as
well as 2008.

The second statement I would like to respond to, Chairperson, with your
permission, is the statement from the IFP member, hon Sibuyana, with whom I
agree that dirty water indeed is unhygienic, it brings disease and death
and it should be avoided that people have to drink dirty water at all
costs. That’s why we have adopted measures such as the free basic services
policy to ensure that those who don’t have access to water, who can’t pay
for water actually are given water and are discouraged from using dirty
water.

I agree with him that all people must have access to clean running water
and should not drink dirty water. We are working very hard to ensure that
all our people have access to clean running water by our target date. I
have noted his concern. I will look into this Louis Trichardt story and see
how we can assist the municipality to bring interim intervention in that
case whilst we look for a permanent solution. I thank you. [Applause.]

               ORDERS NO 1 AND 2, CHILDREN’S BILL, STAND OVER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That Orders No 1 and 2 stand over.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairman, I know that what I am
doing is unusual and has never been done in this Parliament, and ought not
to be done. However, I stand here surely to complain at the unacceptable
manner in which this Bill has been dealt with by Parliament as a whole.

It is the third or fourth time this month that we are told in this House
that the Children’s Amendment Bill is not ready, and it has taken 10 full
years plus one for this Bill to be tabled here before Parliament. Surely,
there must be something wrong with Parliament and its administration if
such things are happening. There must be something wrong with the
management as a whole.

I can’t accept that. It is unacceptable, and I stand here to state very
clearly: I am not party to that; It can’t be. All of us are expected to
keep quiet because it is happening. If the people concerned are unable to
do their job, surely some other better people should be appointed to do
that. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, since the hon Minister has raised the point, we
want to concur with him fully. It is quite incredible to think that we
could have got to the stage where we were within minutes of debating the
Bill, which has not yet been completed by the technical committee, by the
legal advisors, and so on. It is a most incredible situation, and I simply
stand to say that we agree one hundred percent with what the Minister has
said and thank him for his attitude. Maybe it is through that kind of
attitude that we can start to develop proper procedures in this House.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 15:15.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry

         (a)     Standards Bill [B 46 – 2007] (National Assembly–
              proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
              No 30351 of 8 October 2007.]

         (b)     National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill [B
              47 – 2007] (National Assembly– proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 30351 of 8 October 2007.]




              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM
              within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


      a) Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified during a
         performance audit on the rendering of catering services at the
         Department of Defence – August 2007 [RP 221-2007].

2.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Agreement Establishing the Collaborative Africa Budget Reform
         Initiative (CABRI), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement Establishing the
         Collaborative Africa Budget Reform Initiative (CABRI).

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr T V D Matyolo, in
         terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
         of 1993).

4.    The Minister of Science and Technology


     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Sultanate of Oman on Scientific and
        Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Sultanate of
         Oman on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
      c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Argentine Republic on Scientific and Technological
         Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

      d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Argentine
         Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      e) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Slovak Republic on Scientific and
         Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

      f) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Slovak
         Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      g) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of Australia on Scientific and Technological
         Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

      h) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of Australia on
         Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      i) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Hellenic Republic on Scientific and
         Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

      j) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Hellenic
         Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


