---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 February 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-02-13
---


                          TUESDAY, 13 FEBRUARY 2007


                                    ____



                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                 NEW MEMBERS


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I have to announce that Mr A J Botha and Mr S J F
Marais have been nominated with effect from 2 December and 4 December 2006
respectively to fill vacancies that arose as a result of the resignations
of Mr R Jankielsohn and Ms H Zille. Mr Botha and Mr Marais have made and
subscribed the oath in my office in December last year.

Mr Botha and Mr Marais, I take this opportunity to welcome you in the House
officially. [Applause.]

                   PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I have received a copy of the address of the
President of the Republic delivered in the Joint Sitting on 9 February
2007. The speech has been printed in the Minutes of the Joint Sitting.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, Mr President and Deputy
President of the Republic, hon members and distinguished guests, South
Africa has entered its second decade of freedom with the strengthening of
democracy and the acceleration of the programme to improve the quality of
life of all our people.

We recognise that we are at the beginning of a long journey to a truly
united, democratic and prosperous South Africa in which the value of all
our citizens is measured by their humanity without regard to race, gender
or social status.

Inspired by the Freedom Charter and the principles enshrined in the
Reconstruction and Development Programme, we continue unabated with our
social transformation programme informed by democratic principles of the
people-centred and people-driven state, and a value system based on human
solidarity. These pillars are the attributes of a caring society and beckon
us to forge a social compact made up of all our people, and its central
objective should be a social policy that preserves and develops our human
resources and ensures social cohesion.

At this juncture we can and must reaffirm our commitment to redress poverty
and inequality, and on the back of macroeconomic stability, develop an
antipoverty strategy that addresses income, asset and social poverty with
the objective of eradicating poverty and creating employment.

In terms of our commitment to the Millennium Development Goals to halve
poverty and unemployment by 2014, it also means that we should move hastily
towards fulfilling and realising the other Millennium Development Goals in
terms of education, health care, accommodation and the provision of basic
services.

In the context of our continued resolve to challenge underdevelopment and
eradicate poverty, and against the background of a huge investment in
infrastructure and its attendant possibilities, the emphasis on quality
education and health must be recognised. We need educated and skilled
citizens who are healthy and therefore productive to benefit from the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, and the diverse
economic opportunities and possibilities that are now available to our
citizens. Education and health must be prioritised as the core elements of
social transformation.
On attacking covert poverty and building comprehensive social security, we
must seek to empower people to take themselves out of poverty while
creating adequate social nets to protect the most vulnerable in our
society. A combination of policies around a social wage and social grants,
as well as programmes aimed at engaging people in the reconstruction of our
communities, can make a meaningful contribution towards the eradication of
poverty.

On attacking poverty and building comprehensive social security, government
must continue with its plans towards a comprehensive social security system
through consolidation and an ongoing review of all security measures such
as the Unemployment Insurance Fund and social grants.

Government has taken bold steps in establishing a national health insurance
scheme and must finalise its plans within the next 12 months. Huge strides
have been made in the delivery of free basic services and continued support
through Project Consolidate and other mechanisms must be strengthened to
ensure delivery, especially in municipalities that serve the rural poor.

Noting the expansion of the child support grant for children up to 14 years
of age, steps must be taken to support vulnerable children above the age of
14. We must all continue to campaign to ensure that all children eligible
for grants access them, and assist in the removal of all obstacles,
including nonregistration and the lack of proper documents. However, the
huge strides that have been made in this regard must be accelerated, as
some 8 million children are currently the beneficiaries of grants.

We must continue to deal with the effects of unemployment through the
Expanded Public Works Programme, which is linked to the Urban Renewal and
Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Strategies.

The implementation of the National Youth Service Programme creates huge
opportunities for our unemployed youth, and must be sufficiently expanded.
The Expanded Public Works Programme and the sector education and training
authorities pay particular attention to the skilling of practitioners in
the early childhood development and the adult basic education and training
sector.

We must continue with the significant implementation of the integrated food
security strategy and further develop our sustainable food policy that
ensures food security at all times, which directly impacts on food prices
for the poor, with a specific focus on women, the elderly, people with
disabilities and children.

We are renewing the pledge we made to the electorate in 2004 to strengthen
national partnerships to build a better life for all. We will continue to
seek partnerships from all in our society to achieve the national
priorities of fighting exclusion and marginalisation, the eradication of
poverty and the building of social cohesion. We must be able to share the
joy and tribulation of reconstructing our country together as South
Africans.

Strengthening families is fundamental in the quest for social cohesion and
building the social fabric of our society. We intend to release for public
discussion this year a National Family Policy. We hope it will stimulate
dialogue on our common vision of the family as a core institution in our
country, and the rock upon which our communities are founded.

As a caring state, we have to strengthen and improve the welfare services
that provide services to the people of this country. We must consider
involving the local government sphere, which is the closest to the people.
We have to ensure that the destitute and vulnerable in our society find
refuge in the comfort of our state until they are able to survive on their
own, especially if they are young and able-bodied.

Among the welfare services that remain a priority is the development of
children and the young, and protecting them from malnutrition and poverty.
More than 8 million children receive the child support grant, while more
than 330 000 receive the foster care grant.

We are also exploring the expansion of alternative care services, for
example, children’s homes. According to the costing report for the
Children’s Bill, there are currently 14 000 beds in children’s homes
whereas the present demand is for 155 000 beds.

The social sector is reviewing all measures, including income support to
children over the age of 14. A progress report detailing options will be
finalised by midyear.

A lot has been said about crime and its impact on our society. This calls
for renewed united action to intensify crime fighting and crime prevention
efforts, which must include the combating of drug and substance abuse.

South Africa inherited a social security system that was underdeveloped by
international standards. It is characterised by policy gaps, duplication in
delivery and fragmented institutions. It does not fully meet the needs of
the vulnerable groups who face risks such as poverty, ill health,
disability, unemployment and injury on duty.

In seeking to provide comprehensive antipoverty and developmental services,
the provision of social grants to over 11 million South Africans is
complemented by the provision of education which is free to the poor, free
health care and free basic services.

The South African Social Security Agency was established to become an
effective and efficient national administrative system to respond to the
plight of the poor who do not qualify for social assistance. Government
also set up the Expanded Public Works Programme. It draws the unemployed
into productive and gainful employment, while also delivering training to
increase the capacity of participants to earn an income once they leave the
programme.

South Africa does not have a fully developed second pillar or system of
social insurance. History and experience have proved that the role of the
state is critical in providing the platform for the social insurance system
to ensure the pooling of risk and to achieve social solidarity objectives.
The state cannot simply assume the role of consumer protection and watch
failures of private providers such as we are now witnessing in the
unfolding Fidentia saga.

While reviewing some policies and improving delivery by a number of
agencies such as the Unemployment Insurance Fund, work has been underway to
look at best practices for the various components of the social insurance
system.

To date, as a government, we have made significant progress on unemployment
and maternity benefits with the inclusion of more than one million farm and
domestic workers in the Unemployment Insurance Fund. The system has, over
the past three years, become solvent, and has significant reserves,
unprecedented in the fund’s history.
Arrangements for compensation for injuries on duty and diseases and road
accidents require reform, given policy gaps, duplication with disability
and health care in the first pillar and administrative inefficiencies.

On health insurance, government has increased the number of people
contributing to medical schemes, has set up its own employee medical scheme
and has also introduced measures to prohibit adverse selection by the
private industry. We intend to address a number of outstanding issues in
our aim to set up a social health insurance system for South Africa.

The President also referred to the urgent need to reform the country’s
retirement provisions. In South Africa, only six out of twelve employed
persons contribute to some form of retirement savings using more than 14
500 funds. Many people end their membership to a retirement fund as a
result of factors such as early retirement, lump sum withdrawals,
retrenchments, poor investment performance, collapsing of funds and serious
fraud.

Our view is that government needs to make the participation in retirement
vehicles obligatory, to prohibit early withdrawals, to provide for
portability and preservation of funds, and set up institutional
arrangements for delivery. My colleague the Minister of Finance will
address this issue in his Budget Speech. [Interjections.]

The key principle on comprehensive social security is sustainability. The
message came through clearly in the state of the nation address that we
have to link social grants to economic activities and sustainable
development. This includes helping beneficiaries to access education,
training, skills development and employment opportunities to ensure safety
nets.

A pilot project in Dutyini, in Mount Ayliffe in the Eastern Cape, has
proven to us that it is possible to use resources residing in the
communities to promote economic activities. We were impressed that women
beneficiaries of the child support grant were able to, amongst other
measures, save at least R1 a day from the CSG towards a stokvel fund to
enable them to start a co-operative.

All the developmental and antipoverty initiatives depend on adequate
numbers of social workers, social auxiliary workers and community
development practitioners in both government and the nongovernmental
organisation sector.

In addition to executing statutory functions, social workers are the first
port of call for many families and individuals in distress, and are a
source of information with regard to government services. We are currently
providing scholarships for social work students, while promoting the
professions amongst the youth. In addition, the provincial departments will
further train social auxiliary workers to relieve the workload on social
workers.
We also need to further improve the working conditions of social workers. A
study has been conducted in this regard to determine needs. In promoting
and developing the profession, we will be honouring the memory of many
social workers who have served the poor and vulnerable with distinction,
such as the ANC stalwart Charlotte Maxeke of the ANC Women’s League, the
first black social worker in our country.

Working together with our partners in civil society, we will be able to
meet the goals outlined in the state of the nation address. For this to
succeed, we need more consultation and co-operation with civil society,
especially the NGOs and faith-based organisations which need to be better
resourced.

Let us strengthen these partnerships and toil together to build our
country. Nangamso. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Madam Deputy
President, hon members, at the outset I wish to associate my party with the
President’s moving remarks on Friday regarding the heroic life and the sad
death of Mrs Adelaide Tambo. I also dedicate my speech today to the
thousands of victims of violent crime in South Africa and their families.

This is the ninth time I have been privileged to respond to the President’s
state of the nation speech as the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament.
It is also the fourteenth occasion on which I have had the honour to
address Parliament in this debate as one of the leaders of our political
parties represented in the National Assembly.

We have all arrived in this Place from different backgrounds, we wear
different party badges, we speak different languages and we represent
different people who have different perspectives. But we are united under
one flag, we swear allegiance to the same Constitution and we all love our
country, the place that gave us birth and gives us life.

This is also the last occasion on which I shall participate in this debate,
either as Leader of the Opposition or as the leader of a political party in
Parliament. [Interjections.] I hope my observations, therefore, and
whatever candid counsel I have to offer, will be accepted in the spirit
intended, not with an eye on the next election or with a point to score in
this Parliament. Rather they are offered in the hope that, in your own
words, Madam Speaker, we can “deepen the debate” and consider the choices
which we have made as a young nation. I am mindful that this is an
appropriate time indeed to deepen our deliberations, for in 2007 we
celebrate our thirteenth year as a democracy.

As a member of the Jewish faith, I must point out that this means our new
society is celebrating its Bar Mitzvah, the birthday which heralds the
onset of maturity in a young person’s life. It is an apposite occasion then
to look back at what we as a nation have achieved and to reflect on the
choices that we have made during a tumultuous and at times triumphant phase
in our history. For, as with an individual, it is a sign of a nation’s
maturity when we are able to examine the choices we have made and to
consider in all honesty and frankness whether they are the right ones.

One of the finest choices I believe we made was in 1996. Then it was my
great honour and privilege to participate in the debate and on the vote on
our new Constitution. That Constitution enshrined our hope of forging South
Africa into a democratic bastion for Africa and the wider world.

Such inspiring events remind me of how far we as a nation have come on our
progress to democratic maturity, and that we have much to celebrate today
in the choices made in the past. Yet, as the President frankly admitted in
his address on Friday, we are faced with a number of critical issues that
threaten our attainment of a just and a prosperous society.

The President rightly acknowledged that we still have much work to do in
combating the important issues that confront us as a nation: crime;
corruption; wide-scale poverty; HIV/Aids; and in particular the state’s
service capacity. I congratulate the President on the candour of his
speech. His admission in revealing detail of the shortcomings in
government’s attainments of its own goals was welcome and refreshing. The
Age of Hope, proclaimed a year ago, has been supplanted by an age of
reality. However, it was disturbing to note that the President outlined, in
a sense, a wish list of his administration’s ideals, rather than a set of
specific prescriptions to rectify the failures he did so well to
acknowledge.

At this juncture, after three successive terms in office, we are surely
entitled to expect more of the government. It is of little help to
acknowledge shortcomings, but then to insist our policy approach is in all
circumstances correct and that our failings are simply a consequence of
either lacklustre implementation or faulty perceptions. I submit then that
we have made some wrong choices over the past 13 years, and that if we
correct these now, we will enjoy greater success in the future.

It is apparent from what we were told by the hon President on Friday - and
the statistics as well as the first-hand testimony of the people confirmed
this - that government is failing in its pledge to deliver many of the
basic services necessary for all our people to attain security, wellbeing
and a meaningful stake in society. One key reason for this, I believe, is
that since 1994 successive ANC governments have pursued an ill-constructed
transformation policy that puts racial representivity above all else.

Of course, after 1994 we had to construct and pursue with vigour a
programme of redress and empowerment for the victims of apartheid. And yes,
there are some, though in fact very few people in South Africa, who would
prefer to pretend that the past never happened or who pay lip service to
the need for redress without being committed to it in their hearts and in
their deeds.

But none of this changes the fact that over the past 13 years we have
failed properly to balance the need for redress with a need for successful
service delivery. Again, I am not suggesting that in every instance there
has been a failure of such delivery, and the President acknowledged that as
well, but for instance, look at the product of 13 years of ANC-run
education and tell me that no better could have been done.

It is heart-wrenching that in 2007 our schools are still disgorging
hundreds of thousands of young people without opportunity or hope, because
they simply do not have the skills to make anything of themselves in our
economy, let alone in the broader economy of a globalised world.

According to the teachers’ union, Naptosa, only one out of every one
hundred children who begin school in South Africa will attain and complete
tertiary education. It is imperative that we harness the diversity of our
people and our institutions need to reflect that diversity. I think that is
absolutely beyond debate, but it is morally wrong, strategically
incompetent and a violation of our Constitution’s purpose to construct a
policy of redress on a variant of the Verwoerdian notion of demographic
representivity and then elevate it above every other consideration. When a
policy of redress is so ill-constructed that it perpetuates, rather than
eradicates, a lack of opportunity and crushes the hope of advancement, then
surely the policy must be changed.

If we want our children educated, our sick healed, our poor cared for and
our unemployed to find work, then we must begin to live the values of
excellence, hard work and merit. As a mature democracy, responsible for our
own decisions, it is time we make a clear choice. We simply cannot have it
both ways. We cannot choose delivery and growth if we also choose racial
preferment at all costs. As Max Weber once said: “If we serve one god, we
land up offending another.”


Indeed, last week we hosted the President of China on these shores. Perhaps
we should reflect on the famous axiom of the founding father of modern
China’s economic miracle, Deng Xiaopeng, who said once: “It doesn’t matter
if the cat is black or white, as long as it catches mice.”

This does not mean redress and empowerment should be shoved to the back of
the queue, far from it. BEE, if practised with openness, accountability and
affordability, can release new energies into our economy and empower those
previously denied access to opportunity. It can, indeed it should, increase
the size and the diversity of the winners circle in South Africa.

There are indeed people in government who recognise this. The hon Deputy
President, in her capacity as chairperson of Asgisa, said: “I don’t think
there is any virtue in pure BEE if it equals poor service.”

An outstanding example of what may be achieved is available for study in
the City of Cape Town. The DA-led multiparty coalition that took power in
March last year inherited a corroded BEE system, the defining features of
which were race quotas, nepotism and corruption. Since then we have
abolished the quota system for tenders, opened the books to transparency
and eliminated corruption. Because we did not predetermine the outcomes or
the beneficiaries, a wider pool of role-players was engaged. It is a matter
of proud record that we have increased the number of BEE firms involved by
10% in less than one year. [Applause.]

The people of the Mother City have made a choice. They have chosen
openness, accountability and efficiency over backdoor cronyism and
frontdoor incompetence. We commend this example to government, of the kind
of choice we need to make at a national level as well if we are to attain
the vision of a great nation enshrined in our Constitution.
Deepening the debate also means choosing freedom over fear. The former
Soviet prisoner of conscience, Natan Sharansky, makes an important
distinction between what he calls “free societies” and “fear societies”. In
1994 we made the choice to become a free society, and constitutionalised
that choice two years later. Yet sometimes we display the characteristics
of a fear society.

In fear societies there is limited space for difference. In fear societies
we reflexively label our opponents as racists or counter-revolutionaries.
And it is in fear societies that we force on people the stifling
straitjacket of political correctness.

Yet the only way to manage diverse societies with justice is to embrace
pluralism. And so, therefore, I warmly welcome the President’s call on
Friday for inclusivity to, and I quote: “... act in partnership to realise
the happiness for all that should come with liberty.”

In effect this means that as a nation we should spend more time listening
to each other and not be too quick to judge as illegitimate the concerns
and expressions of any individual or any group.

Kyk maar na die oorhaastige reaksie van die woordvoerder van die
Departement van Kuns en Kultuur oor die gewilde liedjie De La Rey wat tans
deur die land beweeg. Moet ons nie eerder luister na die boodskap en sy
implikasies, pleks daarvan om amptenare te stuur om die ruimte vir hierdie
tipe vrye uitspreek van opinie te sluit nie?

Elke Suid-Afrikaner wil soos ’n regmatige landsburger voel, met ’n
kulturele identiteit wat nie ontken of eenkant toe gestoot word nie. En ons
wil almal weet dat niemand vergeet sal word wanneer ons geskiedenis
opgeteken word nie, en dat die proses nie deur ’n dominante faksie
gemanipuleer sal word om hul eie politieke wense te vervul nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Just look at the overhasty reaction of the spokesperson of the Department
of Arts and Culture with regard to the popular song De La Rey that is
currently moving through the country. Shouldn’t we rather be listening to
the message and its implications, instead of sending officials to close the
space for this type of free expression of opinion?

Every South African wants to feel like a rightful citizen of the country,
with a cultural identity that cannot be denied or pushed aside. And we all
want to know that nobody will be forgotten when our history is recorded,
and that the process will not be manipulated by a dominant faction in order
to fulfil their own political wishes.]

Neither victims nor perpetrators make for a self-confident, tolerant and
united citizenry.
One way, I believe, of understanding the project of the new South Africa,
is to see it as an attempt to move beyond victimhood and guilt to a place
in which we are united without having to be uniform.

The other characteristic of fear societies is the limited space for
criticism. That is why the effective muzzling of First National Bank was
disturbing and disappointing. All leaders have to deal with the criticism
of their leadership. I know whereof I speak. As a leader, however misguided
you may feel your critics are, and however much you may distrust their
motives, it is finally always better to ensure that the space for criticism
is protected and that we listen to the critics with care. Put simply,
tolerance of criticism wins respect; suppression of it breeds resentment.

Let me now turn to crime, the crisis of the hour. I think it is fair to say
that I echo the feelings of many South Africans who are disappointed and
disheartened by the hon President’s response to this crisis. I understand
that the President wants to approach the problem of crime in a reasoned and
deliberate manner. But our country is desperate for empathy, for a belief
that the campaign against crime is fuelled by both passion on the one hand
and steely-eyed determination on the other.

Our people want to see crime and the fighting of it elevated to the top of
the national agenda, not placed in the middle of it, with a host of
contending and often contradictory items crying out for resolution and
redress.

It may help the President to understand the crisis better if he listens to
the voices of the people. According to a recent television poll, 98% of
South Africans believe that government is losing the fight against crime
and that it is indeed out of control. For every high-profile victim, like
historian David Rattray, whose killers have commendably been brought to
book, there are thousands whose murderers, rapists and robbers roam free.

The orgy of violent, sickening crime continues relentlessly. Just this
weekend the community buried the 14-year-old Johannesburg schoolgirl Thato
Radebe: two weeks ago the nation was horrified by her savage rape, murder
and dismemberment.

Let me share with you the sentiments of a patriotic South African, Vi
Rathbone, grandmother of the more famous Clyde, the former captain of the
South African under-21 rugby side. She recently wrote to me to explain why,
at the age of nearly 80, she is unwillingly emigrating to Australia to join
the rest of her family. She wrote:

   The full story of my grandson Clyde Rathbone’s decision to relocate to
   Australia and play rugby for the Brumbies is not well known. His mother
   is lucky to be alive, as, when their home in Warner Beach in Durban was
   broken into, she was dragged by the hair to their upstairs balcony and
   pulled over the balustrade. She sustained serious injuries but
   fortunately did not become bedridden for life.

Mrs Rathbone concluded her letter to me by saying:

   I will always love South Africa, and I will never run it down. I only
   hope and pray ... that the government will do all in its power to fight
   the rampant crime in South Africa.

We must listen, Madam Speaker. We must feel with our people. And we must
lead them to victory over the criminals.

In his address, the President argued that proper implementation of existing
policy was the solution to crime. Apart from some minor tinkering, the
major new prescription offered was the very welcome announcement that the
police force will be increased to 180 000 members.

But if we are serious about winning the war against crime, we need to send
out a clear and unequivocal message that, for example, connections with the
ruling party will not lead to you falling off the list of Travelgate
accused, or to your featherbedding in prison, or to your early release from
jail.

As ons ernstig is oor die stryd teen misdaad, waarom dring ons daarop aan
dat die polisie in sterk Afrikaanssprekende provinsies soos die Noord-Kaap
en die Wes-Kaap slegs in Engels mag kommunikeer? (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[If we are serious about the battle against crime, why do we insist that
the police in predominantly Afrikaans-speaking provinces such as the
Northern Cape and the Western Cape may only communicate in English?]

If we are serious about winning the war against crime – at home, where it
needs to be fought – why is the Minister of Safety and Security deployed on
lengthy peacemaking missions to the Great Lakes and elsewhere, when we have
a Minister of Foreign Affairs and two deputies, presumably equal to the
task?

If we are serious about winning the war against crime, why is it that a
politician, and not a policeman, was appointed by the President as the
National Commissioner of Police? And why, after serial failures in office,
is he retained there?

International and domestic experience shows that visible cops on the beat
are the best deterrent. That is why it is imperative that the government
ensures that these officers are on the streets, taking the fight to the
criminals, not behind their desks.

And we certainly welcome the President’s appeal to all sectors of society
to become involved in the battle against lawlessness. Yet at the same time
the government seeks to centralise control of the police force, which flies
in the face of best international practice. In South Africa there will be
no more special police units and moves are afoot to do away with municipal
police forces as well. Once again, we seem to be pursuing the wrong choices
in the attainment of worthy goals.

It is not only in relation to crime that we are failing to make the right
choices. It is also in our international relations with the world that we
sometimes seem to have lost our way. Surely our Constitution behoves us, as
with the biblical injunction of the Good Samaritan, not to walk by on the
other side of the international road, ignoring the tyranny in Zimbabwe or
the dreadful human rights violations in Burma.

So, on the occasion of the onset of our maturity, we must begin to make
those mature choices. If we seek ANC-style transformation first and
effective delivery second, we will achieve a representative Public Service
which could fail apartheid’s worst victims. If we fail to respect cultural
diversity and close the space for criticism, we will achieve a resentful
citizenry that eventually will rise up in anger. If we continue with an
uninspired, unempathetic and unfocused approach to crime, we will achieve a
terrified populace that flees the country, hides behind electrified fences
or engages in violent acts of vigilantism.

In making our choices for the future, we should be guided at all times by
our founding document. It behoves us as a nation to redouble our efforts to
give meaning to the noble ideas of our Constitution.

Looking back, it is salutary to recall the shining ideals that animated so
many South Africans, in the ANC and outside the ANC, at the time of the
struggle against apartheid. Those who fought for a new society did not
dream of the watered-down, halfway complete or compromised democracy that
too often we seem content with today. Rather, we set the bar high, aspiring
to make of our new democracy a shining star among the free and winning
nations of the world. When we have done that, we will be able to say that
we have come of age as a nation, and have with full confidence, honesty and
responsibility entered into our maturity.

That is the cause that brought me into Parliament and into the politics of
South Africa. I know it inspires and burns bright in the ranks and hearts
of the many who will follow me into this Place, long after I have left it.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Thank you, Madam Speaker, President Thabo
Mbeki, Deputy President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, comrades and hon members.

President, as you began the state of nation address, you pointed out that
Mama Tambo, freedom fighter and devoted community builder, has passed on.
Thank you for your wonderful tribute to her at her funeral on behalf of all
of us. You also reminded us of the 90th anniversary of the birth of Oliver
Tambo and the 40th anniversary of the death of Albert Luthuli. They are
both part of a generation of leaders that dedicated their entire lives and
energies to removing from our country, in your words: ``... much that is
ugly and repulsive in human society.’’ They ensured that the common dream
of freedom came true.

Indeed, our task now is the transformation of South Africa ``into a
democratic, peaceful, nonracial, nonsexist and prosperous country,
committed to the noble vision of human solidarity’’.

It is the attainment of democracy, peace and prosperity that we wish for
Africa and the world a new world order that is free of racism and sexism,
where we all share the benefits of our own labour — a more inclusive and
people-centred world.

Madam Speaker, the late Comrade Albert Luthuli, in his acceptance speech on
receiving the Nobel Peace Prize for 1960, had this to say, and I quote:

   This is Africa’s age — the dawn of her fulfilment, yes, the moment when
   she must grapple with destiny to reach the summits of sublimity saying,
   ours was a fight for noble values and worthy ends, and not for lands and
   the enslavement of man ...


Nearly half a century later, we are beginning to see the dawn of Africa’s
golden age, and that a free and independent Africa is asserting itself in
the world.

In the 8 January statement, you also recalled that the ANC and South
African people have a long tradition of international engagement and
solidarity. And you went on to say that this arises from the understanding
that our fortunes as a nation are intimately interconnected with the
fortunes of our neighbours, our continent, indeed all of humanity; and that
it is therefore on the basis both of moral responsibility and collective
self-interest that we continue to be actively engaged in the effort to
build a better Africa in a better world.

Our greatest achievement in Africa in recent years has been the restoration
of peace and democracy in the DRC after 40 years. True to Patrice Lumumba’s
last words: ``History will have its say in the DRC’’, indeed, history has
had its say in the DRC. Of course, our involvement in the DRC has not come
to an end. The challenges of nation-building, infrastructure development,
health, education, economic development and the building of state
institutions are only starting.

Madam Speaker, Darfur, Somalia and Cote d’Ivoire will be major
preoccupations for us and the rest of the African continent in the coming
months. The mutual distrust between the North and the South in Sudan is
slowing the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Of course,
the international community must also make good the pledges made in Oslo
for the reconstruction so as to make unity attractive for the southerners.

The President in his address also emphasised the importance of community
safety and security and said on the international front, as within South
Africa, we also acknowledged in particular the vulnerability of women and
the prevalence of gender-based violence in the world. Within the
Progressive Women’s Movement and other women’s organisations, we shall all
continue to make inroads in addressing the plight of women and how to
empower women. In this regard, South Africa has been mandated also by the
continent to host the Pan African Women’s Organisation, Pawu, in 2007 in
which African women can help to take forward the emancipation of women on
the continent.

We also salute the work of Sawid, South African Women in Dialogue, in
particular as it remains very helpful in improving the situation of women,
both at home and in terms of their work with other African countries.

Madam Speaker, the African Union, AU, has also decided that the Diaspora
should constitute the sixth region of the continent. In this regard, South
Africa was mandated to host the global conference of the Diaspora and the
continent. This will bring together Africans from around the world, who
wish to contribute towards the cause of Africa’s development and African
advancement. In this regard, we shall work closely with the AU and the
Caribbean Community and Common Market, Caricom. This event will be preceded
by consultations at a national level, and there will be a ministerial
meeting. We see this event as providing a platform for reasserting African
culture. It will be of mutual benefit to both the Diaspora and our
continent. We look forward to co-operating with Parliament in this regard.

Madam Speaker, the AU is also grappling with the challenge of how to
accelerate the political and economic integration of our continent. Whereas
we all agree on the ultimate goal of a united Africa, the vexing question
is: How? A decision has been taken to have what has been termed by the
heads of state “the grand debate” on which the very question will be
debated in Ghana in July this year. But before this takes place, wide
national consultation is needed, including debates in this very Chamber.
Put simply, the question is whether the time has come to put into action
the late Kwame Nkrumah’s vision of a United Africa. Let me remind the House
what he said:


  Never before have a people had within their grasp so great an opportunity
  for developing a continent endowed with so much wealth. Individually, the
  independent states of Africa, some of them potentially rich, others poor,
  can do little for their people. Together, by mutual help, they can achieve
  much. But the economic development of the continent must be planned and
  pursued as a whole. A loose confederation designed only for economic co-
  operation would not provide the necessary unity of purpose. Only a strong
  political union can bring about full and effective development of our
  natural resources for the benefit of our people.

  The political situation in Africa today is heartening and at the same
  time disturbing. It is heartening to see so many new flags hoisted in
  place of the old; it is disturbing to see so many countries of varying
  sizes and at different levels of development, weak and in some cases
  almost helpless. It is this terrible state of fragmentation, and if this
  terrible state of fragmentation is allowed to continue, it may well be
  disastrous for all of us.


  Critics of African unity often refer to the wide differences in culture,
  language and ideas in various parts of Africa. This is true, but the
  essential facts remain that we are all Africans, and have a common
  interest in the independence of Africa. The difficulties presented by
  questions of language, culture and political systems are not
  insurmountable. If the need for political union is agreed by us all, then
  the will to create it is born; and where there’s a will there’s a way.

Those who think that we are ready to implement what Nkrumah said that if he
was ready then, we should be ready today. But, the other view is that we
should follow a step-by-step route maybe like the EU. Of course, I’m
raising this to start the debate and the consultation so that we are ready
for the Grand Debate when the time comes.

Madam Speaker, Paul Kennedy in his book, The Parliament of Man, quotes Lord
Alfred Tennyson in 1837 in Locksley Hall:


  When I dipt into the future far as human eye could see;
  Saw the Vision of the world and all the wonder that would be.


  Saw the heavens fill with commerce, argosies of magic sails,
  Pilots of the purple twilight dropping down with costly bales;


  Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rain’d a ghastly dew
  From the nations’ airy navies grappling in the central blue;
  Far along the world-wide whisper of the south-wind rushing warm, With the
  standards of the peoples plunging thro’ the thunder storm;

  Till the war-drum throbb’d no longer, and the battle-flags were furl’d
  In the Parliament of man, the Federation of the world.

  There the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm in awe,
  And the kindly earth shall slumber, lapped in universal law.

This young English poet forecast that the nations of the world, realising
that they could destroy one another, might mutually agree to form a
political federation, the Parliament of Man. Indeed, Harry Truman at the
San Francisco Conference read that passage from Locksley Hall.

I am quoting this poet to demonstrate that the need for a multilateral
system is today as important as it was envisaged by Tennyson, and that the
only way to save nations from destroying one another is the United Nations.
And the United Nations is the global primary instrument by which the world
should solve its problems.

We still believe that it is very essential to stick to this multilateral
system of governance but that it does need to be reformed.
President, as you said at the UN:


  Because this organisation of the people of the world has grown to
  encompass the entire world, many had thought it would be logical that this
  custodian of global democracy would itself serve as beacon in our
  contemporary request for democracy in all our countries. Clearly, for the
  UN to continue occupying its moral high ground, it has to reform itself
  urgently and lead by practical example as to what is meant to be
  democratic.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, on 16 October 2006, South Africa was
elected by the member states of the UN General Assembly onto the Security
Council as a nonpermanent member for the period 1 January 2007 to 31
December 2008. Our participation in the UN Security Council is, first and
foremost, to champion the cause of Africa and to be a voice of the Africans
on the continent. We will work hard to elevate the African agenda of
achieving peace, security and development. We see our task as bringing
greater alignment to the work of the Security Council and that of the AU,
especially the Peace and Security Council and those bodies outlined in
Chapter 8 of the UN Charter, which deal with regional organisations. The
major challenge that South Africa will have to contend with is how to
operate in an environment that is characterised by conspicuous power
imbalances and a domination of the UN Security Council by its five
permanent members.

We need to pay special attention to the problems of Serbia and the clamour
for independence of Kosovo, the Middle East, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, and
Western Sahara. South Africa has been given lead to take the lead on the
matter of Timor-Leste.

Special groups have been formed to take care of most of these issues that I
have mentioned, and South Africa needs to acquaint itself with them. We
will also be chairing the G20 Finance Group and the Nuclear Suppliers
Group. I would also like to thank the President for reminding us that there
is urgency to the creation of a better life for all.

I would like to conclude by quoting Comrade Oliver Tambo when he spoke at
the University of Fort Hare:


   We are therefore called upon to embark on the long and thorny road of
   transformation. Transformation requires a more dynamic discourse that
   insists on capacity and potential; on originality and on a creative
   existence that makes and remakes its own essence; that stimulates a will
   to overcome history, time and necessity rather than encouraging
   submission. We need to introduce this into our universities as much as to
   our national fora. South Africa needs to believe in our capacity to
   overcome our painful history; to begin again and to regard our failures,
   when they occur, not as finite moments, but as occasions for a new
   beginning.
I think if we all believe, like Oliver Tambo believed, that South Africa
has the capacity to overcome its painful history and to be transformed into
a South Africa we all would like to live in, we should all keep our
shoulder to the wheel and work, and stop grumbling and complaining. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker, your Excellency our President, your
Excellency our Deputy President, hon members of the House, I would also
like — on behalf of myself, my wife Irene and the IFP — to pay tribute to
Mrs Tambo, who was not only a mother to us in the sense in which she was to
all South Africans, but a friend of many years.

In paying tribute to her I would like to say that one thing that I will
never forget in what remains of my own life is the fact that even when,
after having worked for many, many decades with her late husband, Mr Oliver
Tambo, and things changed because of differences in strategy, she never
changed or adopted a different attitude towards us.

I would like to pay tribute to you, Mr President, for the tribute you paid
to Mrs Tambo at her funeral service was a befitting tribute, not only
because you were doing so on behalf of all of us, but also because it was
an example of sons paying tribute to their mothers, because she was more
than a mother to you personally.

Thirteen years into our democratic experience, it seems that a new tone and
a new hope have come to characterise this debate. We feel that in his
address our President has opened the door to a more sober, self-reflecting
and pragmatic approach, and I hope that his new tone will now offer this
debate the opportunity of finally listening to things which have often been
spoken of within this House, but rarely recorded and acted upon.

The President has embraced the serenity to admit that we face dramatic
challenges which we must address with possibly drastic actions. This is a
turning point in the history of our Republic.

We must respond to the President with a cross-party approach which creates
a new spirit of national unity in dealing with these challenges. I appeal
to both sides of the aisle to consider the need to join hands to provide
our contribution in our respective roles by placing the interest of the
country above that of our own parties or politics in general.

We must not belittle the enormity of what we have achieved in the past 13
years. Indeed our democratic experience has, thus far, been extraordinarily
successful and admirable.

However, the healthiest of bodies will fall ill and possibly die on account
of a single disease or wound. We must now turn the page and accept the need
to focus our political attention not on what is going right, but rather on
what is going wrong. It is in this spirit that, on this occasion, one
should not enumerate the long list of things for which our government ought
to be rightly praised. Praise is undoubtedly due, but this is neither the
time nor the occasion for it.

For 13 years, on this occasion, I have sounded the warning that the rising
spiral of crime would undermine the gains of our liberation. Indeed, I
sounded these warnings since the ANC began its campaign to make townships
ungovernable, destroy our education system and undermine any notion of
authority, legality and social co-existence as strategies for our
liberation struggle. We have now reached the point in which it is not
Mangosuthu Buthelezi alone stating that crime is out of control, but the
reality of crime being out of control has finally been recognised
domestically and internationally.

Three years ago I stood at this rostrum, if I may remind you, declaring
that I knew no one who had neither been a victim of crime nor did not live
in fear of becoming one. From the highest level, that of the Chief Whip of
the Majority Party, the retort came that no one was in fact known to be in
such a position. I can never forget the raucous, derisive laughter that
shook the benches of the ruling party, who saw me as bonkers when I made
this statement. [Laughter.]

This syndrome of denial has bedevilled our government much more than the
problem itself, and part of this syndrome has also been an often
unexpressed apologetic attitude, suggesting that crime is an inevitable by-
product of poverty and that it affects only a privileged few.

However, I do not wish to give the impression that I believe that the
government is somehow soft on crime. Of course government wants to
eradicate crime — I know this, I was in government for 10 years – who does
not? But we must, to purloin a famous phrase, “be tough on crime and tough
on the causes of crime”.

For more than half a century I have carried the burden of governing a
community of thousands of people who are among the poorest of the poor.
Nobody has anything to teach me about poverty. I do not need to read the AU
and UN reports on poverty to learn about it, even though I welcome its
recent findings about the levels of hardship in South Africa. It is just
plainly not true that poverty alone causes crime. It is the disintegration,
rather, of the social fabric of society which turns poverty into a breeding
ground for crime. [Applause.]

It is also absurd to continue to suggest that crime is only the problem of
the rich or of white people. The rich amongst us have ways and means to
cope with crime, protected as they are by high walls, sophisticated
security systems, armed response and vicious dogs. [Laughter.] Today the
largest number of victims of crime are amongst the poor, including the
older people attacked in townships by youngsters who pillage their wages at
the end of a hard week’s work, or the small emerging businesses trading in
rural and growing urban areas alike.

We must stop blaming the police for what is in effect police in action. Too
often policemen are terrified of themselves becoming victims of crime as
criminals know where they live and because of that they are open to
retaliation with no defence. We have rising numbers of assassinations of
police every year. Truth be told, everyone, including the Police Service,
has been abandoned and neglected by the state. We need to strengthen the
state to change this state of affairs.

I often despair at how politics seems to be the only field of human
endeavour in which words are often confused for thoughts and thoughts
confused for actions. It is not our talking about crime that will solve the
problem. We need to multiply the police force manifold, and even far beyond
what our President suggested. We need to boost their equipment, skyrocket
their budgets and expand their training.

We must also break down the absurdity of a nationally organised, structured
and directed police force. Throughout the world the most efficient police
forces are structured, organised and directed at the local level to reflect
the fact that the overwhelming majority of crime is in fact localised in
scope and activities.

And yet the Police Service is being further centralised at the present time
as I speak to you today. The post of area commissioner is being abolished
in many areas. I learnt only last week that there was no longer an area
commissioner in the Ulundi region, where I live.

We must also become serious in addressing the crime problem by solving the
disastrous conditions of our judiciary, and we must not be priggish about
it. Under our circumstances we must pass legislation compelling judges to
deliver their judgements or sentences within two months of trial.
[Interjections.][Applause.] The tardiness and often outright laziness of
some judges have become part of the problem. We must also create
investigative structures within the judiciary and the police to halt the
convenient disappearance of dockets which has become so common.

More importantly, we need to have the courage to overhaul our antiquated
criminal and civil procedures so that the bulk of judicial activities can
be removed from our courtrooms and be dealt with in pretrial, as is the
practice in many other countries. This reform alone would effectively
multiply overnight, and at no cost to the state, the number of judges,
courtroom hours and judicial infrastructure available to our fight against
crime and our judicial system in general.

In fact, the problem is not just on the criminal side, as there is no real
justice when an average civil case must take three years to deliver redress
to the aggrieved party. It is a well-know maxim in our jurisprudence that
“justice delayed is justice denied”.

At a deeper level, Madam Speaker, your Excellency the President, your
Excellency the Deputy President, hon Ministers and hon members, we need to
go back to basics and inculcate a respect agenda amongst our youth. A
transforming society such as ours need not be an uncivilised society. The
seeds of crime and lawlessness are often sown at a young age, and we must
bring back a sense of respect in our schools, communities, townships and
cities.

I’m sure those who were with me in Cabinet when Madiba was President will
remember when the Bill abolishing corporal punishment came before us.
Madiba was sitting next to me and our President was sitting on his other
side as then Deputy President. I said: “You know, the President would not
be sitting here if he didn’t get some whacking when he was young.”
[Laughter.] And Madiba said: “He’s right! He’s right! He’s right!”
[Laughter.]

When one considers that the ANC is the ruling party of our country, it is
unsurprising that the flames of violence and crime are fomented when
members of the ruling party insult and abuse the Head of State, even before
a visiting head of state. I personally witnessed this with great shame when
the President was hosting the Prime Minister of India, Dr Manmohan Singh,
in Durban. Even worse, it took place when the occasion was the celebration
of Mahatma Gandhi’s Satyagraha.

As if this was not enough, despite my appeal before this national forum for
people to show the respect that should rightly be accorded to the Head of
State, members of the ruling party once again hurled insults at the
President on the sombre occasion of the interment of the mortal remains of
an African stalwart, Mr Moses Mabhiba, in Pietermaritzburg.

Ukukhipha umhlonishwa uMongameli ngaphansi kukanina ichilo. Ungene ngani
umta kaMoerane nxa nizicabela izikhundla? [Calling the hon President “under
his mother’s skirts” is a disgrace. What the heck does Moerane’s child have
to do with you paving the way for top positions?]

This behaviour, if I may say so, is foreign to our African culture, which
has always been rooted in respect. What kind of example does this set for
our country? Can we not disagree without being disagreeable? Are we
surprised that crime is escalating out of control when we consider what
happened in Khutsong and during the Satawu strike?
I stood before you here, hon members, for many years, pleading with
government to awaken from its denial of the HIV and Aids pandemic. We need
to have the courage to go through the unsettling process of awakening to
many other arenas which have been discussed in this House, but often with
little practical outcome. These are the challenges of poverty, corruption,
unemployment and, of course, HIV and Aids.

We must address corruption apart from crime, as it is becoming a phenomenon
in its own right, which, like a cancer, is pervading the matrix of
government and civil society, and is becoming part of common mindsets.
Unless we put a stop to it, we shall be facing disaster. Too often
meritorious government programmes are not launched because they lack
politically interested patrons, while political clientele have promoted
deals, programmes and activities that are either not in the interests of
the state, or are grossly overpaid.

The recent cover story in the Financial Mail about dealership shocked us
all. We must face up to the fact that the impeccable legislation we put in
place is not addressing this problem. Perhaps we will need to establish a
qualified and internationally representative fact-finding commission, which
can suggest ways and means to stop corruption before corruption stops
anything which is noble and pure in our Republic. Let us be bold that
corruption is a heinous crime.
Our economy is doing better than many expected. However, little of its
success, or perhaps lack of failure, can be ascribed to the action of
government. Employment generation programmes have not succeeded, and most
people in this House would be hard pressed to exactly name such programmes
or projects, and how they are operating in their own constituencies.

Our training programmes have been financed by 1% of our nation’s payroll
for more than five years now, and we are still far from the beneficial
results which we would expect to flow from this huge expense. We have often
talked about the need to introduce much-needed flexibility into our labour
market, but little has been done about it in practice. And it is not for
the failure of government in this case, as you know. You remember that I
once told you of a certain chant, which almost became a second anthem in
this country: “Asiyifuni’ iGear”. [“We do not want Gear.”] [Laughter.]

Our economy is suffering because young people, especially young people from
the previously disadvantaged groups who are now ready to make their
contributions in the workplace, cannot find employment opportunities
because they are not allowed to replace less competent people hired at
their expense. This is especially true within our Public Service. We have
focused so much on our affirmative action programme that we may have failed
to be alive to the need to enable a second and third wave of beneficiaries
of these programmes to provide their essential contribution.
We have a stated policy of encouraging foreign investment, and yet our
actual programmes do not compete with those of other countries. In
addition, our obsolete exchange control regulations have become a major
impairment to any small foreign business investing in South Africa. They
are administered in an arbitrary and autocratic manner by the Reserve Bank,
which is not even part of our government, even though the Constitution
requires it to be an organ of state.

We must have the courage to rein in and reform the Reserve Bank ...
[Applause.] ... and perhaps like its prototype, the Bank of England, we
should nationalise it, so that it may no longer be owned by private
entities or even foreigners. Within this context it would be appropriate to
fulfil the promise made by our government as early as 1996, that exchange
controls would be abolished.

These are all painful and necessary measures. We cannot continue to rely on
declaration of policy to bring about change. We must avoid kneejerk
reactions to protect what we have for fear of letting in a better
alternative. I am very saddened by the disintegration of the system of
migration control, which was so laboriously put in place when I was the
Minister of Home Affairs. I am not sad just because it obliterated ten
years of my work and five years of the work of Cabinet and Parliament. I am
sad because we told the world that our country needs foreign skills to ramp
up economic growth and employment.

Having made that statement in the past three years, this Parliament has
hastened to undermine the very law that embodies it. The message we send to
the world could not be clearer, that we want the outside world’s
contribution but we are ready to bite the hand that delivers it.

I fear that we are still to gain a better collective understanding of the
hard rules of the age of globalisation. We must make investments to produce
South African technology and products to be sold in the market place of the
global village, while opening our doors to foreign products, services and
people.

I do not understand why our government should impose duties which force our
people to pay twice as much for motor vehicles bought in this country than
people pay overseas. This even applies in respect of vehicles produced in
South Africa which are sold at higher prices than abroad, because of the
protectionism of import duties.

All this is self-defeating, as it makes us uncompetitive. Similarly, I
cannot understand who we are really benefiting  by continuing the absurd
monopoly of telecommunications, which leads all of us to pay as much as 10
times for our phone services as people in other countries. Equally damaging
is the fact that our country is not ready for the new technologies such as
direct satellite communications and voice-over internet protocol, which are
rapidly replacing the old telecommunication dinosaurs to which we cling.
The same could be said of our banking system. In the end our short-
sightedness damages our children and their posterity.

Madam Speaker, your Excellency our President, I appreciate that the
challenges are grave, that they are great, and that there are many. We are
even facing a climate of declining political leadership and rising
political turmoil. It is saddening for our Republic that on this day we
have heard perhaps one of the last parliamentary addresses from one of
South Africa’s greatest sons and patriots, the hon Tony Leon, MP, the
Leader of the official Opposition.

I think all sides of the House would wish to join me in acknowledging that
he possesses a very subtle ability to marshal   words and ideas to sustain
his case, and then use them to devastating effect against his political
opponents. [Laughter.]  That, importantly, is how Mr Leon sees those on the
opposite benches. He sees them as opponents, not enemies. Mr Leon has
always consistently and fearlessly championed the centrality of the
institution of Parliament to our way of life, even as its powers have been
steadily eroded. I say this notwithstanding the stridency, which, as I have
pointed out, was often misheard by African ears. [Laughter.]

For this reason, I wish to conclude by referring again to my initial
appeal. In the looming shadow of a leadership crisis, the weak will turn to
create conflicts, as we can see. It is for the strong and the wise to
recognise that this is the time to rise above political conflicts, and
force national unity in the relentless struggle against crime, HIV and
Aids, unemployment, corruption and poverty.

I urge the consolidation of all the political forces that are not within
the control or sphere of influence of the ruling party, so that together we
may provide a joint constructive and solid contribution towards a dynamic
democracy. Faced, as we are, with approaching political turmoil and
uncertainty, we must invoke, once again, the spirit of national unity and
work together in our respective roles of the ruling party and the
opposition to promote the success of our Republic and the rule of
democracy. May God so help and inspire us. Dlamini![Thank you!] [Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Comrade President Thabo Mbeki,
Comrade Deputy President, hon members, comrades and fellow South Africans,
this year, 2007, we enter the last five years that would conclude the
celebration of the centenary of the birth of the ANC. This is an occasion
whose significance will surely resonate across our land. Our commitment,
therefore, is to intensify the struggle against poverty as we advance in
unity towards 2012. Phambili! [Forward!]

Attacking poverty and deprivation remains the first priority of the
democratic movement. Improving the quality of life of all South Africans,
in particular the most poor and marginalised sections of our community,
remains central in transforming South Africa. In attacking poverty towards
the eradication and elimination thereof, the ANC-led government continues
to focus the attention of South Africa towards eliminating hunger,
providing land and housing, access to safe water and sanitation, affordable
and sustainable energy, eliminating illiteracy, raising the quality of
education and training for our children, protecting the environment, and
access and improving the health of all our people.

Today we, those of us in the social transformation cluster of the ANC here
in Parliament, renew our pledge to speak together of freedom, to act in
partnership to realise happiness, and through our programme of oversight in
Parliament this year to attempt to respond to agreeing: “Enough of
everything that made our country to contain within it and represent much
that is ugly and repulsive in human society”, as you said on Friday,
Comrade President.

Die kern van ons program sal wees om die fokus op parlementêre toesig te
verbeter en in die debat te fokus op die wegdoen van apartheidspatrone en
om nie-rassige menslike vestiging en grondhervorming daar te stel.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The crux of our programme will be to improve the focus on parliamentary
oversight and to focus in the debate on doing away with apartheid patterns
and to bring about nonracial human settlement and land reform.]

The strides made in sport transformation in the past decade have gone back
a few steps in some instances, as more limitations are now being placed on
women, on rural communities, on the youth and people with disabilities
aspiring to become national athletes.

Our oversight and constituency focus, therefore, would be to galvanise the
South African population into a united force, not only to deliver the best
ever Soccer World Cup, but to emerge as a nation united in our diversity
with the common purpose to create a better South Africa and Africa. Thus it
will be prudent to identify a common theme for the World Cup, one that
would lend itself towards social cohesion.

Verder, wat die vroeë ontwikkeling van die kind betref, kan menige ouer
weens uiterste armoede steeds nie daarin slaag om aan hulle kinders ’n
veilige omgewing te verskaf nie. Baie ouers in hierdie situasie kan ook nie
die nodige gebalanseerde voeding, ’n gesonde leefstyl en kwaliteit
opvoeding voorsien nie. Daardie kinders wat fisiek of sielkundig gestrem
is, ondervind steeds die las van stigma en diskriminasie op alle vlakke in
die samelewing. Dit sluit in skole wat nie oor die nodige infrastruktuur en
hulpbronne beskik om in hulle spesiale behoeftes te voorsien nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[Furthermore, as far as the early development of the child is concerned,
many parents still cannot manage to provide a safe environment for their
children as a result of extreme poverty. Many parents in this situation
also cannot provide the necessary balanced nutrition, a healthy lifestyle
and quality education. Those children who are physically or mentally
challenged still bear the brunt of stigma and discrimination at all levels
in society. This includes schools that do not have the necessary
infrastructure and resources to provide in their special needs.]

The cluster will, therefore, also focus on ensuring that adult basic
education and training is more accessible and expanded. In so doing we
would encourage the utilisation of empty school buildings, and in the
process ensure that poor families steadily move out of the shackles of
poverty.

The cluster will also ensure that all poor children are prioritised in
programmes such as the no-fees schools, free basic water provision,
electricity, proper sanitation, free quality health services and social
security. Our people in South Africa deserve dignity, and therefore the ANC
is committed to eradicating the bucket system by December 2007 and towards
providing decent sanitation for all. Indeed, the ANC prides itself on
spending more money on water and sanitation than on arms ... amanzi
[water], of course.

These are our noble objectives of eradicating poverty. Comrade President,
to provide the freedom and happiness that comes with liberty, the bucket
system must go in the Free State. It must go in the Eastern Cape. It must
go in North West, in Mpumalanga, in the Western Cape, Northern Cape,
Gauteng, Limpopo and KwaZulu-Natal. The cluster will do the following to
ensure that this happens: It will do a detailed oversight programme in all
the nine provinces; it will involve our constituency offices to monitor the
progress; and also ask our ANC branches to form broad forums of development
in pursuit of eradicating the bucket system.

With regard to the centenary of the ANC, we want to state that the Freedom
Charter has found expression and implementation in South Africa, and we
want to feel and live the freedom and happiness that come with this
liberty. As we do this, we need to turn our attention towards the areas
that in some instances have fallen short with regard to our own and our
people’s expectations, and one such area in many instances is the area of
social exclusion. Those areas would cover instances of the plight of the
long-term and intermittently unemployed, who are single parents sometimes.
In many instances they are referred to as the means-tested category.

While taxes do assist, the composition of the poor differs and it reflects
different welfare state emphases. The question is: Who bears the brunt? It
differs from the youth to women, from old to young, from urban to rural.
What are the ages of the people who are the long-term unemployed? It
matters for skills development; it matters for shared growth. The UIF does
make this differentiation. Job-training policies are also a way to combat
social exclusion. Raising the skills level increases the hiring of
disadvantaged groups, thus raising productivity, but training and economic
growth complements each other. Programmes to keep track of and retain all
who have undergone various forms of Seta training and other training may
make them part of insertion, instead of them searching in vain for
employment.

Miskien moet daar gekyk word na projekte soos die programme van die
Departement van Openbare Werke wat ons reeds het, of
vervaardigingsprogramme wat die hele gemeenskap sal bevoordeel – programme
wat miskien diegene wat tans uitgesluit word, in staat sal stel om deel te
neem en om sosialisering in spesifieke kulture te bevorder, of dit nou
koöperasies, ondernemings, die staatsdiens of gemeenskapsbehoeftes is. In
teenstelling met belastingvoordele, deregulering en ander winsgedrewe
motiewe, behoort die doel eerder te wees om die skep van werk- en
besigheidsgeleenthede na te strewe, met die doel om sosiale uitsluiting
teen te werk. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Maybe projects such as the programmes of the Department of Public Works
which we already have, or production programmes that would benefit the
entire community, should be looked into – programmes that maybe allow those
who are currently excluded to participate and to promote socialising in
specific cultures, be it co-operatives, enterprises, the Public Service or
the needs of the community. In contrast to tax benefits, deregulation and
other profit-driven motives, the aim should rather be to create job and
business opportunities, with a view to working against social exclusion.]

The ANC speaks with confidence because it has been at the head of this
national effort to change our country for the better. Working with you in a
people’s contract to create work and fight poverty, we are confident of
success. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President and hon
members, ...

... siyambona notata ka-Annanias Mathe ukhona apha namhlanje, utat’
uBalfour. [Kwahlekwa.] [... I see that Annanias Mathe’s father, Mr Balfour,
is present here today. [Laughter.]]

Let me thank President Mbeki for an issue-driven speech that touched upon
most of the pressing concerns facing this country. Indeed, I think we
should heartily welcome his repeated references to unity, partnership and
joint initiatives.

The President’s appeal for unity and Madam Speaker’s theme for the year:
“Masijule ngengxoxo, Mzansi – Let us deepen the debate South Africa”,
indicate that we, as South Africans, have not yet found one another on a
number of issues. We normally notice this with some of the emotional and
controversial laws that we have passed in this House. Sometimes I get the
feeling that we are leaving our population behind. Perhaps the electoral
system we have plays a role in this.

To deepen this discussion, it will have to be inclusive as much as
possible. Perhaps it might not be a bad idea to form a steering committee
composed of all South African stakeholders to begin to identify areas where
we need to deepen the debate as a nation.

Such a process should culminate in a national convention where resolutions
would be taken. Those that require the attention of this House can come to
this House; those that require the attention of the executive would be
referred to the executive. This is the type of action that I believe is
required. We cannot simply talk of unity and deeper debates if they do not
result in something concrete.

I am sure that there are many issues that the public wants us to debate and
address, for instance the floor-crossing issue that was introduced merely
to accommodate ex-National Party political orphans. Yet it has taken years
for the public’s views to be heard, and it will take more years for the
debates to actually happen and for the necessary changes to be made.

Why do we, as South Africans, yearn for unity when it should go without
saying that we are all united in our citizenship and commitment to
democracy? It is because we live in a divided country. We have a history of
being divided, and today we continue to find not only some of the old
divisions, but also new ones: black versus white; rich versus poor; healthy
versus sick; rural versus urban; suburb versus slum; victim versus
criminal; employed versus jobless and government versus the people. This
should not be the case and it need not be that way.

With all these divisions, it is easy to fall into a defensive mentality and
to adopt an attitude of “us versus them”. This is the reason so much of our
national debate has become trapped in the same, shallow clichés and
stereotypes.

Take, for instance, the issue of crime and the whole FNB saga.
[Interjections.] Bayangxola aba bantu bahleli ngasekhohlo. [The people on
my left are making a noise.]

It demonstrates that we are still miles apart and divided regarding
approach, even when we agree that something needs to be done. FNB and
others might legitimately feel that government should be petitioned to
ensure that crime is top priority, because it undermines business, job
creation and foreign investment.

On the other hand, others might ask: “But where was this concern in the
‘90s under President De Klerk’s government, when thousands were massacred
in violent crime?” Indeed, others would argue that FNB’s approach is
nothing but a corrosively subliminal rejection of black rule. From my
experience of FNB, however, it is a pity that they find themselves in this
situation because they took risks in the past by providing services to the
progressive forces when it was not politically correct to do so.

FNB also built a home for football, which was considered a pariah sport for
blacks by the apartheid regime. It should also be remembered that FNB is
one of the main sponsors of the 2010 Soccer World Cup. I’m sure when their
actions hit the international newswires, the prophets of doom who think
that we cannot host the World Cup jumped up and down and said: “You see, we
told you so. Look at their main sponsor.” Perhaps with hindsight, their
decision not to proceed has prevented further divisions and polarisation of
society around the issue of crime.

In the cause of seeking that unity and of deepening the debate, allow me to
expand upon some of the important issues that the President raised here in
this House last week. Firstly, regarding crime, government should recognise
that a crime-fighting operation must be managed by crime fighters.

A review of the police management structure is required. We need
experienced policemen and policewomen at the highest level. Just as we
wouldn’t appoint anybody but a career soldier to lead our soldiers in
defence of the nation, so we should not expect anybody but a career police
officer to lead us in the fight against crime. It is hard to sustain unity
of purpose when we do not have faith in the person leading us.

Whilst we call on government for drastic action, we need to consider all
the factors that fuel violent crimes. The fact is that firearms are the
common denominator in the many violent crimes that are committed in this
country. We need to consider how we can drastically reduce the number of
firearms that are on our streets. Perhaps it is time to say that firearms
should not leave the home or property of the owner, so that it is only the
police and the security forces that can legally bring guns on the street.

I agree with President Mbeki that we need to regulate the private security
industry better, and that only those with valid reasons should be allowed
firearms. We could then ask the SA Police Service, with the assistance of
the Defence Force, to hold regular, random roadblocks to search for
firearms.

I am certain that the public, if it stands united behind this initiative,
would assist the authorities and we could begin to remove the licensed and
unlicensed guns that are used in violent crimes. Such an initiative would
require give-and-take from society, and certainly a great deal of patience
would be required with the roadblocks. Thus it should perhaps be run on a
trial basis for 6 to 12 months, and then be re-evaluated.
Another aspect of crime that seems to have come to the fore as we battle
against arrogant, violent and organised criminals is that there is a
complicit market involved in most crimes. If violent crime is a beast, then
its soft underbelly are the members of the public who buy stolen and
illegal goods. It is they who provide the criminals with an income by being
willing to buy that cheap cellphone or car part, DVD, cigarettes, brand
clothing or banned substances. We should arrest and sentence these people
to embarrassing community service.

Hardened criminals might be difficult to reform, but I suspect that the
misguided buyers of illicit goods will respond positively to community
service and the threat of prison. In this way we can begin to make crime
less profitable by destroying the market for stolen goods.

If we speak of being unified as a nation against criminals, then the nation
must understand that consorting with criminals will not be tolerated.

The SPEAKER: Liphelile ixesha lakho, tata. [Your time has expired, hon
member.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Hayi bo, ndisathetha nje. Kutheni uphelisa ixesha lam?
Awulawuleki he! Enkosi. [Kwahlekwa.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] [No, I still have
something to say. Why are you telling me to stop now? You are
uncontrollable. Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Nmz J B SIBANYONI: Somlomo wePalamende, ngilotjhisa uMongameli nePhini
lakhe, begodu ngilotjhisa nani noke malunga wePalamende kilomnyaka omutjha
we-2007.

Ngizokhuluma  isikhethu,  isiNdebele,  khona  isitjhaba   sizangizwa   kuhle
bonyana  ngithini.  IsiNdebele  ngelinye  lamalimi  ekhabe  aqalelwa   phasi
ekadeni.    Ngithula   ikulumo   le   ngesiNdebele   ngokuhlonipha    namkha
ngokukhumbula iNgwenyama uNdebele, umsunguli wesitjhaba samaNdebele,  okhabe
angenye  yamadodana  kaNguni.  Emnyakeni   lo,   ngenyanga   ezako   uNtaka,
emnyanyeni wakoMjekejeke eMetsweding hlanu kweTshwane,   kuzabe  kukhunjulwa
begodu kukhulunywa ngomlando weNgwenyama uNdebele neNgwenyama uSilamba.

Ekulumeni yakhe yomnyaka uMongameli ukhulume ngomzabalazo wokuqeda  umthlago
wathi: “The struggle to eradicate poverty has been and will continue  to  be
a central part of the national effort to build the new South Africa.”

Ngijama nayo ikulumo  le  begodu  ngifuna  ukukhuluma  ngokwenzeka  endaweni
engithunyelwe kiyo, iKungwini Parliamentary Constituency Office, PCO.  I-PCO
le isebenzela isifunda sangeMetsweding soke,  ekuyindawo  emaplasi  wokufuya
newokulima. Ngombana iyi-Regional PCO, ifaka  indawo  yange  Bronkhorstpruit
neyange-Cullinan.
Kwanjesi isitjhaba  sesiyawalemuka  amahlelo  wokuthuthukisa  enziwa  mbuso.
Ngenyanga  kaNobayeni  nyakenye  nangoTjhirhweni  nonyaka,    thina   be-PCO
yeKungwini,  savakatjhela  amahlelo  wokuzithuthukisa   enziwa    mphakathi.
Kunabomma bangeKangala, konoBhalarhana, abasungula  ihlelo  balithiya  bathi
“yiManzini Wonder Brick Co-operatives.” Sinobaba uKabini, abantu bathi  ngu-
Mayor   for   Life,   owabasiza   ngokuthi   babandulwe    mantangi    khona
bangazokubhalelwa  msebenzi  wabo  begodu  batlolise  ne-co-operative  yabo.
UMasipala weKungwini noweMetsweding wabasiza ngokubabhorela amanzi,  wabapha
iingolovana, idrada nokunye kokubasiza emsebenzini wabo wokuforoma iintina.

Begodu, khona ngeKangala kunabanye abomma  abasarha  imithi  emikhulu  -  le
eqeda amanzi. Bayayibasa benze ngayo  i-charcoal.  Abanye  abomma  banehlelo
lokufuya iimfarigi, bazithengise.

Savakatjhela  godu  nabanye  abomma   abanehlelo   lokuqotha   indlala,   i-
Rethabiseng Food  and  Vegetable  Gardens.  UmNyango  wezokuLima   e-Gauteng
wabapha  izinto  zokulima  nembewu  yokutjala.  Kwanjesi  bakghona  ukuvuna,
bathengise bafumane  imali  yokuziphilisa  bona  nabantababo.  Sebanobuphilo
obungcono.

Godu ngoNobayeni nyakenye, umNyango wezokuLima e-Gauteng wasungula  amahlelo
we-Agricultural  Micro-Credit  Fund,  i-Mafisa,  eMetsweding  azokunabiselwa
kiwo woke amaWadi.

I-PCO yeKungwini isebenzise ijima lesifunda  se-Gauteng  elibizwa  “i-Making
Our Schools Work Campaign.” Ijimeli liqaliswe kinazi izinto ezimbili:

  No learner is excluded on the basis of not having school fees.


  We strengthen school governance and safety in school
  by working with SGBs and CPFs.


Ama-SGB ayabandulwa khona azokghona ukwenza umsebenzi wawo ngcono.  Kwenziwa
namano wokuqalana nokuphepha eenkolweni.  Kunehlelo  lesikhatjhana  lokufaka
idrada eenkolweni.

Mongameli,isitjhaba sangeMetsweding singithume kuwe, ngombana  batjho   sona
sigcina  ngokubona  uMongameli  ku-TV  nemaphephandabeni  kwaphela.   Abanye
batjho bagcina ngokumuzwa nakakhuluma  emrhatjhweni.  Batjho  ngombana  mina
ngikwazi ukumbona ngamehlo wenyama nokukhuluma naye, ngimtjele,  UMongameli,
bonyana abantu basatlhaga  emaplasinapha,  batlhagiswa  banikazi  bamaplasi.
Bagirizelwa izindlu  zabo  ngeengaragara,  bayaqothwa  ngemaplasini,  abanye
bafuzelwe imizi ngekani, bayokulahlwa hlanu kwendlela.

Umnikazi  weplasi  e-Boschkop,  wabetha  umuntu  obegade  atjhayela   ibhesi
yabantwana  besikolo  ambangisa,  bonyana  uthela  ikoloyi  yakhe  ngethuli.
Omunye batjho  walayitjhwa  mnikazi  weplasi;  wawela  endleleni  angamboni;
wambona sele abuya. Umuntu  lo  wabulungwa  ngaphandle  kokutjelwa  komndeni
wakhe.

Abantu abaqothiweko, Mongameli, nanje  basahlala  eholweni  yomphakathi  we-
Roodeplaat, abanye bahlala e-testing ground yeMetsweding.  UMongameli  lokha
nakakhuluma ngehlelo lokubuyiselwa kweenarha, uthe:

  While the land restitution programme has resulted in more  settlements  in
  the recent period, we still need to put in extra effort  in  dealing  with
  remaining cases.

Kunamaqhegu  amabili  wakwaMahlangu,  kwaDima,  elinye   ngelakwa   Mothupi.
Elidala lineminyaka ema-82 begodu  mabili  la,  aneminyaka  ema-77.  Akhamba
ngamadondolo. BakwaDima bafika eplasini ngomnyaka we-1939,  uMothupi  wafika
ngomnyaka   we-1960.   Inarha   kwamva    yathengwa    yimayini    yeGolide,
engasasebenziko  kwanjesi.   Isibawo   sabo   sokubuyiselwa   inarha   nanje
asikaqedwa.  Kwanjesi  sele  batshwenywa  mnikazi  weplasi   ohlanu   kwabo.
Uthumela  abahloli  bomNyango   wezokuLima   bonyana   abatlhorise.   Batjho
baphungule  ifuyo  yabo  begodu   basuse   nesirhalarhala.   Kodwana   yena,
umakhelwana lo, ufuye iinkomo ezinengi,  nesirhalarhala  sinengi  ngeplasini
lakhe.

Amaqhegu la gade avele  phambi  kwekhotho  yange-Bronkhorstspruit.  Kurareke
nomarhastrada, uSkhosana wathi yena akasegisi,  bekathumele  ngejele  abantu
abarhola  umndende,   kodwana   uthumela   iinlelesi.   Omunye   wabobababa,
Mongameli,  uthe  ngikutjele  bonyana  uneminyaka  ema-82,  begodu  uyathoma
ukungena  ngekhotho  ebuphilweni  bakhe.  Ngemaplasinapha  batjho   ubuphilo
busafana  nekadeni,  kwamanye  amaplasi,  batjho  bumbi   buphala   ubuphilo
bekadeni. Batjho idemokhrasi yeSewula Afrika ngemapulasinapha abakayiboni.

Ngifuna ukutjho bonyana lokha  navane  ngikhuluma  emrhatjhweni,  umphakathi
vane  uthi  ubawa  amalunga  wePalamende   bonyana   uwufundise   ngamahlelo
kaMongameli. Ngithokoza godu lokha UMongameli nakaswaphelisa  ikulumo  yakhe
athi:

  Let us all roll up our sleeves and get down to work,  fully  understanding
  that the task to build the South Africa for which we yearn,  is  a  common
  responsibility we all share.


Mongameli ngiphethe iincwadi neenthombe,  ezinye  iincwadi  zivela  ekhotho,
zabantu  abaqothwa  makhotho   bebalahlelwe   eentradeni.   Ngiphethe   godu
nesithombe esibonisa umuntu owabethwa likhuwa, limbethela  bonyana  ulithela
ngethuli.  Ikhuwelo  azange  libotjhwe.   Ngiphethe   godu   nombiko   ovela
kumasipala weKungwini wabaqothwe emapulasini newalabo abagirizelwe  izindlu.
Ngithanda  ukutjho  bonyana  nasakha  isitjhaba  seSewula  Afrika,   sithola
bonyana   izintwezi   zimraro   omkhulu   esiqalene   nawo.    Ngiyathokoza.
(Translation of isiNdebele speech follows.)

[Mr J B SIBANYONI: Speaker of Parliament, I  greet  the  President  and  his
Deputy, and also Members of Parliament in the new year, 2007.
I will speak  my  language  isiNdebele,  so  that  the  nation  can  clearly
understand what I am saying. IsiNdebele is one of those languages that  were
marginalized. I deliver this speech in isiNdebele  in  the  honour  of  King
Ndebele who started the Ndebele nation. This year March, at  koMjekejeke  in
Metsweding next to Tshwane, there will be a commemoration  of  King  Ndebele
and King Silamba.

In this year’s state of the nation address, the President  spoke  about  the
struggle to eradicate poverty, and said:

  The struggle to eradicate poverty has been  and  will  continue  to  be  a
  central part of the national effort to build the new South Africa.

I support the President’s speech because  I  want  to  talk  about  what  is
happening  in  the  place  that  I  was  sent  to,  Kungwini   Parliamentary
Constituency Office, PCO. The PCO works for  the  whole  Metsweding  region,
which is a rural place for  land  and  stock  farming.  Because  it  is  the
regional PCO, it covers Bronkhorstpruit and Cullinan.

Now, the nation understands the developmental programmes undertaken  by  the
state. In December last year and January this  year,  Kungwini  PCO  visited
the self-empowerment projects undertaken by the community. There  are  women
at eKangala, in Bhalarhani’s place, who have started a project and named  it
“Manzini Wonder Brick Co-operatives”. We have Mr Kabini, known as the  Mayor
for life, who assisted them to get training first, so that they  could  work
effectively and also to  register  their  co-operative.  Both  Kungwini  and
Metsweding   Municipality   assisted   with   water    boreholes,    donated
wheelbarrows, fencing and other forms  of  assistance  that  is  related  to
their job of brick manufacturing.

Again in eKangala there are women who saw trees that absorb a lot of  water.
They burn these trees and turn it into charcoal. Other women are  running  a
piggery project and sell these pigs.

We visited women who have a poverty alleviation  project,  Rethabiseng  Food
and  Vegetable  Gardens.  The  Gauteng  Department  of  Agriculture  donated
farming equipment and seeds. Now, they are able to harvest  and  sell  their
products to get money for themselves and their kids to survive and,  indeed,
they have a better life.

Again in December last year, the Gauteng Department of  Agriculture  started
a  programme  called  the  Agricultural  Micro-Credit  Fund,  Mafisa.   This
programme will be spread across the Metsweding wards.

The Kungwini PCO used the Gauteng campaign called “Making Our  Schools  Work
Campaign.” This campaign focuses on the following two issues: No learner  is
excluded on the basis of  not  having  school  fees;  we  strengthen  school
governance and safety in school by working with SGBs and CPFs.

The SGBs are now trained  to  perform  their  job  better.  There  are  also
strategic plans, which focus on safety in  schools  and  there  is  also  an
interim programme to fence schools.

President, I have been sent to you  by  the  Metsweding  community,  because
they only see the President on TV, in the newspapers and  hear  him  on  the
radio. They said because I’m able to  see  the  President  face-to-face  and
talk to him, I must tell the President that people on some farms  are  still
being harassed by the  farm  owners,  who  destroy  their  houses  by  using
bulldozers, and evict them by force and throw them along the roadside.

A  farm  owner  in  Boschkop  beat  the  bus  driver  who  was  transporting
schoolchildren and accused him of raising dust in front of his  car.  It  is
alleged that the other person who was taken with the  farm  owner  fell  off
along the road, without the farmer noticing, and that the  farmer  only  saw
him when he came back. The deceased was buried without the knowledge of  his
next of kin.

Evicted people are still living in Roodeplaat community hall and  others  in
Metsweding  testing  ground.  When  the  President  talks  about  the   land
restitution programme, he said: “While the land  restitution  programme  has
resulted in more settlements in the recent period,  we  still  need  to  put
extra effort into dealing with remaining cases.”

Two old men, one from the Mahlangu family, Dima,  and  the  other  from  the
Mothupi family, use walking sticks. The eldest  is  82  years  old  and  the
other is 77 years old. The Dima family arrived at the farm in 1939  and  the
Mothupi family arrived in 1960. The land was later bought by the  owners  of
the gold mine, which has now closed down. Their land claim is not  finalised
yet. They are now being harassed by the farm owner next to  them.  He  sends
the inspectors from the Department of Agriculture to harass  them.  He  says
they must reduce their farm stock and remove a poisonous  plant  that  kills
cattle. But he himself has a herd of cattle and a lot of poisonous plants.

These old  men  appeared  before  the  Bronkhorstpruit  magistrates’  court.
Magistrate Skhosana was shocked, and said that he was  not  going  to  judge
and send people who receive a government grant to prison and  that  he  only
sent criminals to prison. The other  man,  Mr  President  ...  they  said  I
should tell you that he was 82  years  old  and  that  that  was  his  first
appearance before a court of law. They say that on some farms  life  is  not
like what it used to be before the new dispensation. They also say  that  on
some farms conditions are worse than it used to be in  the  past,  and  they
haven’t yet seen the South African democracy.

I would like to say, when I speak on  radio,  that  the  community  requests
members of Parliament to teach them about  the  presidential  programmes.  I
would also like to thank the President for ending his speech by saying:

  Let us all roll up our sleeves and get down to work,  fully  understanding
  that the task to build the South Africa for which we yearn,  is  a  common
  responsibility we all share.

President, I have letters and pictures, some letters  are  from  the  court,
for people who were evicted and  thrown  on  the  streets.  I  also  have  a
picture that shows a person who was beaten by a white  person,  who  accused
him of raising dust in front of him. That white person was not  arrested.  I
also have eviction reports and that of those whose houses were destroyed.  I
would like to say while building the South African nation, we find  that  we
are still facing these problems. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
members, let me start by thanking the hon President for his honesty in
admitting some of the shortcomings that we are facing in our country. For
that you must be applauded. However, some of these shortcomings are a
direct result of our government’s policies over the past twelve years.

There’ve been noticeable achievements in that time, but there have also
been short-sighted decisions. In a speech to a Public Service
managers’conference in 2004, the Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel, said,
and I quote:

  ... in many aspects of management, we are failing the poor. It is a
  failure of our management systems and of our managers. It is our
  collective failure.

The ID welcomes the government’s gradual return to its social democratic
roots, after the largely unsuccessful policy of Gear. As social democrats,
the ID supports the developmental state, but the tragic irony that
confronts us is that we desperately need a strong state to bridge the
socioeconomic divides of the past while in reality we have a weak state.

Too many government departments are receiving qualified audits from the
Auditor-General, and too many are underspending their budgets. The latter
is criminal, and the ID is expecting you, hon President, to outline what
action you are going to take against guilty Ministers. The challenge that
we face is to make all government departments as efficient as the SA
Revenue Service, in fact, we need to “sarsify” all of them.

For the ID the solution is simple. Instead of relying on the state
apparatus to deliver on social goals, we need to form partnerships with all
stakeholders, such as civil society, business and the public at large.

While the state lacks capacity, our people do not. On a whole range of
issues, South Africans are crying out for action, and we need to channel
the energy into a productive force for change. The government must unlock
the capacity within our communities and organisations by creating a
developmental model that builds social cohesion. The irony, Mr President,
is that the Gear policy is not designed to create a developmental state.

The goal of the Reconstruction and Development Programme was to transform
growth to benefit the majority of our people. The key elements in any
development strategy, as Asgisa reiterates, must be to create employment on
a massive scale to meet the basic needs of our people and to diversify the
economy and exports.

This developmental vision cannot stop at BEE, making the rich more
representative without addressing the suffering of the poor. The ID wants
BEE to benefit workers and the poor, not only through employment equity and
skills development, but also by doing far more to create employment.

Greater action should be taken against public servants and public
representatives who steal from the state. The Shaik and Yengeni trials do
not help to instil a new culture of law and order in our country. Neither
does the fact that it is left up to the British and German prosecutors to
finger South Africans involved in the arms deal corruption.

We must stop talking with a forked tongue, Mr President, about corruption,
which bedevils the developmental agenda through the theft of resources from
priority focus areas. We should also streamline extradition agreements
between the European Union and ourselves, so that the guilty can be
extradited.

Crime affects us all, Mr President. We’ve heard all the horror stories and
some political parties have unwisely relived them on their websites. We
should not use the suffering of our people for political gain, but rather
channel our people’s anger into a force for positive change. It is said
that out of crisis, opportunities arise. Many communities have been able to
turn the tide on crime. We need to highlight these successes and replicate
them throughout South Africa.

This is why the ID has consistently called for a crime summit. In August
2006, the ID discussed this idea with the Minister of Safety and Security,
and we are still awaiting a positive response. The summit will set up an
exchange of ideas and solutions between individuals, communities, civil
society, business, churches, and government. It will enable us to act
decisively against the criminal minority that is holding this country
hostage.

We successfully overcame the criminal minority apartheid government, so
that is not new to us. We also need to take a long, hard look at our
society and ask why we are producing so many violent criminals. If
government has failed to implement the crucial aspects of the National
Crime Prevention Strategy, then let us as a nation help you to rectify the
mistakes. Let us empower loyal and patriotic South Africans to help
government achieve the social cohesion that you, Mr President, so
eloquently spoke about on Friday.

Government engagement with all sectors is also an important pillar of the
developmental state. I am also concerned about the attack on foreign
diplomats and I appeal to you, Mr President, to ensure that our compliance
with the Behenna Protocol is observed. A crime summit will produce a plan
owned by all of us.

The ID is encouraged that you recognise that children between the ages of
14 and 18 are falling through the social assistance cracks. We again call
on you, Mr President, to extend the child support grant to all children
under the age of 18, because poverty does not magically disappear when they
turn 14.

The ID also believes that the school nutrition scheme should be extended to
high schools, to provide sustenance, and to ensure that our high school
dropout rates are reduced.

Hon President, we need to see ourselves as a leading nation in this world,
and be prepared to rise to the challenges confronting us at home and
internationally. The ID will continue to offer constructive solutions to
the challenges we face. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, hon Mr President, hon Deputy President and
hon members, given the time constraints I prefer to leave the usual praise
singing to professionals. I would rather say this, Mdengeentonga Mr
President: Masijule ngengxoxo, Mzansi, ka gore ntwakgolo keya molomo.
[Let’s deepen the debate, South Africa, because people do differ in
opinion.]

Briefly stated, we are not oblivious of the positives of South Africa’s
Foreign Affairs policies and thrust, not only in Africa, but in the
international sphere as well. For the commendable achievements we say,
“Keep it up.” Only the best is good enough for South Africa. However,
having said that, we would like to make a few points worth taking note of
in order to rouse all of us from sitting lethargically on our proverbial
laurels.

It seems there are two different kinds of human rights in South Arica.
There is the ANC’s version of human rights that does not tally with the
values and principles contained in the Bill of Rights in our South African
Constitution. What has been repeated by actions often perhaps by the ANC,
though not alone, is that you keep quiet about human rights abuses if the
offender is a friend of the ruling party. The Constitution, on the other
hand, states that: “The state must respect, protect, promote and fulfil the
rights in the Bill of Rights.”

Former President Mandela succinctly stated and understood the importance of
human rights. In 1994 he wrote the following:

  South Africa will not be indifferent to the rights of others. Human rights
  will be the light that guides our foreign affairs or policy.

I am sad to say, Mr President, that currently it is patently clear that
what influences policy greatly and even undermines the very ideals
expressed by Madiba is your party’s loyalty to those parties which you
share a long history with, and thus you tend to turn a blind eye to the
human abuses perpetrated by so-called friends in solidarity. We have to
speak up when human rights are violated by all and sundry, friend and foe.

Mr President, human rights should, like never before, be the light that
guides our foreign policy both on the African continent and in the world
out there. Neither political loyalty nor struggle solidarity should
override universal basic human rights or countenance human rights abuses by
sheer reticence.

Much has been written, perhaps ad nauseam, about South Africa’s approach to
Zimbabwe over the past four to five years, yet the problem has grown
bigger. Yes, all role-players in Zimbabwe must together break the log jam
and find amicable solutions like we did, but do not rule out the fact that
we were all brought to the table by pressures of some sort injected by the
democratic peace and freedom-loving people of the world.

Our sotto voce approach does not help the intransigent and untenable
situations prevailing in Zimbabwe, Swaziland, Darfur, etc. Surely the
people, the citizens whose rights are violated, should be placed above the
narrow interests of parties or governments maintaining their rule by
undemocratic means that violate human rights?

On the international scene, while South Africa is doing well to eradicate
the pariah stigma brought on the country by the past ignoble and unjust
system, South Africa should not be complacent of some of the pitfalls that
we may encounter. Multilateral and bilateral agreements, by all means,
beneficial to all parties concerned, should not be at the expense of the
selfsame human rights and democratic tenets that we so cherish. The
presence of South Africa in the United Nations, especially on the Security
Council, must be of such a nature that we promote those ideals across the
board. We must use the power of our vote prudently and judiciously.

How we relate to other countries, in terms of our constitutional interests
and those of Africa as a whole, is very important. The influence we have
must be for the common good of the very ideals we cherish so much.

There is no way that we can avoid looking at our partners and how they
conduct their affairs in the context of what we hold dear: the
Constitution; human rights; democratic and transparent good governance;
various treaties and protocols, to name but a few.

We have no choice but to scrutinise ... Thank you very much. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
members, I want to start by agreeing with the President:

  ... that government must move forward as quickly as possible to implement
  detailed programmes intended to reduce the cost of doing business in our
  country; to promote the growth of the small and medium business sector; to
  continue with programmes to build a social security net; to meet the
  objectives of poverty alleviation and to expand access to such services as
  water, electricity and sanitation.

On improving the safety and security of all citizens and communities, we
expected the President to elaborate more as crime is the most spoken about
subject at the moment. While the ACDP applauds the long-overdue decision to
improve the remuneration and working conditions of the police and to expand
the number of SAPS personnel to over 180 000 in the next three years, we
want to know what new strategies government is going to implement to
drastically reduce violent crime in our country.

The ACDP agrees with citizens who say that the President must make fighting
crime government’s number one priority. If violent crime remains as high as
it is today, then programmes that promote growth of the small and medium
sectors will fail, an enabling environment that encourages investment will
not be created and, without new investment, poverty alleviation will be
stifled.

There was a mixed reaction to FNB’s anticrime campaign and their subsequent
decision to withdraw it. While some accused the organisers of attacking the
President, we saw it as a desperate attempt to communicate with him.
Citizens must be allowed, we believe, to exercise their right to raise
their concerns with their President.

Because the ACDP supported the FNB’s anticrime campaign, I want to read the
letter they decided not to publish, but which was subsequently published in
the media, in order for it to become part of this debate. I’m going to read
the letter on behalf of those millions of South Africans who are despondent
and frightened by the high levels of crime in our country. I’m doing this
on behalf of parents, like me, whose children and babies have become
victims of crime, some brutally raped, abused and violated. I’m doing this
for those who are trying to say to the President that to them crime is not
a perception, it is a reality. I’m doing this for those people who have
tried to voice their fears and have been told to stop whingeing or else to
leave the country.

The letter reads as follows:


  Dear President Mbeki


  I am a proud, but concerned South African. Proud because I live in such a
  wonderful democracy. Proud because my country has been recognised by the
  world to host the Fifa 2010 World Cup. Proud because our economy is
  showing exceptional growth. And proud because we showed the world that
  peaceful settlement can be achieved through working together.


  But I am also concerned.


  Concerned because even though I live in the most prosperous country in
  Africa, our crime rates are the highest on the continent, far outstripping
  the poorest African countries. Concerned because last year alone reported
  statistics recorded 18 528 murders, 54 926 rapes and 119 726 violent
  robberies.


  I’m also concerned that crime is destroying our progress and threatens our
  dream of eliminating poverty and living in peace. As a result, the world
  continues to question the credibility of our progress.


  Mr President, I know you love this country as much as I do, so please make
  crime our government’s Number 1 priority. As a committed South African I
  will be right behind you – because our nation’s history has shown, there’s
  nothing we can’t achieve when we work together.


  Yours faithfully


I see no vindictiveness in this letter. It is a heartfelt cry for help from
the President. It is the primary role, I believe, of government to protect
its citizens.

The Sunday Times recently published a letter written by Ivan Makoku, who is
now based in the UK, which I also want to read to show the concerns that
people have about crime.

He wrote, and I quote:

  I am a proud South African living in the UK at the moment and I am as
  black as you can get. I have been considering moving back to South Africa,
  but I am too scared about the level of crime in my beloved country.


  The ANC has to realise that this is not a black or white issue. I have
  lived in Germany and the UK for the past seven years now. I am not moving
  back until crime is down. Why should I put my life on the line when I can
  stay here? I urge all South Africans to challenge the government and to
  bring back the death penalty. Come on South Africa, let us all get
  together and fight these criminals. This is not about white South Africans
  whingeing. This is not about poverty, Mr Mbeki. I was brought up in the
  North West and most days I did not have anything to eat. But I worked hard
  to help myself and my family. I am not a criminal because I chose not to
  be one – so don’t give excuses, please. If the ANC does not deliver, I
  urge all South Africans to think twice when we vote in 2009.


That’s the end of Mr Makoku’s letter.

While the ACDP appreciates government’s commitment to ensuring that the
2010 Fifa World Cup is the best ever, we nevertheless want to warn the
President that if violent crime is not drastically reduced or, at best,
eradicated from our country, then the privilege of hosting this prestigious
event might slip through our fingers, despite the many assurances we have
received from Mr Sepp Blatter, who is a friend, admirer and great supporter
of South Africa.

If governments of the world voice their concerns about the safety of their
citizens in this country, then Fifa might be forced to reconsider their
decision. We do not want this to happen. That is why we are appealing to
government to ensure that crime is dealt a deathblow. It is this government
that will determine whether these threats happen or not. I therefore urge
you, Mr President, on behalf of the millions of concerned South Africans,
to make the drastic reduction of violent crime in this country government’s
number one priority.

My second warning to you, Mr President ... [Interjections.] Yes, listen. It
is that if government continues to ignore the concerns of South Africans
who objected to the legalisation of so-called same-sex marriages, then the
ANC will pay a heavy price for that. The price is going to be very, very
heavy, Mr President.

Finally, while we have noted what the President said about government’s
commitment to “intensify the campaign against HIV and Aids”, we want an
assurance from the President that proper nutrition and treatment will be
made accessible to the majority, if not all, Aids sufferers in our country.
The present, so-called prevention methods that form part of government’s
campaign to turn the rate of Aids infections around have not been
effective, as there are now as many as 1 400 new HIV infections ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Deputy Speaker, thank you for this opportunity to address
this august House.

Mr President, Madam Deputy President, hon members, I wish to join those who
spoke before me in thanking the hon President for his comprehensive and
enlightening state of the nation address.

It is now 13 years after our nation declared that we are free at last; free
from national oppression and exploitation. The excitement and celebrations
that accompany the declaration of freedom are now over. Every day that
passes by it becomes clearer and clearer what past we need to deal with. It
is obvious that most of us thought that the benefits of our liberation
would be very immediate to all of us and on all fronts.

But all this was just a fantasy if not a fallacy. The truth is separating
itself from the flight of imagination with every day that passes by. It is
becoming clearer that our post-apartheid existence is a fierce struggle
between the old, as characterised by the legacy of apartheid, and the new,
as characterised by the policy positions advanced by the African National
Congress in our new democratic dispensation.

This situation reminds me of the old saying that “the real struggle begins
with the declaration of independence”. It is clear from policies and
programmes adopted by government in the last decade that government decided
to work in an effort to grow the economy and to improve the capacity and
functionality of the state. The positive economic growth figures and other
economic indicators are a source of hope and it indeed needs to be
sustained.

Let us join the ANC in asserting that poverty is a huge problem affecting
our society, and that everything needs to be done in our power to reduce
it. This is the main problem, because it is the one that underpins all
other problems, including crime.

The naïve have always wanted to assert that poverty is a new phenomenon
that our country is only starting to experience with the advent of
democracy. Poverty dates back hundreds of years when the early colonial
settlers destroyed the indigenous African economic system. It was
systematically and gradually imposed on the people through land and
livestock dispossession, imposition of taxes, forced removals and
Bantustanisation of the indigenous people to less than 30% of the land of
the Republic.

What we are seeing today is an accumulated effect of all colonial and
apartheid policies and oppression. Poverty is the direct legacy of the
apartheid capitalist system and its racial production relations. It is for
this reason that poverty – mostly prevalent in the black communities – has
actually taken the character of race. It does not affect all people in the
same way and in the same degree.

South Africa, like many African countries that have a colonial past, was
ravaged by plunder of colonial rule and imperial looting. Nothing was left
for future generations of liberation states except the remnants. Our
struggle now is to meet the needs and wants of our people with these
remnants. We have not chosen this but we have to make a success of this
difficult situation.

But, the big question that needs to be asked is what causes poverty in our
country? Is it the level of technological know-how in the production of
goods and services for the people or is it the problem of inequality and
distortions in the distribution of incoming goods?
I think as many others have said before me, especially those coming from
institutions that deal with poverty and public policies, that South Africa
is capable of producing anything and everything for its people and all who
are visiting. Our problem is that of inequality in the distribution chain.

We must re-engineer production relations and reduce inequality and income
gaps. We must ensure that with every percentage growth in our economy the
poor must gain in income and wealth. In other words, we have to make sure
that the growth rates that we achieve are also elastic towards the poor.

Economic growth is an essential basis in the struggle to reduce poverty. It
should however be noted that economic growth does not translate
automatically into making gains for the poor. The state must take care to
ensure that there is redistribution to the poor through direct income or
the social wage. Government should not hesitate to do this. This is the
only way we could drag our society out of deprivation and underdevelopment.

Infrastructure development is the access on which poverty reduction should
be anchored. Both big and small community-based infrastructure projects
should be utilised in an effort to create work and skills for the poor.
Huge infrastructure projects are more useful in the medium and long term.

A four-country study conducted in Bangladesh, Senegal, Thailand and Zambia
– as a joint venture between Japan and the United Nations Development
Programme, UNDP – demonstrated clearly and without doubt that small
community projects could actually bring serious benefits for the poor. We
must increase the number of infrastructure projects in different
communities to offer these communities the possibility to create valuable
community infrastructure for themselves and to earn an income. The
maintenance of this infrastructure will create yet another possibility for
those involved in these projects to earn an income.

My constituency office is located in Mamelodi on the far eastern side of
the Tshwane CBD. People in that area are mainly working class, and the
majority are poor and unemployed. Our experience in this constituency
confirms the theory that community-based infrastructure programmes are
adequate instruments in addressing poverty in communities. Since the
housing projects in the area have started, they have gone a long way in
providing skills to those in the community who previously never had skills.
Even after projects have been completed, those who participated in these
projects are in a position to fend for themselves, using the skills that
they have acquired during these projects.

It is however critical for the state to improve the speed at which these
projects are processed and completed, because when they are prolonged they
also add to stress in the community.

Baswa ba bopa ye nngwe ya dikarolo tše bohlokwa setšhabeng, mme e bile ke
ba bangwe ba makala a setšaba ao a angwago ke botlhoki le tlhokego ya
tlhabologo. Matsapa a mmušo a go fediša botlhoki a swanetš e go hwetša
tsela yeo baswa ba kago ntšhwa tebetebeng ye ka yona. Ke nnete gore ga go
bonolo go hlola mananeo a go lebelela tša mereo ya baswa. E feela, mafapha
a mmušo a swanetše go dira bonnete bja gore mathata a baswa a fiwa šedi ye
kgolwane. Dikgoro tša mmušo di swanetše gore mo mananeong le mešomošomong
ya wona go akaretšwe merero ya baswa. Le ge go le bjalo, re swanetše go
leboga mmušo mo matsapeng ao o a tšerego go thuša khomišene ya baswa le
Umsobomvu Youth Fund go phethiša maikarabelo a bona.

Ke rata go feleletša ka go gatelela karolo yeo Kgoro ya Mmušo-selegae o
kago e bapala go tlišeng diphetogo setšabeng. Ke a leboga. (Translation of
Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The youth make up a big part of the nation. They are also a part of the
nation that is highly affected by unemployment and lack of development. The
government’s efforts to eradicate poverty must be focused on helping the
youth out of this mess. It is true that it is not easy to establish youth
programmes, but government departments must ensure that they give priority
to the challenges that the youth are facing. The government departments
must include the issues of the youth in their strategic planning. We
should, however, be grateful to the government for their assistance with
regard to the Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund in order to
fulfil their responsibilities.

I would like to conclude by emphasising the role that the Department of
Local Government has played in bringing transformation to the people. Thank
you.]

Business suspended at 16:17 and resumed at 16:39.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please be seated. We now invite the hon Minister of
Safety and Security to address us.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President,
hon Deputy President and hon members, the ANC has started organising its
structures, hon President, to give expression to the marching orders you
gave at Witbank, Mpumalanga, on January 13. As to our own input regarding
the fight against crime in South Africa, you reminded us on that occasion
that:


  The Police Service and government agencies cannot fight crime alone and
  that it requires the involvement and active participation of all
  communities and all sections of society to meet this challenge.

Your observation, Comrade President, was a reminder of what we have always
known in the ANC. That question and other matters that were canvassed
within our ranks did not automatically become law in the new South Africa.
Some of them changed in both form and content on the operating table of
negotiations.

Discussing the matter of policing in 1992, as part of our overall strategy
to prepare ourselves to govern the country, we said among other things:


  Community policing has now been recognised as more effective, because it
  understands that it is not the police alone who combat and prevent crime.
  It is the community who are responsible for criminal prosecutions. They
  lay charges, make statements, testify in court, and assist the police in
  the performance of their functions. Without this co-operation, no police
  force can discharge its duties.

Our view at the time was that effective policing was not dependent on huge
police numbers, but rather on better police-community relations. The key,
we argued, was the ability of the police to root themselves among the
people and work together with the communities in a well-defined partnership
to prevent and combat crime.

Defining that arrangement we said:

  The relationship between the police and the policed should be one of
  reciprocal control.

We were clear that:


  Unless the police are rooted in and accountable to the communities in
  whose name they police, they will not enjoy the support of those
  communities.

We may have raised those questions as ANC members, but we understood,
Comrade President, that we were addressing national security. We were clear
that national security was a national matter that requires the involvement
of all South Africans from all walks of life in our country. When we spoke
about our communities, we meant all of them. That continues to be our
position to date.

Crime is a very emotional matter because it affects many people directly.
But while we must all agree that crime is a serious matter in South Africa,
it is incumbent on all of us as leaders, hon members, to be logical and
rational in our response to the scourge.

There are many South Africans who understand that truth, Comrade President.
They are members of South Africa’s various community-based and
nongovernmental organisations, the labour movement, business and religious
sectors, as well as some political parties.

One of the responses must be the mobilisation of our communities to work
together with the police to prevent and combat crime. The people at local
level are the best repository for information. They know who is where and
doing what, even when it relates to crime and criminality. They are the
eyes and ears of law enforcement.

At this juncture, allow me to mention the role that politicians like the
hon Patricia De Lille have played in mobilising residents in the areas
where they live to participate in crime prevention. The hon De Lille,
together with a number of residents whom she has helped to mobilise against
crime, take turns to patrol the area, alongside the police.

There are other experiences like Manenberg where Comrade Mario Wanza lives.
He too has played a leading role in mobilising people in his area to
participate in crime prevention and fighting. Dr Mzukisi Qobo is of one
mind with you, Comrade President, when you said, as you did on Friday,
that:
  Working together to achieve the happiness that comes with freedom applies
  equally to the challenge of dealing with crime. Certainly, we cannot erase
  that which is ugly and repulsive and claim the happiness that comes with
  freedom if communities live in fear, closeted behind walls and barbed
  wire, ever anxious in their houses, on the streets and on roads, unable
  freely to enjoy our public spaces. Obviously, we must continue and further
  intensify the struggle against crime.

In a column piece he did for the Cape Argus on Friday, Dr Qobo wrote:

  The emergence of a more stable, healthy and balanced society will not come
  as a result of technical and administrative work of the government, but
  through collective ownership of the existing challenges and preparedness
  to step out of our comfort zones and be responsible citizens, including
  through wealth and skills transfers from areas of high resource
  concentration to areas of low resource concentration.


  Crime is a collective responsibility and dealing with it would require
  fundamental change in the social structure in South Africa, as well as a
  serious examination of the state of morality of our society.


Dr Qobo is a Mellon Research Fellow in the Department of Politics at the
University of Stellenbosch.

No crime in South Africa terrifies our people like serious and violent
crime. That type of crime is visited directly on victims in the form of
serious and violent assault, rape and murder, as well as attempts to cause
such violence.

Research by some independent bodies and the SA Police Service indicates
that most of those crimes happen between people who know one another and
occur, mainly, in secluded areas including behind closed doors of the homes
of either the perpetrator or victim.

The police recently analysed 9 623 dockets for murder, attempted murder,
rape, serious and violent assault and common assault. The result of that
analysis was published in 2005-06 SAPS annual report. What the exercise
revealed was that 81,5% of the murder victims were killed by persons they
knew. The killers in 61,9% of the cases were relatives, friends or
acquaintances of the victims. In 75,9% of rape cases, the victims knew the
rapists, while in 56,9% the rapists were relatives, friends or
acquaintances of the victims. Cases of assault showed higher percentages of
perpetrators known to the victims including relatives, friends or
acquaintances.

It seems to me that we need to do more than just policing to deal with such
crimes. I believe that those crimes are a direct consequence of moral decay
within our communities. Others are generated by the social conditions under
which people live. There, surely, must come a time, Comrade President, when
as South Africans we will come together and do a thorough assessment of the
extent of the damage that apartheid caused to our people as a whole –
oppressed and nonoppressed.

Apartheid contributed directly to the destruction of family values that
were built over many centuries by the indigenous communities of our
country. Apartheid contributed directly to the collapse of the moral fibre
in many of our communities.

An exhaustive interrogation of that question, therefore, may provide the
answer to the problem of social crime in South Africa. Meanwhile, the ANC’s
commission on religious affairs intends to place the matter of social
crime, especially the serious and violent kind, on the agenda of the
programme of religious interaction on the moral regeneration campaign.

It is a fact that everywhere that the partnership between the residents and
the police has taken root, crime has gone down. This is true of Alexandra,
Sebokeng, Orlando, Motherwell and other places that I will mention, Comrade
President, during my Budget Vote speech later this year.

The SA Reserve Bank and the SA Risk Information Centre have partnered the
police to deal with armed robberies in a project that is called Cash Risk
Management, or Crim in short. The relationship has extended to other
enterprises, including the retail sector, and the gambling, entertainment
and property industries.

The campaign by the police in the second half of last year, which
dramatically brought down armed robberies, especially at banks and other
financial institutions, as well as cash in transit heists, benefited
tremendously from the co-operation with business and many members of our
communities, who supply the police with valuable information.

The President, through the Presidential Big Business Working Group,
influenced the forging of a relationship between that group and the
justice, crime prevention and security cluster of Cabinet. The partnership,
I am happy to report Comrade President, is working well in the search for
the necessary responses to crime in South Africa. A system of regular
interface between the two sides has become an established form.

Allow me to go back to the original point I made about community-police
relationships. One of the most important interventions South Africa made to
realise that objective was the establishment of the Community Police
Forums. We must admit, though, that the final product of our labour was not
the formidable structure we thought would help communities:


   To assume a more active role in crime prevention in the policing of their
   areas.

The ANC believes that we should go back to the original concept and make
CPFs autonomous bodies that would be responsible for the communities they
serve, but work closely with the police in a manner where they would
discuss with them the policing priorities of the given local areas, and
help assess police performance on the basis of such priorities.

Given that the CPFs would be responsible to the people who would use
democratic means to establish them, they would have a dynamic relationship
with both the communities and the local government authorities.

It is quite clear, though, that interventions we need to make relate to the
entire criminal justice system. Safety and Security, Justice and
Correctional Services are already working in an integrated fashion,
together with the country’s intelligence community to deal with crime as a
united entity. Without reinventing the wheel, we would like to expand the
work of CPFs for interventions across the entire integrated justice system.

These matters, Comrade President, will be subjected to further scrutiny at
the ANC’s policy conference in June. It is our hope that when they are
endorsed they will come to Parliament where amendments could be made to
existing legislation to create the conditions that our situation demands –
of better community-police relations for our nation, united in action to,
to quote you, Comrade President:

   Erase that which is ugly and repulsive and claim the happiness that comes
   with freedom.


Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Nksz M M SOTYU: Somlomo kunye noMongameli obekekileyo, Mphathiswa Nqakula
liyinyaniso elokuba thina singurhulumente okhokelwa nguKhongolozi
sikholelwa ekubeni idabi lokulwa nolwaphulo-mthetho yingxaki yethu sonke
bemi beli loMzantsi Afrika. Ngoko ke kunyanzelekile ukuba sibhinqele
phezulu, sinyathele kunye ekulweni esi sihelegu, kuba kaloku urhulumente
yedwa akasoze aphumelele, ngengokuba sele utshilo. Thina malungu eNdlu
yowisoMthetho silapha nje, sivotelwe ngabantu ngokusithemba, yiyo loo nto
kufuneka, kwaye kunyanzelekile ukuba sibakhusele aba bantu kunye nezinto
zabo ekuhlaleni. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mrs M M SOTYU: Madam Speaker, the hon President and Minister Nqakula, it
is the belief of the ANC-led government that the fight against crime is a
responsibility of all the citizens of South Africa and that co-operation
with it is important as on its own it could never succeed in the fight
against crime as you have already said. People elected us to represent them
in this House because they trust us, and we are obliged to protect them and
their property wherever they live.]

Madam Speaker, the ANC National Executive Committee in its January 8
statement states that:

  As the ANC we will therefore undertake an extensive mass campaign to
  mobilize communities to assume leadership in the struggle for peace,
  stability and safer places to live.

Somlomo, ngamampunge into yokuba urhulumente okhokelwa nguKhongolozi
akawunanzanga kwaphela umba wolwaphulo-mthetho kweli lizwe. Wakhe wasiva
phi isigebenga sithi xa siza kumosha okanye siza kudlwengula siqale
sikubuze ukuba ungowawuphina umbutho? Masiyeke ukuphatha amasiba abomvu
thina malungu ale Ndlu, sibe sixakekile silungisa okulungileyo
nokungalunganga babe bona abantu phaya ngaphandle belindele lukhulu apha
kuthi sonke. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Madam Speaker, it is not true that the ANC-led government does not care
about the extent of crime in the country. Where have you ever heard a
criminal or rapist asking for one’s political affiliation before committing
a crime? We should cease using a red pen to mark what is and what is not
wrong as people expect more than just that from all of us.]

Let us build partnerships with all sectors including churches, spaza shop
owners, and tavern associations ...

... kuba kaloku apha kwezi ndawo kulapho uninzi lwabantu lufumaneka khona.
Nezi zigebenga kaloku nabo ngabantu, bazalwa kwasithi aba. Intsebenziswano
sikwayilindele nakumashishini azimeleyo, ngoba xa ebona ukuba
ubundlobongela buchaphazela uqoqosho kunye noluntu ngokubanzi thina
silindele ukuba abe nendlela yokuncedisana norhulumente ngokuthi babuze
ukuba anganceda njani na.

Xa nditshoyo ke Somlomo, ndithi masizame singamalungu ePalamente ukuphucula
indlela esiqhagamshelana ngayo noogxa bethu abaphaya kurhulumente,
bejongene nezinto zasekuhlaleni, lowo ke ngurhulumente wezekhaya. Iinkqubo
zethu neyabo mayisebenzisane ukuze sithi xa sithatha ukhenketho sisiya
emaphondweni sikwazi ukukhawulelana ukwenzela ukuba sikwazi ukufikelela
kwiindawo ezininzi kule minyakana mihlanu sinayo. Thina siziikomiti
ezijongene nezokhuseleko masithathe inxaxheba ngaxeshanye ukuya kuhlola,
ngakumbi kwimida yethu namanye amazwe, ukuzama ukuncedisana neSebe
leZekhaya. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... because these are places where most people reside. Criminals are human
beings too. They come from amongst us. We ask for co-operation from the
private sector too, because when they see that crime affects the economy
and the lives of community members, we expect them to assist government in
any way they can.

By that Madam Speaker, I am appealing to hon Members of Parliament to work
towards uplifting and bettering the methods of communication we use with
other civil servants in local government. We should seek to integrate our
programmes and theirs before we visit provinces in order to facilitate
collaboration with as many areas in the five years that we have. Safety and
security committees should take the initiative to plan monitoring trips to
the boundaries we share with other neighbouring countries to assist the
Department of Home Affairs.]

We are reminded by the President to capacitate our intelligence agencies.

Yiyo loo nto sibongoza uluntu ngokubanzi ukuba lukhathalele ukumazi
ummelwane walo. Kufuneka ube liliso lommelwano wakho. Ngaloo ndlela siza
kuba nakho ukuphawula xa kukho into engaqhelekanga, sihlabe ikhwelo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[That is the reason we are pleading with the general public to take time to
get to know their neighbours. Be watchful of thy neighbours. In that way
you would be able to notice anything sinister and mysterious in the
neighbourhood and inform the police.]
Whereas the President in the state of the nation address was not specific
about overcrowding, he made a commitment that government would ensure that
decisions to expand the infrastructure of our correctional facilities
services are implemented. This indicates the fact that our democratic
government still regards overcrowding as a serious challenge, which must be
addressed.

The peace and stability cluster Ministers, together with all the affected
departments’ Ministers, made a request to Members of Parliament through the
constituency offices to assist in the identification of facilities in their
constituencies to be converted into secure places of safety for abused
women, children, and children in conflict with the law.

Siza kuthanda ukubongoza uluntu ukuba luwamkele amabanjwa asigqibileyo
isigwebo sawo nanjengokuba ebetshilo uNgconde ukuba uyacela ukuba sibamkele
phakathi kwethu. Siye saphawula ukuba uluntu alubamkeli ncam abo baphuma
entolongweni, sele besigqibile isigwebo, nto leyo eyenza ukuba baphinde
benze izenzo ezigwenxa ezenza bazifumane sele bephinde babasemva
kwezitshixo. Kunjalonje abanye babo baphuma bezincutshe kwimisebenzi
yezandla. Loo nto ithetha ukuba baza kuba luncedo eluntwini. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We humbly ask community members to welcome back those people who served
and completed their sentences, and by that I am repeating what the hon
Ngconde had already mentioned. We have observed that communities do not
find it easy to welcome former inmates back among them, something that
drives some of them into committing crimes that eventually send them back
to prison. Some of them come out skilled in handicraft in most cases. That
indicates that they could be useful to society.]

The ANC in its National General Council in 2005 noted processes relating to
rationalisation of our court system, and resolved that there should be the
establishment of an extensive mechanism to transform and rationalise the
superior court structures. Though this legislation is still in process, the
President in his state of the nation address indicated that the government,
in consultation with the judiciary, would finalise the remaining aspects of
the transformation of the judiciary.

Asikwazi kwaphela ukuyamkela into yokuba emva kweminyaka elishumi
elinesithathu safumana le nkululeko kube kusekho abantwana abadutyulwayo,
kuba umntu othile ebecinga ukuba udubula imfene okanye irhorho, ze
nenkundla imfumane engenatyala lakubulala okanye asuke anikwe isohlwaywana
kuthiwe makahlawule nje ama-R10 000 kuphela. Leyo asoze siyivume tu! Lo
ngomnye nje wemizekelo. Zininzi zona iziganeko ezikwa lolu hlobo.
Masikhumbule kakuhle ukuba ngumsebenzi wethu thina malungu ale Ndlu yoWiso-
Mthetho ukuqinisekisa ukuba abantu bethu bayachazelwa ngamalungelo abo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)
[It is totally unacceptable that after 10 years of democracy people are
mistaken for baboons and shot, and then courts find those who commit these
acts not guilty of murder or only ask them to pay a fine of about R10 000.
That, we will never accept! This is but one example. Many such incidents
have been reported. Let us remember that one of our responsibilities as
members of the National Assembly is to ensure that our people are informed
and educated about their rights.]

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to congratulate members of the
SA Police Service ... nanjengokuba sele etshilo uMphathiswa uNqakula ...
[as Minister Nqakula has said ...] at the Manenberg police station for the
initiative that they took by engaging in the Safe Schools campaign with the
community of Manenberg under very difficult and dangerous conditions.

I also congratulate the Sekhukhune police station in Limpopo where members
of the SAPS established a tea club together with the communities, and out
of the tea funds managed to build beautiful brick houses to accommodate
abused women and children. Keep up the good work! [Applause.]

Tat’uNdlovu ndiyadana xa kanti i-IFP ayazi ukuba sohlukana naba komishinala
bemimandla ngoba sasivumelene siyiKomiti yoKhuselo noKhuseleko emveni
kokuba sithe satyelela amaphondo olithoba, saze safumanisa ukuba
izisetyenziswa ziphelela kule mimandla aziyi apho sizidinga khona
ngamandla, ezitishini. Kwiingxoxo zethu zabucala masibaxelele izizathu
zokuba sithi asisasebenzi ngaba komishinala, ngoba zizigqibo ezathatyathwa
kwiKomiti yemiCimbi yePhondo zaze zangqinwa yile Ndlu. Enkosi kakhulu.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Hon Ndlovu, it disappoints me to learn that the IFP does not know that we
have since done away with regional safety commissioners and that that
decision was taken by the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security after
our visit to all nine provinces where we found that resources were not
utilised by the most needy of areas. During discussions at our constituency
meetings, we should inform our people about the reasons for doing away with
commissioners and that decision was made by the Portfolio Committee on
Provincial and Local Government. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr N T GODI: Thank you, Chairperson. Your Excellency, Comrade President of
the Republic and the Deputy President, comrades and hon members, we wish to
extend, on behalf of the PAC, our congratulations to you on your delivery
of the state of the nation address.

The freedom that we enjoy today came about primarily as a result of the
sweat, toil, and blood of the masses, but with indispensable international
support. Thus a democratic and progressive South Africa must speak out in
support of all oppressed, threatened and bullied nations: from Cuba and
Venezuela to Palestine and Iran. We must continue to be amongst the
frontline nations in striving for a much-strengthened South-South
solidarity.

The current WTO talks are an example that acting in concert we can
withstand the bullying and hypocrisy of the North. You must be
congratulated, together with the rest of Africa, for your steadfastness on
matters of a fair international trade regime.

We also share in the nation’s delight about South Africa’s tour of duty in
the UN Security Council. We wish and hope that South Africa will make a
lasting impression in striving for international peace and security.

Comrade President, Africa our motherland and Africans as a people do not
occupy the front rows in terms of levels of development amongst nations of
the world; this is despite its great endowment with primary commodities.
This is a challenge to the African political class and the masses of our
people to bring pride and dignity to ourselves by becoming masters of our
own destinies and captains of our souls. It means greater control and
efficient management of the resources at our disposal for the benefit and
development of Africa.

In a globalising world, it can only mean deeper and faster integration –
economically, militarily and politically - of all of Africa, a Pan-African
unity that would give us a zone of manoeuvre and resistance to external
pressures. We are alive to the obstacles that are there, but we believe
there is no alternative to unity or integration. Can we have our government
on the side of those who are calling and working for greater and quicker
integration? We hope so.

We wish to express our support for the government on its role in Africa.
South Africa is doing for Africa far more than any other African country
today. We believe this needs to be applauded and encouraged. [Applause.]

Chairperson, if we move from the premise that it was the intolerable and
gut-wrenching poverty and inequality that mobilised our people to rise in
struggle against settler colonialism, then the freedom we have attained
should address itself to these two: poverty and inequality that afflicts
the majority.

The struggle to improve the material conditions of our people should remain
the primary task and focus of this epoch. All other social problems we face
find their resolution ultimately in addressing the challenges of poverty
and inequality in our country. This will come about as a result of a
national effort by all of us, the citizenry, government and private
capital.

The historic political settlement of Kempton Park in 1993 had given private
capital an opportunity to demonstrate its commitment to the new
dispensation by committing their resources to addressing these two
challenges. Can we say that private capital has responded enthusiastically
to this challenge? [Interjections.] We do not think so.

Even the 18,4%, President, that you spoke about in terms of investment, we
know that it is in a large measure due to the increase in public investment
by government. We know that the Growth and Development Summit had agreed on
a higher percentage of around 25%, which we have not been able to attain.

We also believe that the state has a fundamental role – a developmental
role – to play in the socioeconomic landscape of our country, but this can
only be done if the state is sufficiently capacitated, properly organised
and has strategic leadership in its bureaucracy.

We concur that the vacancy rate at senior management levels is
unacceptable, and the lack of strict and consistent monitoring and lack of
compliance with laws, regulations and procedures is undesirable. These have
a huge impact on local government delivery, the implementation of the
Expanded Public Works Programme and many others.

Comrade President, our Constitution directs us to honour those who fought
for freedom in our country. The President has correctly not failed to
honour them, thus reminding us that as we celebrate freedom, let us honour
service – the service of those who have served, suffered and sacrificed for
our freedom. This is a tradition that should continue forever into the
future so that future generations can appreciate where we come from and
understand the traditions and values of the liberation movement.

If the President had lifted his eyes, he would have seen beyond the
activists of the 1956 Women’s March and the 1976 uprising, and the leaders
and survivors of the 1960 Sharpeville and Langa massacres. He would have
seen beyond iNkosi Albert Luthuli, Comrade Oliver Tambo and Comrade Steve
Biko, and Mangaliso Robert Sobukwe, whose passing away 29 years ago we will
commemorate in the little Karoo town of Graaff-Reinet next week. He would
have seen the late Sabelo Phama, who died on 9 February 1994 on a dusty and
desolate road in Tanzania, on the eve of our democratic breakthrough.

Comrade President, indeed there are cold souls out there who do not feel
the warm embrace of freedom, who feel that their sacrifices and efforts go
unacknowledged. We believe there is in you, comrade, the largeness of heart
and the magnanimity of victory to embrace the totality of the liberation
movement family, thus guaranteeing the equal enthusiastic celebration of
freedom as the collective achievement of all.

The PAC remains committed to positively contribute, as it has done during
the liberation struggle, in this epoch of national reconstruction and
development. Thirteen years is a very short time in the life of a nation. A
lot has been done so that our country does not contain within it and
represent much that is ugly and repulsive in human society, but much more
still needs to be done. The struggle continues. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Chairperson, hon President and hon Deputy
President, and hon members, the history of the ANC has always been one of
fighting oppression, of fighting discrimination. We have now achieved our
democracy and freedom, but the fight continues: against poverty and against
crime. Just as our commitment and energy went into fighting oppression, in
the same way our commitment will be to fighting poverty and crime. The work
continues.

Among the many effects of the system of apartheid, poverty, social
dislocation and systematic violence helped to create conditions for the
growth of crime. In spite of the growing crime, work done over the past
decade shows that crime can be beaten if South Africans continue to work
together to reduce criminal activities and to build safer communities –
communities where our children can play freely, where women can walk
anywhere and also be free inside their own homes, where our elderly will be
respected and not abused.

In our 1994 election manifesto, the ANC had a clear plan to build a better
life for all, one that requires a peaceful and secure environment in which
people can live without fear. The 1994 manifesto stated that our country
needed peace. We needed to end the violence against communities and the
abuse of women and children. It was required of our government to commit to
dealing firmly with the violence and crime.

In the 1999 ANC manifesto the ANC had a clear plan for combating crime and
corruption, to get tough on the underlying causes of crime such as poverty
and inequality, and tough on crime and corruption itself.

In our 2004 election manifesto, we said we should improve the security of
all South Africans, and make life increasingly difficult for criminals in
both private and government structures. The ANC and the ANC government have
always shown that it is interested in building safe communities for all
South Africans. We have never shied away from that; we see that the ANC has
always taken the security of all South Africans into consideration.

As the hon President said on Friday, and I quote:

   Since 1994 we have worked to transform the SA Police Force ...


Many hon comrades will expand on that later -

   ... and other institutions of the criminal justice system to serve all
   our people more effectively and to work to safeguard their safety and
   security. We have increased the numbers of police personnel, improved
   systems of co-ordination and management, and improved the efficiency of
   our courts and prosecution services.

Yet, as the hon President continued to say: “... all our efforts will not
succeed unless we make tangible progress in addressing the socioeconomic
conditions that feed crime and violence.”

I agree, hon President, that the police service and government agencies
cannot fight crime alone, and that it requires the involvement and active
participation of all communities and all sections of society to meet the
challenges of crime. We must stand united against crime.

Every year since 1998, from 25 November to 10 December, South Africa takes
part in the campaign “Sixteen days of activism for no violence against
women and children”. South Africa uses this international and UN-recognised
campaign annually to generate increased awareness of the negative impact of
violence against women. The campaign starts on 25 November, which is the
international day for no violence against women. This day was also chosen
to commemorate the death of the Mirabal sisters in 1960 at the hands of
dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic. The campaign
ends on 10 December, which is International Human Rights Day.

During that 16-day period, there are also two other important international
commemoration dates. The one is 1 December, which is International Aids
Day, and the other 3 December, which is the International Day for Disabled
People. Those days are recognised and celebrated here in South Africa.

We have seen an increase in the abuse of women and children. The President
of the ANC has mentioned that there will be an extensive mass campaign to
mobilise communities to assume leadership in the struggle for peace,
stability and safer places to live. The campaign will also seek to
strengthen partnerships between communities and the police service, and
between the public and private sectors. This campaign also pays particular
attention to crimes of violence, especially violence against women and
children. We will extend this campaign of the 16 days of activism to be for
the whole year, 365 days, so as not to forget that violence against women
and children is just not to be tolerated.

When we think of building a safe community, we must also think of other
vulnerable groups in our communities, such as people with disabilities and
the elderly. They are also abused, and sometimes in many ways very
silently. People with disabilities are often not understood, for example,
when a person with a mental disability is abused, his statement is not
taken seriously. When a person with multi-disabilities is abused, no one
believes that person.

When a deaf child is sexually abused or raped by her educators, the case is
thrown out of court, simply because they don’t have qualified and
accredited South African sign language interpreters. When a deaf person who
has never gone to school, who has never been exposed to sign language,
becomes a victim, it is important that a deaf person acts as a relay
interpreter to assist the sign language interpreter.

Reporting should be handled with sensitivity, by both the police and the
staff of the court. They also need sensitivity training and training on how
to work with people with disabilities.
There should be physical access to police stations and to courts. When the
elderly report a problem, such as the abuse of their pension, this is
sometimes a problem. In my area many old people were abused and raped, and
many times it is done by perpetrators whom they know. A policeman in my
area then called the old people together and explained to them about crime.
Crime is happening to them and they know the perpetrators.

We need the community to be involved. We cannot emphasise that enough. When
I read the newspaper, I read of a mother who abused and beat a child until
she died. The neighbours heard this but they didn’t want to get involved.
What happened to the slogan “every child is my child”?

Community development workers, too, need to be involved and be active and
participate or be mediators between the police and the old people.

Here in Parliament, what have we done for people who have been abused
children and for women? A parliamentary task group on sexual abuse of
children was set up, and in the Women’s Parliament issues of domestic
violence were discussed and issues of trafficking of women and children
were highlighted.

And now we have the Children’s Bill, which was signed by the hon President
and is now an Act. In a comprehensive section of the Act, section 18, the
trafficking of children is discussed. For the first time trafficking is
discussed as a crime. The Act also provides a message to look after the
interests of children. The work continues for a better life for all our
people. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, Mr President, one of the things which you
highlighted in the state of the nation address as ugly and repulsive in our
society is an increasingly high rate of corruption and falling moral and
ethical standards in all areas of government service. You committed to
greater effectiveness of anticorruption strategies for all spheres of
government by the end of the year and to intensify the public sector and
national anticorruption campaign.

Never in the history of our country has this been more necessary. There is
no doubt that South Africa is suffering from an ethical and moral malaise.
The evidence is not just anecdotal; it is documented daily in the courts,
in the media, in Parliament. The ANC’s secretary-general has said “this rot
is across the board”. Members of the public can rightly ask: Who can we
trust?

Let us start at the top of the justice system. Can we trust the judges? I
believe, with some exceptions, standards have not been sacrificed on the
altar of transformation, but increasingly we are having problems. Take the
Judge President of the Western Cape, John Hlope: court papers have revealed
that he was unable to perceive the conflict of interest in a situation
where he was the recipient of large amounts of money, some R500 000, from
the Oasis Group, but nevertheless gave them permission to sue one of his
fellow judges. Clearly, he should have recused himself from the case.
Surely this lack of judgment should be taken up again by the Judicial
Service Commission.

Justice Minister Brigitte Mabandla needs to be more proactive, since she
has a role prescribed by law in all this. No judge may do remunerated work
outside their judicial work without her permission. In the light of how
Judge Hlope has acted, she should refuse or withdraw any permission he
might have, but she has done nothing about it.

Instead, she has misdirected her energies to turn down the Free State Judge
President’s request that she appoint some local members of the Bar – who
happen to be white – to act temporarily as judges to clear the significant
case backlogs in that province. She has apparently demanded that any
appointees be of another colour.

Mr President, you made reference in your address to the need to reduce
these court backlogs. There are currently very few black attorneys or
advocates in the Free State willing or able to act. The Minister and I sit
on the Judicial Service Commission together, and she knows this. Playing
these pointless racial games does not enhance transformation or the
effective administration of justice.

Another judge has been captured on film allegedly driving drunk and being
disorderly. Sadly these and other events have made it essential to pass
legislation to deal with misconduct by judges more comprehensively and to
establish a much-needed, it seems, code of conduct for them. Perhaps, Mr
President, you can persuade the Minister of Justice to fast-forward this
long delayed legislation. If we cannot respect the judges, who is left for
the public to look up to?

Then there is the case of our top cop, Commissioner Jackie Selebi, who
admits to being the friend and confidante of an alleged organised crime
boss, from whom, it seems, he regularly received gifts. Surely the public
has every right to ask why the police is still being led by someone who
believes that he need not abide by the moral constraints of high office.

Then there are the shenanigans going on in Correctional Services, where a
different set of rules seems to apply to white-collar criminals with top
ANC connections. Mr Tony Yengeni was found by our courts to be a crook, but
he was escorted into prison by the Speaker of this House, received lengthy
visits in his cell, or should I say hospital ward, by the Minister in
charge of prisons. [Time expired.] [Interjections.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Chairperson, hon President, uBabe Mbeki, Deputy
President, u Make Mlambo-Ngcuka, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon Members
of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, on an important occasion such as this
one, it is befitting and important to be reminded about the selflessness of
our fallen heroes and heroines of our struggle for liberation.

I therefore dedicate my speech to those 42 people, including children and
women, who were massacred by the SADF in the early hours of the morning of
that fateful day of 9 December 1982. One of them was a young, energetic
patriot, the real son of the soil and recently qualified medical doctor who
at the time was only 27 years old and completing his internship at the
Edendale Hospital and that was Doctor Norman Ngciphe.

The crime problem is a complex phenomenon, particularly in a society
ravaged by apartheid and colonialism. Having said that, I am not suggesting
that crime is unique to South Africa, rather it is a universal problem.

Akungabazeki ukuthi ubugebengu buyinkinga ehlasela iningi labantu. Kodwa
futhi abathinteka kakhulu yibo laba abampofu abahamba ebusuku ngezinyawo,
beyofuna imisebenzi noma bebuya emsebenzini; yibo abangakwazi nokufaka
imithangala emide ngoba abanamali. Yibo laba abahlala emapulazini,
abahlukunyezwa maqede umnikazi wepulazi ayovula icala kuqala, athi webelwe.
Yingakho indlela yokulwa nobugebengu ifuna kuliwe nezimbangela. Ziningi
izimbangela zobugebengu, ilungu elihloniphekile lale Ndlu, uKoornhof,
lizokhuluma ngazo kodwa-ke ngeke uzehlukanise izimbangela zobugebengu
nokulwa nobugebengu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[There is no doubt that crime is a problem affecting many people. But the
most affected people are the poor people, the pedestrians, who walk on our
roads at night, looking for employment or coming from work. These are the
people who cannot build the sophisticated, high walls because they are
penniless. These are the people who stay on the farms, and are ill-treated
by the farm owners and who then, after ill-treating them, run as swiftly as
they possibly can to open theft cases against these very poor people. It is
for all these reasons that we say that in our fight against crime, we need
to start first by fighting the causes of crime. There are many causes of
crime and the hon member of this House, Mr Koornhof, will talk about these.
But you cannot divorce the causes of crime from the fighting of crime.]

Health professionals say: Treat the cause of the disease and not just the
symptoms and signs. In preventing crime we have to deal and treat the
causes and not just the symptoms.

Yingakho kuyiqiniso ukuthi kumele silwe kakhulu kunakuqala nobuphofu
nokuswela imisebenzi. IMbuluzi, eMpumalanga, endaweni engisebenzela kuyo,
iyindawo esemakhaya, futhi ekhungethwe ubuphofu. Ekuzameni ukulwa nobuphofu
siye sanikela ngezicathulo zesikole kubantwana abahluphekile abasemabangeni
aphansi.

Omunye umntwana ocishe abe neminyaka eyishumi nambili uye wathi  esebonga,
“Kukabili ngizama ukuntshontsha izicathulo esitolo ngoba ekhaya vele ngeke
bakwazi ukungithengela, futhi esikoleni abanye abantwana njalo uma kuvulwa
izikole baba nezicathulo ezintsha.” Uye wathi futhi, “INkosi ingibonile,
ngeke ngiphinde ngicabange ukweba. Ngiyabonga kakhulu.” Lokhu kusho ukuthi
ngeke sithi silwa nobugebengu sibe sikushiya ngaphandle  ukuswela. Yingakho
kumele silwe nobumpofu, khona-ke lokho kuyoba nomthelela omuhle ekulweni
nobugebengu.

Siyile ezimbizweni lapho kuba khona noMongameli wethu, kube khona nePhini
likaMongameli kanye noNgqongqoshe. Sasikhona eMkhondo, wayekhona nomama
uThoko Didiza, ekhona noMongameli ngesinye isikhathi ePixley ka Isaka Seme.
Sasikhona eGovan Mbeki, nathi siyazibiza izimbizo emagatsheni, futhi siyaya
emakhaya lapho singena umuzi nomuzi.

Bathi abantu, “Mongameli, Phini likaMongameli, Ngqongqoshe, Lungu
lePhalamende, sidinga imisebenzi, sihluphekile. Bathi abanye, “Sidinga
amanzi nokunye.” Kanti abanye bakhala ngeziteshi zamaphoyisa, njengesiteshi
samaphoyisa saseMayflower. Abanye bayasho ukuthi obunye bobugebengu
bubangwa ukweswela nokuphela kwezimilo zabantu.

Asibacabangeli, akukho ndaba esizakhela yona, asibhuli futhi asiphuphi,
sisho abakushoyo. Ngakho-ke sizokwenza lokho abakushoyo, singesabe muntu.
[Ihlombe.] Yingakho sidingana sonke ekulweni nobugebengu: amaphoyisa,
izimantshi, abezokuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo kanye nosomabhizinisi.

Isiteshi samaphoyisa saseFeni, eMbuluzi, sibe ngesihamba phambili ezingeni
lokusebenza kwamaphoyisa ngoDisemba kuzwelonke. Imfihlo yabo bathi ukuthi
basebenza nomphakathi, benza izigebengu zingabi nandawo; basifuna baze
basithole isigebengu, uma nje siseNingizimu Afrika. Kodwa futhi lawa
maphoyisa athi, njengamalunga emiphakathi, ayahlanganyela asize
ezinhlelweni zokunciphisa ububha. Lo mphakathi uyafakaza uthi ubugebengu
behlile. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Therefore, that is why it is indeed true that we need to fight crime,
poverty and unemployment more energetically than before. Mbuluzi, my
constituency in Mpumalanga is one of the places plagued by poverty. In
trying to combat poverty in the area, we donated school shoes to destitute
primary school children.

One of the children in one of the schools who was about 12 years of age,
when thanking us, said: “It is about the second time now that I have been
trying to steal shoes at a certain store, because at home they cannot in
any way afford to buy me a pair, and besides the other children would
always have a new pair of shoes at the beginning of every school term. The
child continued and said: “The Lord has seen me, and I will never think
about stealing again. I thank you very much.” This, therefore, means that
we cannot exclude poverty in fighting crime. We, of course, need to fight
poverty so that our fight against crime can bear positive results.

We have attended many izimbizo whereby the President, the Deputy President
and the Ministers would be present. We were present at Mkhondo and the hon
Madam Thoko Didiza was present as well, and the President was also present
at Pixley ka Isaka Seme. We were there at Govan Mbeki. We also have our own
izimbizo at branch level, and we also visit houses door to door.
The people say: “Mr President, the Deputy President, Minister, Member of
Parliament, we need jobs, we are destitute.” Others say: “We need water and
other things.” And yet others complain about police stations which are
ineffective, like the police station in Mayflower. Others say crime is a
result of the moral degeneration of our people.

We do not think for the people. We do not invent stories. We are not
prophesying or dreaming, but we are saying what people say. Therefore we
will do what they say, and we will not shy away from it. [Applause.] That
is why we need each other in fighting crime. We need police, magistrates,
correctional officers, and the private sector.

The Feni police station at Mbuluzi was voted the best working police
station nationally in December last year. They said their secret for
success is that they work with the community, making sure that the
criminals do not have a place to hide; they would look for the criminals
until they find them, especially if they are still in South Africa. When
these police officers were asked how they managed to do it, they said they
are members of the public themselves; they take part in programmes to fight
poverty. The community indeed testified that crime has since come down in
the area.]

Chairperson, fighting crime in a sustainable, comprehensive and measurable
manner is high on the agenda of government and this Parliament. We believe
that if all of us can combine our effort in fighting the root causes of
crime which, among other things, include poverty and degeneration of
morals, we will win this fight.

It is also equally important to be reminded that section 35 of the
Constitution deals with the arrested, detained and accused persons. In this
section the provision 3(h) deals with the presumption of innocence until
proven guilty by the law. This calls for sensitivity among all of us as
communities to have self-respect and respect for the dignity of others in
fighting crime.

Lo msebenzi udinga imali eningi impela. Sisishayela ihlombe isimemezelo
esenziwe uMongameli sokuthi inani lamaphoyisa lizokhushulwa liye ezi-180
000 kule minyaka emithathu ezayo. Ngale kokwandiswa kwesibalo, kusho ukuthi
kuzodaleka amathuba emisebenzi kubantu abayi-180 000. Sikushayela ihlombe
lokho. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[This work needs a lot of money. We applaud the announcement made by the
President that the police force will bring their total number to over 180
000 police officers in the next three years. Besides the expansion of
police personnel, there will be 180 000 job opportunities for the people.
We really applaud this.]

Chairperson, suggesting that corruption is a product of this government is
weird and unjust to say the least. Pre-1994 South Africa was a racially
fragmented country and the majority of people were subjected to a morally
and politically corrupt regime. Postapartheid South Africa has witnessed
the new government embarking on development and reconstruction in order to
overcome corruption, which leads to poor services created by apartheid
rule. Some of you benefited from it.

Lo hulumeni yiwo olwa nohwaphilizo olungene emithonjeni yabantu isikhathi
eside. Qha, lo hulumeni akalufihli uhwaphilizo, ulubeka obala – umehluko
lowo. [Ubuwelewele.] Uhwaphilizo lushaya uhlangothi lwemisebenzi kahulumeni
kodwa futhi lukhona nasohlangothini lwezimboni ezizimele. Abadala bathi
ugotshwa usemanzi. Kuqala ngokuthi umuntu athi kogogo ngenkathi beya kohola
impesheni, “Ngizokufaka phambili emgqeni kodwa nginike u-R10.” Kusuka lapho
kuye nasemsebenzini umuntu athi, “Ngizokufaka emsebenzini. Ngifuna R300.”
Kuya nasekunikezeni amathenda, umuntu athi, “Ngizokunika ithenda, nginike
R50 000,” aze athathe nemali yethu emabhange nge-Internet. Ugcina
esecabanga ukuthi vele indlela yokuphila inkohlakalo nohwaphilizo.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[This is the government that really fights corruption which has been deeply
embedded in people’s veins for a long time. Oh yes, this government does
not hide corruption, this government brings it into the open – that is the
difference. [Interjections.] Corruption affects government departments
terribly but it is also present in the private sector. There is an old
saying which says that you should teach the child whilst he is young.
Corruption starts with someone saying to an elderly lady queueing for her
pension: “If you can give me R10, I will make you jump this queue.” That’s
where it starts, and it goes up to workplaces, where someone would say: “I
have a position for you, if only you would give me R300.” It doesn’t only
end there. It even applies to awarding tenders. You would find someone
saying: “Give me R50 000 and I will award a tender to you.” Such a person
would end up stealing our money from the banks through the Internet. Such a
person ends up thinking that corruption is a way of life. [Time expired.]]

Ms N M MDAKA: Chairperson, hon President, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, in his state of the nation address to the House, the hon
President has once again given us the inspiration that the government
remains hard at work to ensure that the nation’s objectives will sooner or
later be met.

The points you have raised, hon President, are generally favourable. We
support many of the initiatives you have spoken about, and it would be an
injustice to our country if we were to say otherwise.

The UIF admits that the hon President unveiled an ambitious plan to
stimulate economic growth and to fight poverty and crime, and that has
renewed our hope as a nation. The hon President stated categorically that
an average of 4,5% growth rate of our economy over the past two and half
years has been at its highest since we attained our democracy.

In order for a good quality of life for all our people to become a reality,
poverty must be replaced with prosperity. In order for the people of South
Africa to enjoy any form of prosperity they must have jobs. The first
pillar for any poverty alleviation programme is job creation, and most of
the jobs must be permanent.

In a rapidly globalising world, an increasing number of countries are
becoming more competitive and ready to make their contribution to world
markets, culture and social exchanges. We must decide now on what South
Africa is going to be and on what it will be known for in this rapidly
globalising world. We need to plan something more, something better and
make the required investments to achieve our goals.

Chairperson, the opportunity and privilege given to our country to host the
2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup is clearly going to bring a major boost to our
economy.

It was and it is still a great concern, hon President, when you stated in
the state of the nation address that on 1 September, last year, 27% of
municipalities did not have municipal managers. This brings the vacancy
rate at senior management level to over 50%.

It makes one wonder, hon President, whether the five-year local Government
Strategic Agenda is the right tool to eliminate challenges faced by the
municipalities. We must be vigilant to avoid such problems that can become
obstacles in organising the 2010 soccer showpiece.

We need the goodwill of all our people to make our country succeed. We also
need to extend the call for social discipline in other segments of our
society, including workplaces and communities.

In the final analysis, through a political will, the fight against crime
and poverty can be won. Where there is will there is always a way. We carry
the responsibility of giving to the country a government which the people
can look up to for leadership and moral inspiration. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mnr die Voorsitter, mnr die President, die
Adjunkpresident, Ministers, Adjunkministers, “comrades” en agb lede, ek
neem graag aan hierdie debat deel, waarin ek hoofsaaklik in Afrikaans sal
praat, en ek gaan fokus op die tema van die skepping van veiliger
gemeenskappe, en dus op hoe om misdaad effektief te bekamp.

Laat ek dadelik ter inligting, en ter inleiding, die voorkoms van misdaad
in ons land in konteks plaas. Dit is ’n feit dat die impak van die
apartheidsbeleid voor 1994, tesame met die gebruik van die polisie as ’n
instrument van onderdrukking, gelei het tot ‘n skerp toename in misdaad en
geweld in ons gemeenskappe.

Verder kan die bekamping van misdaad nie in isolasie gesien word van ander
belangrike prioriteite nie. Dit sluit in die verligting van armoede, die
skep van werkgeleenthede, die uitwissing van ongelykhede, die voorsiening
van behuising, gesondheidsdienste en toegang tot basiese dienste vir die
meerderheid van ons mense.

Wat betref die voorkoms van misdaad, wil ek graag vandag ’n perspektief gee
uit die kiesafdelingsgebied wat ek deur die ANC toegedeel is, naamlik die
oostelike voorstede van Pretoria, of Tshwane. Eerstens wil ek erken dat
misdaad en geweld ’n ernstige probleem in hierdie gebied is. Omdat deur-tot-
deur werk hier problematies is, besoek ek gereeld gemeenskapsleiers,
insluitende predikante, mediese dokters, al die skoolhoofde, sakeleiers en
polisiebevelvoerders om die omvang van hierdie probleem prakties te bepaal.
Die tipe misdade wat voorkom en die effek daarvan op mense en die
gemeenskap word almal aan hierdie leiers meegedeel.

Die afgelope ses maande was daar ’n dramatiese toename in veral
gewelddadige huisroof, waar mense in hulle huise aangeval en ernstig beseer
is. Daar is ook baie verkragtings en skietvoorvalle. In my kiesafdeling
hoor ek van die ervarings en vrese van mense wat geweldsmisdade beleef.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson, Mr President, the Deputy President,
Ministers, Deputy Ministers, comrades and hon members, I gladly participate
in this debate where I shall be speaking mainly in Afrikaans and shall be
focusing on the theme of creating safer communities, thus focusing on how
to combat crime effectively.

Let me start immediately by putting, for your information and as an
introduction, the occurrence of crime in our country in context. It is a
fact that the impact of the apartheid policy before 1994, together with the
use of the police as an instrument of oppression, gave rise to a sharp
increase in crime and violence in our communities.

Furthermore, the combating of crime cannot be seen in isolation from other
important priorities. This includes poverty alleviation, job creation, the
eradication of inequalities, the provision of housing, health services and
access to basic services for the majority of our people.

Today, I would like to speak about the occurrence of crime from the
perspective of the constituency area that the ANC had allotted to me,
namely the eastern suburbs of Pretoria, or Tshwane. Firstly, I want to
acknowledge that crime and violence is a serious problem in this area. As
working from door to door here is problematic, I regularly visit community
leaders, including pastors, medical doctors, all the school principals,
business leaders and police commanders to determine the scope of this
problem in practice. All the different types of crime that occur, and the
impact thereof on the people and the community, are conveyed to these
leaders.

The past six months there was a dramatic increase especially with regard to
violent housebreakings, where people were attacked and seriously injured in
their homes. There are also many rape and shooting incidents. In my
constituency I get to hear about the experiences and the fears of people
who encountered violent crimes.]

My constituency work on this matter of violent crime made me realise that
crime statistics can never mirror the pain, the fear, the uncertainty, the
trauma and the resignation of our people. I did research on statistics of
crime in my constituency area, but I’m not going to give it today, because
it hides the individual despondency of many of our people about crime.

The question that arises is: What do we do to solve the problem of crime in
our societies? In his book The Tipping Point, Malcolm Gladwell wrote that
we are all powerfully influenced by our surroundings, our immediate
context. To combat crime effectively, we therefore need to change the
social context in which crime is currently flourishing. A combination of
relatively small changes can have a big impact. Such smaller changes will
work together for larger changes, which will result in a tipping point
where the occurrence of crime will be reduced. In changing the social
context in which crime is currently flourishing, we need to improve the
functioning of the SA Police Service, but we must also address, for
example, poverty, the criminal justice system, violence on television,
restrictive borders, mobilisation of the youth, respect for life, etc. It
is possible that with the slightest push in just the right places, crime
can be tipped.

Dit is juis om hierdie rede dat ons president Mbeki se uitsprake wat hy in
sy staatsrede verlede Vrydag hier gemaak het, naamlik dat ons die stryd
teen misdaad gaan voortsit en verder verskerp, nou moet steun. Die
uitdaging is om hierdie visie van die President nou suksesvol te gaan
implementeer.

Die President se aankondigings oor die stryd teen misdaad is in lyn met die
ANC Nasionale Uitvoerende Komitee se 8 Januarie verklaring en strategiese
plan. Drie van die sleuteltake wat geïdentifiseer is vir implementering
teen misdaad, wat as ’n prioriteit vir hierdie jaar geïdentifiseer is,
sluit in: die mobilisering van gemeenskappe om leiding te neem in die stryd
vir vrede, stabiliteit en veiliger woonplekke; die bou van vennootskappe
tussen gemeenskappe en die polisie; en verskerpte deelname aan
gemeenskapspolisieforums.

Ek wil graag ’n paar voorbeelde noem van praktiese stappe wat ons in ons
kiesafdelingsgebied gedoen het of beplan om te doen om die sosiale konteks
waarbinne misdaad voorkom te verander. Hopelik gaan dit ons nader bring aan
die “tipping point” om misdaad suksesvol hok te slaan.

Eerstens, een van ons ANC-takke het besluit om ’n vrywillige taklid elke
Saterdagaand aan ’n polisiestasie beskikbaar te stel vir diens, sodat ’n
SAPD-lid beskikbaar gaan word vir sigbare polisiëring. ’n Ander ANC-tak het
’n taklid geïdentifiseer om gereeld gemeenskapsforums by te woon om te
bepaal waar hulp vir die polisie nodig is en waar gewone kiesers kan help.

Tweedens, ons fokus op verskerpte bewusmaking van die gemeenskap oor
agtelosigheid teenoor misdaad, want mense is nie altyd veiligheidsbewus oor
oop deure en oop hekke in hul eie woonplekke nie, en ook om mekaar te help,
op te skerp en te steun.
Derdens, ons help om die omgewingsuitleg te verander. Byvoorbeeld, waar
daar nie straatligte werk nie, waar daar lang gras in openbare plekke is,
waar daar dig beboste oewers langs die spruite is, gaan ons in gesprek tree
met die plaaslike owerhede en sê: Maak hierdie klein veranderings sodat ons
’n groot impak kan maak.

Vierdens, ons moedig gemeenskappe aan om meer betrokke te raak by
misdaadbekamping, soos byvoorbeeld gemeenskapsforums; die patrolering van
eie gebiede op eie koste en onbewapen, en laat die polisie weet van
probleme. Laat ons die oë en die ore van die polisie wees, samewerking
tussen gemeenskappe en die polisie en sekuriteitsmaatskappye inisieer en
strenger polisiëring aanmoedig. Ook ten opsigte van die metropolisie,
byvoorbeeld waar alledaagse verkeersreëls oortree word, dat ons dit
strenger toepas en die idee bevorder van een van die suksesse in ons
gebied, van die Hatfield Hof waar jy vanaand gearresteer word en môre in
die hof verskyn, en die “City Improvement District” waar jy sypaadjies
plavei, straatligte regmaak, stukkende vensters herstel, skoonmaakdienste
verskaf, en inligting tussen die polisie en sekuriteitsmaatskappye uitruil.

Hierdeur wil ons vir die President sê ons as LP’s in hierdie gebied gaan
help om die regering se misdaadplan suksesvol te implementeer deur die
sosiale konteks en omgewingsontwerp waarbinne misdaad gepleeg word te
verander in vennootskap met die gemeenskap, en vennootskap met die polisie
en ander rolspelers. Ons vertrou hierdie klein veranderings gaan groot
gevolge meebring.

Ten slotte, geweldsmisdaad het geen respek vir lewe nie. Ons moet ’n respek
vir lewe by ons mense aankweek. Ons moet by die jeug begin sodat ons die
nasionale kohesie van ons nasie kan voltooi. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Precisely for this reason, we should now support the pronouncements made
by our President Mbeki in his state of the nation address here last Friday,
namely that we will be continuing and further intensifying the fight
against crime. The challenge now is to implement this vision of the
President successfully.
The announcements by the President on the fight against crime are in line
with the statement and strategic plan of the National Executive Committee
of the ANC of 8 January. Three of the key tasks which were identified for
implementation to combat crime, and were identified as a priority for this
year, include the following: Mobilising communities to take the lead in the
struggle for peace, stability and safer living areas; establishing
partnerships between communities and the police and intensifying
participation in community police forums.

I would like to mention a few examples of practical steps that we have
taken or intend to take in our constituency in order to change the social
context in which crime occurs. Hopefully, it will bring us closer to the
“tipping point” in order to combat crime successfully.

Firstly, one of our ANC branches has decided to make a voluntary branch
member available for service at a police station every Saturday evening, in
order for a SAPS member to become available for visible policing. Another
ANC branch identified a branch member to attend community forums on a
regular basis in order to determine where the police need assistance and
where ordinary citizens can assist.

Secondly, we are focusing on intensifying community awareness regarding
carelessness when it comes to crime, because people are not always safety-
conscious with regard to opening doors and opening gates in their own
homes, and also to help, inform and support each other.

Thirdly, we are helping to change the environmental layout. For example,
where streetlights are not in working order, where there is tall grass in
public areas, where there are thickly-wooded shores alongside side-streams,
we are going to engage in consultation with local authorities and request
them to make these small changes in order for us to make a big impact.

Fourthly, we are encouraging communities to become more involved with the
combating of crime, for example, to become involved in community forums; to
patrol their own areas at their own cost and unarmed, and to inform the
police of problems. Let us be the eyes and ears of the police, initiate co-
operation between communities and the police and security companies and
encourage more stringent policing. With regard to the metro police also,
for example, where common traffic regulations are violated we should
enforce it more stringently, and promote one of the successful ideas in our
area, namely the Hatfield court where you would be arrested tonight and
appear in court tomorrow, as well as the City Improvement District where
you would pave sidewalks, fix streetlights, repair broken windows, provide
cleaning services and exchange information between the police and security
companies.

Through this we wish to inform the President that we, as MPs in this area,
will be assisting government to implement the crime plan successfully, by
changing the social context and environmental design in which crime is
committed in partnership with the community, and in partnership with the
police and other role-players. We trust that these small changes will
result in major consequences.

In conclusion, violent crimes have no respect for life. We have to
cultivate a respect for life amongst our people. We should start with the
youth, in order for us to complete the national cohesion of our nation.]

In 1994 we started a rainbow nation. We have walked this road now for 13
years. Currently we stand at the dawn of the age of hope. Collectively, we
should not allow crime to steal our dream for this nation. We don’t want to
become a nation of fear; we want to become a nation of hope.

Ek dank u. [Applous.] [I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, hon President of South Africa, hon Deputy
President, on an occasion of this nature, on 18 February 2003, Azapo stated
as follows:

   The growth of the economy in the various sectors mentioned in the address
   by the President is indeed encouraging in so far as it strengthens
   economic fundamentals. However, this growth should at the same time be
   accompanied by the growth in jobs and standard of living of the poor. To
   the extent that this is not happening, is a matter that Azapo believes
   should be attended to with speed.

We all know that in a capitalist society such as ours, the capitalist class
does not preoccupy itself with the eradication of poverty. At best it can
create some jobs, but even in creating these jobs it does so only if this
is consistent with the profit it makes.
The question we should ask is: Who should bear the responsibility for the
creation of adequate jobs? What then should be done in a situation where
economic growth is 4,5% or even higher and jobs that are created are not
consistent with this growth?

Many will no doubt agree with Azapo that a situation of this nature calls
for innovative economic policies as well as the acceleration of economic
intervention strategies. Government must act, and all of us must also
decisively support a move to create more jobs.

We must begin to move to a situation where jobs that are created are
measured against the number of poverty-stricken people who access these, as
opposed to just accepting statistical data that jobs are being created
without any indication as to whether the majority of the poor are
benefiting from these jobs. We should measure whether these jobs are indeed
accessible to the poor in terms of requisite skills that correspond to the
jobs created.

With regard to the Expanded Public Works Programme, we should ascertain
whether allocated resources are achieving the desired effect in terms of
poverty eradication and raising the standard of life of poor citizens. We
should indeed move away from merely being happy and proud of budget
allocations, without monitoring whether resources allocated are reaching
the poor as well as producing the intended results.

To Azapo it is important to note that poor existential circumstances, poor
housing, joblessness, homelessness and a combination of other factors that
the poor are subjected to, contribute to the dehumanisation of people and
lead to feelings of inferiority and hopelessness.

Crime is one of the most spoken about subjects in our country, sometimes in
an exaggerated fashion. To this end we agree with the call to unite around
this matter. Azapo suggests that the following measures should be taken:
Enhancing family and community values by creating conditions for the
healthy upbringing of children – that is looking at the family and
communities as core starting points for the promotion of free and
responsible citizens; and determining the extent to which poverty and
dehumanising conditions of existence may contribute to individual
dispositions to crime.
Government should declare mini-states of emergency, targeting crime
hotspots and deploying the police and the army to root out criminals and
weapons that are used to commit crime.

Coupled with this, the judiciary should carefully look at inconsistencies
relating to sentencing and imprisonment of offenders. Notwithstanding the
fact that sentencing is a matter of law, Azapo does not understand why a
white person who shoots a person and alleges that he mistook him for a dog
gets a fine and a suspended sentence, while a black shoplifter who steals a
bottle of perfume is sentenced to imprisonment without a fine. So the
judiciary must do something about this. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The perception out there is that those who can afford expensive lawyers can
avoid the full might of the law, and that when you are poor you go to
prison, even for minor offences or a crime that you never committed. Azapo
believes that more could be achieved through national co-operation where
the interests of the country are paramount. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K O BAPELA: Thank you, Chairperson, the President, Deputy President,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers and all hon members.

Ke a le dumediša. Ke re thobela. Ke a le tamiša. [Greetings to you all.]

  The ANC forms part of the global forces, including governance, parties and
  civil society organisations in developing and developed countries,
  campaigning for a humane and equitable world order.

This is a quote from the ANC’s Strategy and Tactics.

Mookamedi, mo moletlong le tshepedišong ya wona, mokgatlo wa ANC o ile wa
ithuta le go tsentšha letsogo morerong wa tšhomišano go tša tlhompho ya
botho – human solidarity – lefaseng ka bophara. [Director, the ANC has in
their celebration and proceedings learnt about, and also played a world-
wide role in respect for, human rights.]

It was informed in its international work by values of internationalism,
promotion of human rights against abuses and violations, and support for
national liberation.

Le lehono re sa ntše re ikemišeditše go latela diphišegelo tšeo. Gape ebile
re tla tšwela pele go tiiša ditlemagano le mekgatlo yeo e šomišanago le
rena - strengthening of progressive networks - go fihlela re bona tekano le
tlhompho ya botho lefaseng ka moka. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph
follows.)

[We are still willing to follow up on those wishes. We will also strengthen
the spirit of working together with other organisations – strengthening the
progressive networks – until there is equality and respect for humanity
across the world.]

That is the emergence of an equitable and humane world order. The emphasis
is also made to remind us where we come from and why we are continuing on
the path to create a better world, and also to express the ANC’s solidarity
message to the people of Myanmar.

The ANC’s lekgotla stated as follows:

  The ANC should work, together with other organisations locally and
  internationally, to campaign for the restoration of democracy and human
  rights in Myanmar.

The meeting further reiterated the ANC’s deep concern at the situation in
Myanmar, including widespread repression and the continued house arrest of
Aung San Suu Kyi, and urged that these matters be taken up through the
appropriate organs of the UN systems.

We raise this issue to clarify our position, knowing that we will be
meeting at international platforms soon; some amongst us will take it out
of its context for selfish interests or may regard it as regrettable, as
already said by some.

As a matter of record, we want to inform Parliament and the nation that our
delegates, who have attended numerous meetings of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and also the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, have signed,
attended and spoken in solidarity with the people of Myanmar who in these
bodies will have sidetalks and petitions for signing. We will continue to
give support to and express solidarity with the cause of the people of
Myanmar and will support resolutions, if appropriately raised at the
correct platforms.

Ke tshepha gore Mookamedi o tla otlologa gomme a fa setšhaba sa gaborena
lesedi ka ga taba ye, le gore a bontšhe gore re le Maafrika-Borwa re a e
thekga gore go be le tharollo ka se se diragalago kua Myanmar.

Taba ya bobedi yeo ke tlago bolela ka ga yona ke tema yeo Palamente e e
kgathago mo go tlišeng toka le tekano lefaseng. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[I trust that the director will take this opportunity to give our people
information on this issue and to show that we as South Africans support
that the issues of Myanmar be resolved.

The second thing I would like to talk about is the role that Parliament
plays in strengthening justice and equality in the world.]
Parliaments all over the world are strongly emerging as international
players in global politics. So is our Parliament. We have affiliated to a
number of world parliamentary bodies and are being canvassed to join
others. During the visit by our Speaker to Belarus an appeal was made to
the Speaker that we should form a non-aligned movement parliamentary body,
which we are considering, as one of the international parliamentary bodies
that are emerging.

The challenge remains that affiliation alone is not enough, and we should
now embark on transforming these bodies to make them more relevant and
significant, in order for them to become instruments of change, taking up
such issues as fighting poverty, through the monitoring of our respective
countries’ performance in achieving the Millennium Development Goals;
consolidating the African Agenda; pursuing such programmes as Nepad,
regional economic integrations, and global warming issues; fighting the
causes of terrorism; ensuring that the number of African children going to
school increases; ensuring that health accessibility to women and children
is a right and not a privilege for a few; ensuring that conflicts on the
continent are eliminated and that women and children live in peace and do
not remain refugees forever; and ensuring that Africa emerges as an
important global player.

We strive for a world free of hunger and poverty. We are striving for a day
when, in years to come, we will say, as a country and as a continent:
“Tlala o nyele, bohumi bo fedile.” I hope the interpreter did not use the
wrong word. “Tlala o nyele” means “we have defeated hunger and poverty”.
[Laughter.] Ke sepedi seo. [That is Sepedi.]

We need to engage, monitor and involve our people in a participatory
democracy, in seeking solutions afflicting humanity, as parliaments, as
people’s representatives, representing the people who voted us into
parliaments.

We have just adopted, as the Joint Rules Committee of Parliament, a policy
for the establishment of a parliamentary group on international relations
that will guide us to engage with and fulfil all these challenges I’ve
mentioned. We hope that before the end of the first quarter we’ll be able
to adopt it in both Houses to begin implementing it.

Parliamentary diplomacy is on the rise and members will be expected to
empower themselves and follow events closely in pursuance of the strategic
goal of a better world and a better Africa. We should not view
international or foreign politics in a narrowminded way, as our foreign
policy captures it correctly, and I quote:

  Foreign relations are an expression of the domestic interests.

We do all this to attract investment to our country, to open space for our
goods to enter other markets in the world, for our people-to-people
relations to grow and increase, to allow mobility of skills which benefits
countries, and for parliamentarians also to become ambassadors of their own
country.

In relation to the theme of this year’s state of the nation address,
Parliament chose the theme “ Let’s deepen debate in South Africa”. Part of
the contribution to the debate is for South Africans to discuss, debate and
express views around our role on the continent in particular. There is
acknowledgement by the continent of South Africa’s role in conflict
resolution and peacekeeping, and that we have a strong economy, better
infrastructure and strong leadership. Some even go to the extent of saying
that we have a strong army. Hence there is a continuous call for us to
participate in various missions on the continent.

The rest of the continent acknowledges that as a country we obviously have
our own domestic challenges. Notably, we have expressed the need for us to
fight poverty and ensure that the poor’s needs are met, and the need to
fight crime, particularly violent crime. But they are also confident that
South Africa will triumph over these two pressing issues. They also warn us
that as South Africans we have a tendency to run down our own country. We
hope that in engaging with and debating these issues, we will give rise to
action and programmes towards delivery.

A debate needs to start on whether South Africa should consider a policy
option for the creation of a fund for development aid, focusing on Africa,
obviously because of the size of our economy, to assist with development
challenges for the continent and to set a trend for other stronger
countries in Africa to follow suit. Currently, the African Renaissance fund
is just an intervention fund.

South African private sector investment in the continent in areas of
retail, mining, construction and engineering should be encouraged. However,
we need to emphasise here that private companies, too, have a
responsibility in ensuring that our flag is raised high, that they respect
employment practices, and that they procure and buy goods locally.

Government should foster a partnership in the spirit of Nepad and the
vision for a better Africa, and businesspeople should raise the flag
proudly, as we do within such a vision.

As I end my speech, I would also like to call on parliamentarians to
discuss and report on international matters in their own constituencies and
give reports there. As Ingoapele Madingoane said in his famous poem in the
80s: “Africa My Beginning, Africa My Ending.”

Lastly, I want to urge that we should also, as is happening in the capitals
of Kenya, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Zambia and Mozambique, just to mention a few,
name our streets after leaders such as OR Tambo, Chief Luthuli, Nelson
Mandela, Julius Nyerere, Patrice Lumumba, Kwame Nkrumah, Sam Nujoma,
Kenneth Kaunda, etc. We should consider doing so in thanking these leaders
for fighting colonialism and freeing Africa, and also for contributing to
the liberation of South Africa. Again I say: Africa my beginning, Africa my
ending! Africa my home! Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Mnr die Voorsitter en agb President, ek wil graag ’n
paar opmerkings maak na aanleiding van die President se opmerking in sy
staatsrede dat hy grondhervorming wil versnel. Mnr die President, ek gaan
vandag in Afrikaans met u praat, want ek is ’n boer, soos vele ander, wat
my familieverbintenis met die landbou 350 jaar terug kan naspoor. Ek praat
met u as ’n Afrikaner wat uit die landbou kom en in murg en been hier
geskape is en hier wil bly. Ek wil bydra tot die sukses van hierdie land en
ek wil sien dat grondhervorming slaag, want ek steun dit.

Landbou is nie ’n maklike bedryf nie. Die klimaat is onvriendelik, die
reënval min en die politiek vol voorskrif. Die landbou in Suid-Afrika dra
30% tot ons ekonomie by, direk en indirek, en ons is een van sewe lande in
die wêreld wat ’n netto uitvoerder van voedsel is. Daar is nie
kitsoplossings vir landbouprobleme nie. Die sukses en volhoubaarheid van
landbou kom uit kennis, ondervinding en praktiese planne, en ’n fyn balans
tussen klimaat en ekonomiese en politieke realiteite.

Indien u die huidige grondhervormingsproses wil versnel, het u ’n groot
probleem. Besef u dat feitlik alle grondhervormingsprojekte wat met landbou
te doen gehad het tot dusver misluk het? Dit was swak beplan, is onbeholpe
bestuur en het in chaos geëindig. Om die huidige rigting van
grondhervorming te versnel, voorspel net versnelde mislukking en dit kan
ernstige gevolge vir ons land inhou.

Kyk net wat het met die ekonomieë van die buurlande gebeur waar
grondhervorming politiek en prakties verkeerd gehanteer is en die landbou
nie volhoubaar bedryf is nie. Indien u grondhervorming suksesvol wil
toepas, sal u die rolspelers, die rigting en die metodiek van
grondhervorming in Suid-Afrika moet verander. U sal die landbougemeenskap,
en veral hul leiers, in hierdie verband moet betrek.

Hulle het die noodsaak van grondhervorming aanvaar. Hulle verskil nié met
die regering oor die beginsel van grondhervorming nie, maar oor hoe om dit
suksesvol, prakties en volhoubaar toe te pas. Hulle het die kennis,
ondervinding en vermoë om dit te bewerkstellig. U het hul betrokkenheid
nodig indien u wil slaag.

Hul hand van samewerking word egter konstant weggeklap. Hul welwillendheid
word wantrou. Die beter verhoudings tussen die regering en die boere onder
die vorige Minister is tot niet. Verhoudings tussen die regering en die
landbou is tans erg deurmekaar. Daar word op foute gekonsentreer en nie op
oplossings nie.

Algemene beskuldigings teen die boere word om hul hoofde geslinger.
Oortredings van wette en vergrype van mag deur ’n klein persentasie van die
boere word as algemene klag teen alle boere opgestel. Hierdie vergrype word
nie goedgepraat nie en word ook nie deur die oorgrote meerderheid van
georganiseerde landbou geduld nie. Hierdie ondeurdagte beskuldigings van
regeringskant sonder stawende bewyse word op alle boere van toepassing
gemaak en vertroebel verhoudings nóg meer.

Aan die voorpunt van hierdie onverkwiklike aanslag is die nuwe Minister van
Landbou en Grondsake in haar uitsprake. Stem u saam met die Minister as sy
sê dat alle boere onpatrioties is en nie die regering erken nie? Stem u
saam dat alle boere plaasarbeiders onmenslik behandel en onwettig van die
plase afsit, soos die Minister in haar Kersboodskap aan boere geïmpliseer
het? Stem u saam met die verwoording van getuienis wat gebaseer is op
Rawsonville-aanklagte dat boere in die algemeen hulle arbeiders verkrag en
aanrand?

Meneer die President, die landbouperd sal nié saamwerk om oploswater te
soek of te drink as dit met ’n gesplete sweep van vals beskuldigings
gegesel word nie. Kry die vertroue van die landbouperd, en u sal baie ver
en rustig op sy rug kan ry. Dan sal grondhervorming van krag tot krag gaan
en suksesvol in hierdie land tot voleinding gebring word. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson and hon President, I would like to make a
few remarks with regard to the President’s statement in his state of the
nation address that he would like to accelerate the pace of land reform. Mr
President, I am going to speak to you in Afrikaans today, because I am a
farmer, as so many others, who can trace back my family’s ties to
agriculture for 350 years. I am speaking to you as an Afrikaner that hails
from an agricultural background, who was born and bred here and would want
to stay here. I want to contribute towards the success of this country and
would like to see the success of the land reform process because I support
it.

Agriculture is not an easy industry. The climate is unfriendly, rainfall
scarce and politics encumbered with regulations. Agriculture contributes,
directly and indirectly, towards 30% of South Africa’s economy, and we are
one of seven countries in the world who are net food exporters. There are
no instant solutions for agricultural problems. The success and
sustainability of agriculture is derived from knowledge, experience,
practical plans, and a fine balance between climate and economical and
political realities.

If you wish to accelerate the present land reform process, you have an
enormous problem. Do you realise that thus far all agricultural land reform
programmes have actually failed? The planning was bad; it was poorly
managed and ended in chaos. Accelerating the current direction of land
reform, only predicts accelerated failure and this could have serious
implications for our country.

Just look at what has happened to the economies of the neighbouring states
where land reform had been dealt with in a politically and practically
incorrect manner and where agriculture was not managed in a sustainable
way. If you want to apply the land reform process successfully, you will
have to change the role-players, the direction and methodology of land
reform. You will have to involve the agricultural community, and especially
their leaders, in this regard.

They have accepted the need for land reform. They do not differ with the
government on the principle of land reform, but rather on how to apply it
in a successful, practical and sustainable manner. They have the skills,
experience and ability to bring this about. You need their involvement if
you wish to succeed.

However, their co-operation is rejected time and again. Their goodwill is
regarded with circumspect. The improved relations between the government
and the farmers, under the former Minister, have been destroyed. Relations
between the government and the agricultural sector are extremely chaotic at
the moment. Prominence is given to flaws and not to solutions.

General accusations directed at farmers are used to judge them all by the
same yardstick. Contraventions of the laws and the abuse of power by a
minority of farmers, is held as a general complaint against all farmers.
These transgressions are neither condoned nor tolerated by the overwhelming
majority of organised agriculture. These ill-considered accusations on the
side of government, without evidence to substantiate it, are applied to all
farmers and confuse relations even further.

At the forefront of this unpleasant onslaught, is the new Minister of
Agriculture and Land Affairs in her pronouncements. Do you agree with the
Minister when she says that all farmers are unpatriotic and they do not
recognise the government? Do you agree that all farmers treat their farm
workers inhumanely and illegally evict them from the farms as the Minister
implied in her Christmas message to the farmers? Do you agree with the
wording of evidence based on the Rawsonville charges that farmers generally
rape and assault their farm workers?

Mr President, the workhorse of agriculture will not co-operate to find
solutions, or be part of such solutions, if it is flogged with a split whip
of false accusations. Seek the trust of agriculture’s workhorse and you
will have an extended and smooth ride on its back. Then land reform will
grow from strength to strength and it will come to fruition successfully in
this country. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you, Chairperson, Mr President, Deputy
President, members of the House. I would like to deviate and
start off by responding briefly to some aspects of the debate. And I would
like to underline that I certainly accept the bona fides of the hon Leon in
his observations with regard to the question of crime.

I do want to say that I think that we must avoid the temptation to evaluate
the national progress on the basis of reactions by individuals who maybe
traumatised by personal tragedy or those who may be seeking justification
for their actions or inaction. I refer specifically to the examples that
were quoted by the hon Leon and the hon Meshoe – I see here he has escaped
from the House now.

Now, the hon Buthelezi correctly reminds us that the majority of victims of
crime in this country are black, or rather are poor. And I say: The
majority of the poor are black. They are in townships, in informal
settlements, they are in the countryside, they are in downtown
Johannesburg, Sunnyside and other cities. These very, very poor sections of
our population are the vast majority and are the victims of these crimes.

Now, we single out the voice of some wealthy individual who can afford to
take his whole family and leave this country and go to Australia, and then
this is highlighted in the House before this nation. The hon Meshoe invites
into this House the comments of someone who is sitting in the exaggerated
comfort of European cities, pointing a finger and saying how wrong this
country is.

What we need - and I think what we as South Africans should be doing – is
to speak of those who recognise that crime is one of the problems in our
country. But who, instead of sitting as spectators or walking away, take
action to join with all of us to fight this crime. When are we going to
speak about the majority of black and white South African farmers who are
sticking it out on their farms in the Free State, the North West and
Limpopo, and who are working to try and contribute to the national effort
to fight crime.

Those are the people, I think, we should be speaking about and speaking to
here. [Applause.] The examples, in my view, that we should highlight, are
the commendable efforts of loyal and patriotic black and white South
Africans who are working with all of us to fight this crime so as to make
South Africa a better place. Let’s hear more of those ...

Laat ons ’n bietjie meer hoor van iemand soos André Venter, wat sy beste
jare gegee het sodat Suid-Afrika glorie op die rugbyveld kan hê. Vandag sit
hy verlam in Bloemfontein. Laat ons meer hoor van die spelers – blank en
swart – wat nou in die krieketspan, in rugby en in sokker Suid-Afrika se
naam hoog hou. Nie van ’n paar individue wat Suid-Afrika die rug gekeer
het, en weggeloop het Australië toe nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Let us hear a little bit more about somebody like Andre Venter, who gave
his best years in order for South Africa to achieve glory on the rugby
field. Today he is sitting in Bloemfontein – paralysed. Let us hear more
about the players – white and black – who are currently in the cricket
team, in rugby and in soccer maintaining South Africa’s good reputation.
Not just about a few individuals who have turned their backs on South
Africa and run away to Australia.]

Let them go to Australia. Let them make it a happy home for themselves,
that’s fine. We are interested in the citizens of this country who want to
sit here and fight and who want to make South Africa a better place.
[Applause.]

We need partners in the battle against crime and not this eloquent
spectators speaking from the exaggerated comforts of their own elsewhere.

I am sorry, but these are not examples to be held before the youth of our
country.

Mr President, in 1906 Pixley ka Seme wrote:
  The giant is awakening. From the four corners of the earth, Africa’s sons
  ...

And here I want to add, “and Africa’s daughters” ...

  who have been proved through fire and sword are marching to the future’s
  golden door, bearing the records of deeds of valour done.

One hundred and one years later, the golden door is in sight, the quest for
unity amongst the peoples of our continent is still central to our
understanding of a better life for all. Our march through fire and sword
lasted for over four centuries and entailed the defeat of colonialism and
imperialism. For the first time in the history of our continent, we hold
the possibility of shaping our own destiny. We are busy with the task.
[Applause.]

Chairperson, we have been committed to the liberation of the people of
South Africa since 1912 in an organised fashion. We then enshrined the
goals of peace, stability, equality and of building of a better life in the
Freedom Charter in 1955. Moreover, Africans across the continent and our
movement amongst them understood and accepted that whilst one country in
our continent was not free, all were not free. It explains therefore why
nations across our continent, in spite of their problems, made firm their
commitment to supporting the democratisation of this country. And today, in
our own country, that goal has come through and we are seized with that
vision and with that spirit.

Today we keep to the view that without peace without security, there can be
no development on the continent. Without peace and stability in the
continent of Africa, there can be no peace and stability in South Africa.
Thus we have no option, but to address the various conflicts still raging
on our continent.

Mr President, in this regard your leadership must not waiver; our movement
should not waiver behind you. We must continue to deal with the problems at
home, but our contribution to the advancement of the continent is
imperative. [Applause.] Last week, the World Bank released a study and it
says:


  Conflicts are now arguably the single most important determinant of
  poverty in Africa, that recent research suggests that the incidents and
  severity of conflicts in Africa have had a robust negative effect on the
  growth rate of incomes. Countries that experienced civil wars had an
  average income of 50% lower than those of countries that experienced no
  civil war.

A study released a little earlier in 2004 confirms that:

  The direct cost of war is only a fraction, often less than 10%, of the
  indirect costs. Far more people die from more related diseases and
  malnutrition than from battle deaths. The implications of these conflicts
  need to be understood if the urgency of their resolution is to be
  prioritised.

They cannot be subject to knee-jerk reactions and one size fits all
solutions. And South Africa cannot take part in the drive to resolve these
conflicts when it has the luxury to do so. I am therefore proud to announce
that our past interventions have so far had a telling impact on the
continent. But, as the World Bank report says:

  The fact that wars are ended doesn’t necessarily mean that their
  underlying causes have been addressed. For peace to be sustainable over
  the long run the root causes of conflict need to be addressed.

That explains why, although we resolved the Burundi problem sometime ago in
terms of going to elections, South Africa has sustained the presence of
some of her contingents in order to enable that fledgeling democracy to
take route and to be able to sustain itself.

Consequently, we are adjusting our approach and introducing in the training
of our people, content that improves the impact of our interventions. The
men and women who are now going out into Africa to do peace support
operations are being armed with capacity, not only to deal with the raging
conflict but to be able, beyond the resolution, to assist the communities
in which they operate.

They are redirecting their energies into those activities that begin to lay
the foundation for the development of those countries. The strengthening of
the African Union, the SADC, the creation of the Africa Standby Force and
the SADC Brigade, are all parts of a battery or strategies that both our
countries and neighbours use to resolve conflicts in order to encourage
development and to create a better life for all on the continent.

I said in December last year, and I know that this raised some questions in
certain quarters, that South Africa will be the last to leave the DRC.
There is no possibility that we can leave such a huge country that has both
the potential, if properly guided and protected and supported, to advance
development not only inside that country but impact on the nine other
countries that surround it.

That is a situation that is in the lap of Africans. Europeans will probably
withdraw from the DRC when it suits them, because they are far located from
where we are and from where the problem is. Africans have no choice. Mr
President, again, we must not hesitate in insisting that our nation should,
without sacrificing domestic programmes, continue to support the efforts of
the people of the DRC by way of sustaining our presence there in order to
keep stability in place. Threats to our very existence on this planet are
prevalent and must be confronted, they are more than just a question of
conflict on the continent. The threat, for instance, of nuclear weapons is
real and continues to be a serious cause for concern.
South Africa is one of the countries leading the drive for the
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and we are doing that in our cares for
peace and a safe world. The destruction of the ozone layer and the threat
of environmental degradation must be tackled in our global as well as our
local and regional forums.

One of the biggest problems facing our world today is the emergence of
superpower unilateralism and the aggressive reactions which unleash
tensions pregnant with the capacity to thrust whole regions into limited
war and indeed even conflagrations. It is therefore important to appreciate
that we did not lead in containment of conflict on the continent, others
without our sensitivity will find space to drive the continent deep into
the morass of a disaster. [Time expired.]

           FOODSTUFFS, COSMETICS AND DISINFECTANTS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)


There was no debate.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved:

  That the House refuses to pass the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants
  Amendment Bill as amended by the National Council of Provinces.
Agreed to.

Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill accordingly not
passed.

The House adjourned at 18:19.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                          FRIDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

     (1)    The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker in accordance with Rule 234:

         (a)     Public Finance Management Amendment Bill (Mr E W Trent)
         In accordance with Rule 235 the legislative proposal has been
         referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
         Proposals and Special Petitions.

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061117E-insert – PAGES 2815-2916



                          MONDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2006


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061120E-insert1 – PAGES 2918-2935

National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061120E-insert2 – PAGES 2936-2976

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T061120E-insert3 – PAGES 2977-2979


                          MONDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly

      (1)   The following member will vacate his seat in the National
           Assembly with effect from 2 December 2006:

           Jankielsohn, R.

      (2)   The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly
           with effect from 1 October 2006:

           Ramphele, T D H.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      1.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

           (a)   The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 18
                 October 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
                 informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of the
                 South African National Defence Force in the Democratic
                 Republic of Congo.
      2.    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration and the Portfolio Committee on
           Arts and Culture:
           (a)   Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture to the
                 Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
                 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No
                 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
                 Annual Reports of the Robben Island Museum and the
                 Playhouse Company for 2005-2006.

      3.    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration and the Portfolio Committee on
           Transport:

           (a)   Letter from the Minister of Transport, dated 31 October
                 2006, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
                 section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
                 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of
                 the Annual Reports of the Road Traffic Management
                 Corporation and the Urban Transport Fund for 2005-2006.

      4.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Report
           of the Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing
           Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Academy of Science of
                 South Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
                 Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
                 2006.
      5.    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration and the Portfolio Committee on
           Communications:

           (a)   Letter from the Minister of Communications, dated 3
                 November 2006, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
                 terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
                 Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
                 tabling of the Annual Report of the National Electronic
                 Media Institute of South Africa for 2005-2006.

     6.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of
           the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela
                 National Museum for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
                 Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
                 [RP 192-2006].

           (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island
                 Museum for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
                 General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 217-
                 2006].

     7.     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration and the Portfolio Committee on
           Correctional Services:

           (a)   Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified
                 during a performance audit of official departmental
                 accommodation at the Department of Correctional Services –
                 September 2006 [RP 254-2006].

     8.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Finance for consideration and report:

          (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
                 regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
                 Administrations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                 Constitution, 1996.

          (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran regarding Mutual
                 Assistance between their Customs Administrations.

          (c)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
                 Congo regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
                 Administrations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                 Constitution, 1996.

          (d)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo regarding
                 Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations.

     9.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Report of
           the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and
                 Human Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2005-
                 2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General for 2005-
                 2006.

              b) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme
                 for 2005-2006.


     10.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry:

           (a)   Government Notice No R.873 published in Government Gazette
                 No 29186 dated 1 September 2006: International Trade
                 Administration Commission of South Africa: Import
                 restrictions on textiles and clothing originating from the
                 People’s Republic of China, in terms of the International
                 Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002)

           (b)   Government Notice No R.949 published in Government Gazette
                 No 29245 dated 21 September 2006: Prescribed Time Frame for
                 Free Credit Records, and Determination of Application and
                 Registration Fees, in terms of the national Credit Act,
                 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).

           (c)   Government Notice No 928 published in Government Gazette
                 No 29233 dated 22 September 2006: Incorporation of an
                 external company as a company in the Republic of South
                 Africa: Star Gaze Limited, in terms of the Companies Act,
                 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).

           (d)   Government Notice No 960 published in Government Gazette
                 No 29256 dated 29 September 2006: Incorporation of an
                 external company as a company in the Republic of South
                 Africa: Portfolio Deal Services Limited, in terms of the
                 Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).

           (e)   Government Notice No 995 published in Government Gazette
                 No 29277 dated 13 October 2006: Standards Matters, in terms
                 of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

     11.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Transport for
           consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General is
           referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
           consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education
                 and Training Authority (Teta) for 2005-2006, including the
                 Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
                 for 2005-2006.

     12.    The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring
           Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women
           and the Ad Hoc Committee on Review of State Institutions
           Supporting Constitutional Democracy and Public Service
           Commission for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on
                 Gender Equality (CGE) for 2005-2006, including the Report
                 of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-
                 2006.

     13.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
           Reports of the Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
           Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the
                 year ended 30 June 2006, including the Report of the
                 Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the
                 year ended 30 June 2006.

           (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water for
                 the year ended 30 June 2006, including the Report of the
                 Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the
                 year ended 30 June 2006.

     14.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

           (a)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa and the African Union on
                 Contributing Resources to the African Union Mission in
                 Burundi (AMIB), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                 Constitution, 1996.

           (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
                 the African Union on Contributing Resources to the African
                 Union Mission in Burundi (AMIB).

           (c)   Protocol between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa and the Government of the Republic of Angola on
                 Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
                 the Constitution, 1996.

           (d)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Government of the Republic of Angola on Defence
                 Cooperation.

           (e)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on
                 Military-Technical Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
                 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

           (f)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Government of the Republic of Belarus on Military-Technical
                 Cooperation.

           (g)   Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Kingdom of Belgium on a Military Partnership, tabled in
                 terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

           (h)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Belgium on a
                 Military Partnership.

           (i)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
                 of Chile on Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
                 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

           (j)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
                the Government of the Republic of Chile on Defence
                Cooperation.

           (k)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                Africa and the Government of the Czech Republic concerning
                the Protection of Classified Defence Information, tabled in
                terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

           (l)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                Government of the Czech Republic concerning the Protection
                of Classified Defence Information.

           (m)   Supplementary Arrangement between the Government of the
                Republic of South Africa, through its Department of Defence,
                and the Federal Ministry of Defence of the Federal Republic
                of Germany concerning the Provision of Support during
                Exercise Good Hope from 6 February 2006 to 20 March 2006,
                tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

           (n)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Supplementary Arrangement
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa,
                 through its Department of Defence, and the Federal Ministry
                 of Defence of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
                 the Provision of Support during Exercise Good Hope from 6
                 February 2006 to 20 March 2006.

           (o)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
                 of India concerning the Training of South African Navy
                 Personnel by the Indian Navy, tabled in terms of section
                 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

           (p)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
                 the Government of the Republic of India concerning the
                 Training of South African Navy Personnel by the Indian
                 Navy.

           (q)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa and the Government of the Republic of India on
                 Supplies of Defence Equipment, tabled in terms of section
                 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

           (r)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Government of the Republic of India on Supplies of Defence
                 Equipment.

           (s)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa, as represented by the South African Department of
                 Defence, and the Government of the Republic of Mali, as
                 represented by the Malian Ministry of Defence and War
                 Veterans, on Defence and Technical Cooperation, tabled in
                 terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

           (t)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa, as represented
                 by the South African Department of Defence, and the
                 Government of the Republic of Mali, as represented by the
                 Malian Ministry of Defence and War Veterans, on Defence and
                 Technical Cooperation.

          (u)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa and the Government of the Russian Federation on
                 Reciprocal Protection of Intellectual Property Rights used
                 and established in the course of Bilateral Defence-
                 Industrial Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
                 of the Constitution, 1996.

          (v)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Government of the Russian Federation on Reciprocal
                 Protection of Intellectual Property Rights used and
                 established in the course of Bilateral Defence-Industrial
                 Cooperation.

          (w)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa and the Government of the Russian Federation
                 concerning Protection of Classified Defence and Defence-
                 Industrial Related Information, tabled in terms of section
                 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          (x)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Government of the Russian Federation concerning Protection
                 of Classified Defence and Defence-Industrial Related
                 Information.

          (y)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa, through its Department of
                 Defence, and the Ministry of National Defence of the
                 Republic of Tunisia concerning Military Cooperation, tabled
                 in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          (z)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa,
                 through its Department of Defence, and the Ministry of
                 National Defence of the Republic of Tunisia concerning
                 Military Cooperation.

          (aa)   Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
                 of Uganda concerning Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms
                 of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          (bb)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
                 the Government of the Republic of Uganda concerning Defence
                 Cooperation.

         (cc)    Supplementary Arrangement between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
                 Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning
                 the Provision of Support during Exercises, Training and
                 Operations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                 Constitution, 1996.

         (dd)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Supplementary Arrangement
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
                 the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
                 Northern Ireland concerning the Provision of Support during
                 Exercises, Training and Operations.

         (ee)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
                 Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning
                 the provision of personnel of the United Kingdom Armed
                 Forces and the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence to advise
                 the Department of Defence of the Republic of South Africa
                 on aspects of Democratic Defence Management and Peace
                 Support Operations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
                 the Constitution, 1996.

         (ff)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
                 the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
                 Northern Ireland concerning the Provision of Personnel of
                 the United Kingdom Armed Forces and the United Kingdom
                 Ministry of Defence to advise the Department of Defence of
                 the Republic of South Africa on Aspects of Democratic
                 Defence Management and Peace Support Operations.
         (gg)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
                 Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning
                 the Provision of Personnel of the United Kingdom Armed
                 Forces and the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence to advise
                 the Department of Defence of the Republic of South Africa
                 on Aspects of Democratic Defence Management and Peace
                 Support Operations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
                 the Constitution, 1996.

         (hh)    Memorandum of Understanding between the United Nations and
                 the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
                 Contributing Resources to United Nations Operation in
                 Burundi (ONUB), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                 Constitution, 1996.

         (ii)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                 between the United Nations and the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa on Contributing Resources to
                 United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB).

         (jj)    Declaration of Understanding between the Government of the
                 Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
                 States of America concerning the Provision of Equipment and
                 Training from the Department of State of the United States
                 of America under the African Contingency Operations
                 Training and Assistance Programme to the South African
                 Department of Defence, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
                 the Constitution, 1996.

         (kk)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Declaration of Understanding
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
                 the Government of the United States of America concerning
                 the Provision of Equipment and Training from the Department
                 of State of the United States of America under the African
                 Contingency Operations Training and Assistance Programme to
                 the South African Department of Defence.

         (ll)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                Republic of South Africa, as represented by its Department
                of Defence, and the Ministry of Defence of the Socialist
                Republic of Vietnam concerning Defence Cooperation, tabled
                in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (mm)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                between the Government of the Republic of South Africa, as
                represented by its Department of Defence, and the Ministry
                of Defence of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam concerning
                Defence Cooperation.

            an) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
                Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
                of Zimbabwe concerning the Secondment of Air Force of
                Zimbabwe Personnel to the South African Department of
                Defence, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                Constitution, 1996.


         (oo)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
                 between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
                 the Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe concerning the
                 Secondment of the Air Force of Zimbabwe Personnel to the
                 South African Department of Defence.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      (a)   Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General on the submission of
           financial statements by municipalities and the status of audit
           reports as at 30 September 2006 [RP 258-2006].


                          TUESDAY, 28 NOVEMBER 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 28 November
        2006:
          a) Civil Union Bill [B 26B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).


                         THURSDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      (1)   Civil Union Bill [B 26B – 2006] – Act No 17 of 2006 (assented to
           and signed by Acting President on 29 November 2006).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly

      (1)   The following member will vacate his seat in the National
           Assembly with effect from 1 December 2006:

           Jankielsohn, R.
           Please note: The above announcement replaces item 1 under
           “Membership of the Assembly” on page 2981 of the Announcements,
           Tablings and Committee Reports of 27 November 2006.

      (2)   The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr R Jankielsohn vacating
           his seat in the National Assembly with effect from 1 December
           2006, will be filled with effect from 2 December 2006 by the
           nomination of Mr A J Botha.

2.    Panel for National Council for Library and Information Services

      The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, having considered the
      list of names submitted to it in terms of section 7(2)(a) of the
      National Council for Library and Information Services Act, No 6 of
      2001, approved the composition of the panel to shortlist candidates
      for appointment to the National Council for Library and Information
      Services on 14 December 2006.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (1)   Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for 2005-2006,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

      (2)   Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for 2005-
           2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

      (3)   Report and Financial Statements of Namakwa Water Board for 2005-
           2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

      (4)   Report and Financial Statements of Pelladrift Water Board for
           2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

      (5)   Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for 2005-2006,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

      (6)   Increase in water tariffs for 2006-07 by the Bushbuckridge
           Water, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
           Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

      (7)   Increase in water tariffs for 2006-07 by the Mhlathuze Water,
           tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
           Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 27
      November 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
      Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
      National Defence Force in the Republic of Madagascar:

      EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
      DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE
      INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE
      REPUBLIC OF MADACASCAR IN SUPPORT OF ELECTORAL PROCESS

      This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have authorised the
      employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
      personnel to the Republic of Madagascar, in fulfillment of the
      international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the
      Republic of Madagascar in support of the electoral process. The
      elections in the Republic of Madagascar are scheduled to take place on
      03 December 2006.


      This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
      section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
      1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of
      2002).


      A total of 31 members will be employed as from 16 December 2006. The
      total estimated cost to be borne by the Department of Foreign Affairs
      from the African Renaissance Fund for the deployment of the personnel
      is R 6, 847, 224. 01


      I will communicate this report to members of the National Council of
      Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
      Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
      attention of the National Assembly.


      Regards,


      signed
      THABO MBEKI

2.    Request from the Minister of Arts and Culture, dated 9 November 2006,
      for the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, in terms of section
      7(2)(a) of the National Council for Library and Information Services
      Act, No 6 of 2001, to approve the composition of a panel to shortlist
      candidates for appointment to the National Council for Library and
      Information Services.

      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture for
      consideration.

3.    Report by the Public Protector on An Investigation in Connection with
      Compliance by Ministers and Deputy Ministers with the Provisions of
      the Executive Ethics Code relating to the Disclosure of Financial
      Interests, submitted by the President of the Republic, together with
      his comments, in terms of section 3(5) of the Executive Members'
      Ethics Act, 1998.

      Referred to the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests for
      consideration.


                         WEDNESDAY, 31 JANUARY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    South African Judicial Education Institute Bill, 2007, submitted
          by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development.
          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
          Development and the Select Committee on Security and
          Constitutional Affairs.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


      1) The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms H Zille vacating her seat in
         the National Assembly with effect from 9 March 2006, has been
         filled with effect from 4 December 2006 by the nomination of Mr S J
         F Marais.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

   Report of the Auditor-General on the Findings identified during an
   Investigation into Alleged Misappropriation of Funds at the National
   Development Agency [RP 262-2006].


2. The Minister of Education


   (a)      Government Notice No 1491 published in the Government Gazette No
       29317 dated 23 October 2006: Call for comment on the Draft National
       Policy Framework for Teacher Education and Development in South
       Africa, made in terms of section 3(4)(f) of the National Education
       Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


   (b)      Government Notice No R 1052 published in the Government Gazette
       No 29311 dated 18 October 2006: Regulations relating to the exemption
       of parents from payment of school fees in Public Schools, made in
       terms of section 39(4) and 61 of the South African Schools Act, 1996
       (Act No 84 of 1996).

   (c)      Government Notice No 1205 published in the Government Gazette No
       29438 dated 1 December 2006: Publication of List of  No Fees Schools
       per province – Declaring No Fee Schools in 2007 for all nine
       provinces, made in terms of section 39(10) of the South African
       Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

3. The Minister of Transport
   (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Argentine Republic for the Co-ordination
        of heir Maritime and Aeronautical Search and Rescue Services, tabled
        in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


   (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Argentine
        Republic for the Co-ordination of heir Maritime and Aeronautical
        Search and Rescue Services.

4. The Minister of Minerals and Energy

   (a)      Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

   (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on the Physical
        Protection of Nuclear Material.

5. The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

   (a)      Government Notice No 1197 published in the Government Gazette No
        29426 dated 28 November 2006: Prohibition in the making of fires in
        the open air in the districts of Clanwilliam, Piketberg, Ceres,
        Tulbagh, Worcester, Caledon, Paarl, Stellenbosch, Strand and
        Somerset West, made in terms of section 25(1) of the Forest Act,
        1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).


   (b)      Government Notice No 1198 published in the Government Gazette No
        29426 dated 28 November 2006: Prohibition in the making of fires in
        the open air in the districts of Caledon, Worcester, Robertson and
        Swellendam. (The Riviersonderend Mountain Range), made in terms of
        section 25(1) of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

   (c)      Government Notice No 1199 published in the Government Gazette No
        29426 dated 28 November 2006: Prohibition in the making of fires in
        the Western Cape, made in terms of section 25(1) of the Forest Act,
        1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

   (d)      Government Notice No 1200 published in the Government Gazette No
        29426 dated 28 November 2006: Prohibition in the making of fires in
        the open air in the districts of Swellendam, Montagu, Worcester and
        Robertson (The Western Langeberg Mountain range), made in terms of
        section 25(1) of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

   (e)      Government Notice No 991 published in the Government Gazette No
        29277 dated 13 October 2006: Establishment of the eDikeni Water User
        Association in the Magisterial District of Victoria East, Province
        of the Eastern Cape, Water Management Number 12, made in terms of
        section 92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

   (f)      Government Notice No 998 published in the Government Gazette No
        29277 dated 13 October 2006: Withdrawal of restrictions on the use
        of water for agricultural purposes from the Bronkhorstspruit River
        and its tributaries (Tertiary Catchments 820A, 820B, 820C, and 820D
        and the withdrawal of restrictions on the use of water for urban and
        industrial purpose from Bronkhorstspruit Dam and Village Dam[Premier
        Mine Dam]), made in terms of section 63 read with section 72 of the
        National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

   (g)      Government Notice No 999 published in the Government Gazette No
        29277 dated 13 October 2006: Withdrawal of restrictions on the use
        of water for agricultural purposes in the Inkomati Water Management
        Area, made in terms of section 63 read with section 72 of the
        National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

   (h)      Government Notice No 857 published in the Government Gazette No
        29154 dated 1 September 2006: Transformation of the Keurbos River
        Irrigation Board in the Magisterial District of George, Western Cape
        Province into Maalgate Water User Association, Water Management Area
        Number 16, Western Cape Province, made in terms of section 98(6) of
        the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

   (i)      Government Notice No 897 published in the Government Gazette No
        29062 dated 8 September 2006: Notice of List of Protected Tree
        Species, made in terms of 12(1)(d) of the National Forests Act, 1998
        (Act No 84 of 1998).

   (j)      Government Notice No 900 published in the Government Gazette No
        29205 dated 15 September 2006: Establishment of the Thukela
        Catchment Management Agency (Water Management Area Number 7) in the
        Province of KwaZulu-Natal, made in terms of section 78(1) of the
        National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


National Assembly

1. The Speaker


   (a)      The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following
        letter dated 20 December 2006 to the Speaker of the National
        Assembly informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of the
        South African National Defence Force in Burundi:

        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN BURUNDI
        FOR SERVICE IN THE FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF
        THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have authorised
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to Burundi, in fulfilment of the international obligations
        of the Republic of South Africa towards the African Union as part of
        the African Union Special Task Force in Burundi. The South African
        National Defence personnel will assist in providing security to
        leaders and combatants of the Palipehutu-FNL.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).
        A total of 11000 members are employed in Burundi as from 20 December
        2006 to 31 July 2007 to provide security to leaders and combatants
        of the Palipehutu-FNL.


        The total estimated cost to be borne by the government of the
        Republic of South Africa for the deployment will be R 86, 523, 167
        for the financial year 2006 / 2007 and R 101, 446, 938 for the
        financial year 2007 / 2008. The Department of Defence will be
        responsible for the cost of the deployment.
        I will communicate this report to the members of the National
        Council of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence, and wish to request that you bring the
        contents hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        P MLAMBO-NGCUKA
        ACTING PRESIDENT


CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T070131E-insert1 – PAGES 5-53

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T070131E-insert2 – PAGES 54-78


                           MONDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Carriage By Air Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2006] – Act No 15 of 2006
         (assented to and signed by President on 14 December 2006)
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


   1. The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Protocol on Finance and Investment of the Southern African
          Development Community, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
          Constitution, 1996.


      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol on Finance and Investment
          of the Southern African Development Community.

      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
          on the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for the year
          ended 31 December 2005 [RP 94-2006].

      (d)   Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
          Deposits for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


      (e)   Draft Regulations issued under Section 91A of the Income Tax
          Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962), prescribing the circumstances
          under which the Commissioner may write off or comprise any amount
          of Tax, Duty, Levy, Charge, Interest, Penalty or other amount.

   2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Criminal Assets Recovery
          Account for 1999-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements for 1999-2005 [RP 249-2006].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Criminal Assets Recovery
          Account for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 248-2006].

      (c)   Report of the Master of the High Court of South Africa on Moneys
          in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2002-2003, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Summary of Statements of
          Moneys in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2002-2003.

      (d)   Report of Monies in Trust for 2003-2004, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General issued in the absence of Financial Statements
          for the Monies in Trust for 2003-2004.

      (e)   Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2003-
          2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Summary
          of Statements of Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for
          2003-2004.

      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of Monies in Trust for 2002-
          2003, including the Report of the Auditor-General issued in the
          absence of Financial Statements for the Monies in Trust for 2002-
          2003.


      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the Guardian’s Fund for 2005-
          2006 including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 263-2006].

      (h)   Proclamation No R46 published in Government Gazette No 29343
          dated 31 October 2006: Commencement of certain sections of the
          Maintenance Act, 1998 (Act No 99 of 1998).

       i) Government Notice No R1099 published in Government Gazette No
          29347 dated 3 November 2006: Amendment of Regulations relating to
          Maintenance, made in terms of section 44 of the Maintenance Act,
          1998 (Act No 99 of 1998).


   3. The Minister of Arts and Culture


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
          Language Board (PANSALB) 2005-2006, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 264-
          2006].


National Assembly

1. The Speaker


   (a)      Reply from the Independent Electoral Commission to
        recommendations in the Eighty-First Report of the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts, as adopted by the House on 7 November
        2006.
   (b)      Reply from the South African Weather Service to recommendations
        in the Seventy-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts, as adopted by the House on 7 November 2006.


        Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts

   (c)      Reply from Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
        recommendations in the report of Portfolio Committee on Water
        Affairs and Forestry on Oversight of 2004/2005 Annual Reports and
        Oral Presentations of Water Boards, as adopted by the House on 7
        September 2006.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry


                          THURSDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

     (1)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2006] – Act No 20 of 2006
         (assented to and signed by President on 3 February 2007)
     (2)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2006] – Act No 21 of
         2006 (assented to and signed by President on 5 February 2007)

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


    (1)    Housing Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill, 2007,
         submitted by the Minister of Housing. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Housing and the Select Committee on Public Services.

3.    Message from President

    The Speaker and the Chairperson received the following message, dated 5
    February 2007, from the President, calling a Joint Sitting of the
    National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces:
[pic]
4.    Membership of Committees

    (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees:

         Budget

         Appointed: Dambuza, Ms N; Fubbs, Ms J L; Mkongi, Mr B M (Alt);
         Mnguni, Mr B A (Alt); Schippers, Mr J (Alt); Schneemann, Mr G D

         Discharged: Gumede, Mr D M; Mahomed, Ms F

         Constitutional Review

         Appointed: Chohan-Khota, Ms F I (Alt)
         Defence


         Appointed: Daniels, Ms P; Fihla, Mr N B (Alt); Johnson, Ms C B
         (Alt); Koornhof, Dr G W (Alt); Monareng, Mr O E (Alt); Ngcobo, Mr
         N W; Ntuli, Mr S B (Alt); Phungula, Mr J P (Alt); Schippers, Mr J
         (Alt); Seadimo, Ms D M; Tolo, Bishop L J (Alt); Van Wyk, Ms A
         (Alt)

         Discharged: Cele, Mr M A; Sotyu, Ms M M

         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth &
         Disabled Persons
         Appointed: Gcwabaza, Mr N E (Alt); Madella, Mr A F; Mohlaloga, Mr M
        R; Molefe, Mr C T (Alt); Reid, Mr L R R (Alt)

         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women

         Appointed: Direko, Ms I W; Mabena, Mr D C (Alt); Meruti, Ms M V
         (Alt); Morobi, Ms D M; Ntuli, Ms B M (Alt); Nxumalo, Ms M

         Discharged: Tshwete, Ms P

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly

    (1)     The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly
        with effect from 1 February 2007:

        Nkem-Abonta, E


     (2)    The following member will vacate his seat in the National
        Assembly with effect from 1 March 2007.

        Manie, S


2.    Membership of Committees

     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
           Portfolio
           Committees:


           Agriculture and Land Affairs

           Appointed: Dlali, Mr D M; Ngcobo, Mr N W (Alt); Ntuli, Ms B M
           (Alt)


           Arts and Culture


           Appointed: Maluleka, Mr H P; Tshwete, Ms P; Zulu, Mr B Z (Alt)


           Communications


           Appointment: Mohlaloga, Mr M R


           Correctional Services


           Appointed: Burgess, Mr C V (Alt); Gerber, Mr P A (Alt);
           Chikunga, Mrs    L S; Nawa, Ms Z N (Alt); Nyambi, Mr A J; Phala,
           Mr M J      (Alt); Vadi, Mr I


           Discharged: Cele, Mr M A; Makgate, Ms M W; Mahote, Mr S


           Defence
           Appointed: Botha, Mr A J; Diale, Mr L N (Alt); Daniels, Ms P;
           Phungula,
           Mr J P (Alt)


           Discharged: Fihla, Mr N B; Johnson, Ms C B


           Education
           Appointed: Mentor, Ms M P (Alt)


           Environmental Affairs and Tourism


           Appointed: Gabanakgosi, Mr P S; Kalako, Mr M U (Alt); Khoarai,
           Mr L  P; Ntuli, Ms M M (Alt); Sekgobela, Ms P S(Alt)


           Finance


           Appointed: Ainslie, Mr A R (Alt); Fubbs, Ms J L (Alt); Mbili, Mr
           M E;  Mokoto, Ms N R


           Health


           Appointed: Madumise, Ms M M; Mashile, Mr B L (Alt); Tlake, Ms M
           F;    Tshwete, Ms P (Alt)


           Discharged: Luthuli, Dr A N


           Housing


           Appointed: Chikunga, Mrs L S (Alt)


           Discharged: Mosala, Mr B G


           Foreign Affairs: Sub-committee on International Affairs


           Appointed: Maluleke, Mr D K (Alt)


           Justice and Constitutional Development


           Appointed: Burgess, Mr C (Alt); Chohan-Khota, Ms F I; Jeffery,
           Mr J H      (Alt); Landers, Mr L T (Alt)


           Discharged: Maloyi, Mr P D N


           Labour


           Appointed: Nene, Mr M J; Lishiivha, Ms T E (Alt)


           Minerals and Energy


           Appointed: Seadimo, Ms D M (Alt)


          Provincial and Local Government


          Appointed: Bhengu, Ms P (Alt); Mashiane, Ms L M (Alt)


          Public Enterprises


          Appointed: Kholwane, Mr S E; Louw, Mr T J (Alt); Ngcengwane, Ms N
          D (Alt); Nogumla, Mr R Z
          Discharged: Mokoena, Mr A D; Mokoto, Ms N R; Pieterse, Mr R D;
          Yengeni, Mrs L E


          Public Service and Administration
          Appointed: Mentor, Ms M P (Alt); Mthembu, Mr B; Nyambi, Mr A J;
          Tlake, Ms M F (Alt)


          Discharged: Greyling, Mr C H F; Mathebe, Mr P M; Mgabadeli, Ms H
          C;     Mlangeni, Mr A; Mzondeki, Mr M J G


          Public Works


          Appointed: Maluleka, Mr H P (Alt)


          Safety and Security


          Appointed: Khumalo, Mr K M (Alt)
          Science and Technology


          Appointed: Nyambi, Mr A J (Alt)


          Social Development


          Appointed: Sibanyoni, Mr J B (Alt)


          Sport and Recreation
          Appointed: Solo, Mr B M (Alt)


          Trade and Industry


          Appointed: Njikelana, Mr S J; Nonkonyana, Chief M (Alt); Ntuli,
         Mrs M   B (Alt)


          Water Affairs and Forestry


          Appointed: Bhengu, Ms P; Combrinck, Mr J J (Alt); Moonsamy, Mr K


          Discharged: Kati, Mr Z J


    (2)     The following changes have been made to the membership of
          Standing
          Committees:


          Auditor-General
          Appointed: Gabanakgosi, Mr P S; Mahlaba, Mr T L; Nene, Mr M J;
          Ngcobo, Mr N W; Zulu, Mr B Z; Smith, Mr V G (Alt)


          Discharged: Asiya, Mr S E; Fubbs, Ms J L; Zita, Mr L

         Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions


         Discharged: Kondlo, Ms N C; Tshwete, Ms P (Alt)


         Public Accounts


         Appointed: Hogan, Ms B A (Alt)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Public Accountants’ and
          Auditors’ Board for the 15-month period ending 31 March 2006,
          including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
          Statements for the 15-month period ending 31 March 2006.

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Executive Officer of the
          Financial Services Board on the Road Accident Fund for 2004-2005.

      (c)   General Notice No 59 published in Government Gazette No 29556
         dated 24 January 2007: Draft Regulations issued under section 13,
         tabled in terms of section 13(3) of the Small Business Tax Amnesty
         and Amendment of Taxation Laws Act, 2006 (Act No 6 of 2006).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Proclamation No R49 published in Government Gazette No 29456
         dated 7 December 2007: Amendment of Proclamation, in terms of the
         Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act
         No 74 of 1996).

    (b)     Proclamation No R50 published in Government Gazette No 29456
         dated 7 December 2007: Referral of matter to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

    (c)     Government Notice No R990 published in Government Gazette No
        29278 dated 13 October 2007: Regulations regarding the Promotion of
        Access to Information, made in terms of the Promotion of Access to
        Information Act, 1996 (Act No 2 of 2000).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Bloem Water for the year
        ended 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the year
        ended 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern Water for
        the year ended 2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for the year
        ended 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.


                          MONDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2007


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Monies in Trust for 2004-
           2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General issued in the
           absence of Financial Statements for the Monies in Trust for 2004-
           2005 [RP 255-2006].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
           Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2005-2006, including the
           Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           for 2005-2006.
      (b)   Annual Report of The Office of the Consumer Protection for 2005-
      2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

CREDA  INSERT REPORT - Insert T070212E-insert – PAGES 109-120



