---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-03-08
---

THURSDAY, 8 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The House Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on
the next sitting day I shall move:

   That the House-


   (1)      expresses its strong disapproval of the fact that the report of
         the ad hoc committee appointed to propose what action Parliament
         should take in respect of the Travelgate fraudsters was handed to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson of the National Council of
         Provinces on 8 February 2007, but has not yet been tabled in this
         House or debated; and
   (2)      enquires whether the Speaker and the Chairperson disagree with
         the recommendations of the ad hoc committee and, if so, whether
         this is the reason for the failure to inform the House of those
         recommendations.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move:

   That the House is of the opinion that unspent funds of state departments
   be returned to taxpayers in the form of tax credits.

                 ANNIVERSARY OF THREE DOCTORS’ PACT OF 1947

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House-


   (1)      notes that tomorrow, 9 March 2007, marks the 60th anniversary of
        the Three Doctors’ Pact signed in 1947 by Dr A B Xuma of the
        African National Congress, Dr G M Naicker of the Natal Indian
        Congress and Dr U M Dadoo of the Transvaal Indian Congress;


   (2)      recalls that the Three Doctors’ Pact expressed its sincerest
        conviction that for the future progress, goodwill, good race
        relations, and for the building of a united, greater and free South
        Africa, full franchise rights must be extended to all sections of
        the South African people;


   (3)      further recalls that the three organisations recognised that
        unity in action among the people is fundamental to the advancement
        of the liberation struggle; and


   (4)      calls on all South Africans to work tirelessly for the
        realisation of the goal of a better life for all and social
        justice.


Agreed to.

             MONEY ALLOCATED FOR IMPROVEMENTS IN MZIMKHULU AREA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz N M MAHLAWE (ANC): Sihlalo, umhla we-19 nowama-20 kweyeDwarha, kunyaka
ophelileyo, ziintsuku ezingasayi kuze zilityalwe ngabantu bengingqi
yaseSisonke KwaZulu-Natala, ngakumbi kwabesithili saseMzimkhulu. Ezi
ziintsuku apho uMongameli weli lizwe, ohloniphekileyo uQabane Thabo Mbeki,
wathi wandwendwela esi sithili eRiverside. Olu tyelelo ke luthe lwaba
neziqhamo ezincumisayo nezivuyisayo kubantu baseMzimkhulu. UMongameli uthe
jize umasipala waseMzimkhulu ngama-31,9 ezigidi zeerandi. Umasipala
uyicalucalule kakuhle le mali.

Okokuqala ezimbalini, lo masipala uza kukwazi ukuba afake imibhobho
kwisithili sonke, eza kutsala amanzi ukuze afakwe kwiindawo ngeendawo.
Kwakhona, zonke izikimu zamanzi zaseMzimkhulu ziza kuvuselelwa ukuze
kufakwe amanzi acocekileyo kwimizi ngemizi ebingenawo amanzi, kunye nombane
kwiiwadi ezintathu ebezisebumnyameni.

Bathi abantu baseMzimkhulu: Nangamso, Sijadu, Zizi elimnyama neenkomo zalo,
ngokusipha ubomi obungcono. Ze wenze njalo nakwabanye. Ndiyabulela.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs N M MAHLAWE (ANC): Chairperson, the days 19 and 20 October 2006 will
never be forgotten by the people of the Sisonke district in KwaZulu-Natal,
especially those from the Mzimkhulu district. These are days on which the
President of this country, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, visited this district in
Riverside. This visit was fruitful to the people of Mzimkhulu. The
President allocated an amount of R31,9 million to the Mzimkhulu
Municipality, which was accordingly divided for different projects.

This will enable the municipality to install water pipes that will supply
different areas in the whole district with water for the first time in its
history. Furthermore, all Mzimkhulu water schemes will be revitalised in
order that clean water can be supplied to all households to which it was
previously not accessible. Electricity will also be supplied to three wards
that had no electricity at all.

The people of Mzimkhulu sing your praises, and they say: Well done, Sijadu,
one from the Zizis – he who is, like his cows, black. [Applause.]]

                        GREEN POINT STADIUM FOR 2010

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr T D LEE (DA): Voorsitter, dit is verregaande dat mev Helen Zille, die
persoon wat die belastingbetaler in Kaapstad se belange op die hart dra, in
die ontwikkeling van die Groenpunt-stadion deur mnr Mcebisi Skwatsha
daarvan beskuldig word dat sy met “haar speletjies” Kaapstad se kans om ’n
gasheerstad in die 2010-Wêreldbeker te wees in die gevaar stel.

Dit is geensins onduidelik dat daar ’n definitiewe geldelike tekort bestaan
vir die aanbou van die nuwe Groenpunt-stadion nie, en dat nóg die stad
Kaapstad nóg die Wes-Kaap as provinsie in staat is om die tekort te
finansier. Die versigtigheid waarmee mev Zille die saak benader is dus nie
’n poging om Kaapstad se kans om die sokkertoernooi aan te bied in gedrang
te bring nie, maar ’n voorbeeld van verantwoordelike en verantwoordbare
leierskap. Mnr Skwatsha kan dalk iets by haar leer.

Die DA steun met oorgawe Suid-Afrika en Kaapstad se poging om die beste
Sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi aan te bied, maar wil die ANC-regering weer eens
ten sterkste aanmoedig om eienaarskap te neem van die stede se pogings en
’n bereidwilligheid te openbaar om hulp te verleen, in welke vorm dit ook
al mag nodig wees. Dit is nie regverdig om die belastingbetalers te belas
met ’n finansiële verpligting wat hulle nie kan nakom nie. Ek dank u. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr T D LEE (DA): Chairperson, it is preposterous that Mr Mcebisi Skwatsha,
with regard to the development of the Green Point Stadium, is accusing Mrs
Helen Zille, the person who has the interests of the taxpayers in Cape Town
at heart, of jeopardising Cape Town’s chance to act as a host city in the
2010 FIFA World Cup by way of the “games” she is playing.

It is clear that there is a definite monetary shortfall with regard to the
construction of the new Green Point Stadium, and neither the City of Cape
Town nor the Western Cape as a province is able to finance the shortfall.
The cautionary manner in which Mrs Zille is approaching this matter is,
therefore, not an effort to jeopardise Cape Town’s chance to host the
soccer tournament, but an example of responsible and accountable
leadership. Perhaps Mr Skwatsha can learn something from her.

The DA wholeheartedly supports the effort by South Africa and Cape Town to
host the best Soccer World Cup Tournament, but would, once again, in the
strongest terms encourage the ANC to take ownership of the cities’ efforts
and to demonstrate a willingness to render assistance in whatever form it
might be necessary. It is not fair to burden the taxpayers with a financial
obligation that they are unable to fulfil. I thank you. [Time expired.]]

                BUDGET CUTS IN MARINE AND COASTAL MANAGEMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP notes with great concern that
the research budget of Marine and Coastal Management has been cut
drastically to about half of what it recently was.

The research budget is used to do annual fish stock surveys on which MCM
then bases the amount of fish that can be caught by the various permit
holders. What is even more shocking is that MCM has apparently now asked
fishing companies to make additional contributions to it so that the
research can be carried out. This is particularly worrying because the
fishing companies already have to fork out substantial levies to MCM for
exactly this purpose.

One consequence of inadequate research into the health of fish stocks is
that South Africa might lose its marine stewardship certificate, something
which European customers insist on. If we do lose this certificate it would
have dire consequences for our fish exports to the continent. The Auditor-
General recently uncovered a number of accounting problems at the Marine
Living Resources Fund and qualified its audit report. Marine Coastal
Management is also responsible for the fund and, taken together with these
latest revelations, it is clear that MCM is in trouble. [Time expired.]




                        EDUCATION POLICIES – GRADE R


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms R J MASHIGO (ANC): Chairperson, Sadtu women educators in the Thabazimbi
region of Limpopo were addressed by the Deputy Director-General of
Education on 3 March 2007. The dialogue reiterated the fact that the
educators’ priority is the education of learners.

What came out clearly was the fact that some teachers had to understand
that neither should Grade R learners be mixed with Grade 1 learners, as
Grade R learners are there for stimulation, nor should their programmes be
the same.

Grade R is actually for stimulation and this, in the areas like the
disadvantaged communities, should be taken into cognisance because they
need stimulation before they go to Grade 1. The Deputy Director-General,
Mrs Tyobeka, will follow this issue up and organise a meeting with the
foundation phase educators.

The ANC applauds the step taken by the department in this regard. Thank
you. [Applause.]




                              HUMAN TRAFFICKING


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S N SWART (ACDP): Chairperson, on 23 February 2007, the bicentenary date
of the Slave Trade Abolition Act passed in the British House of Lords was
officially celebrated in many countries. This Act was the result of
tireless efforts of the parliamentarian, William Wilberforce, one of the
greatest reformers in British history who, motivated by his Christian
faith, for 18 years campaigned to end the slave trade.

Regrettably, 200 years later slavery still exists, despite the fact that it
is banned in most of the countries where it is practised. Women from
Eastern Europe are bonded into prostitution; children are trafficked
between West African countries and men are forced to work as slaves on
agricultural estates, and that is not to mention the slavery that still
exists in the Sudan.

Other forms of slavery include bonded labour, early, enforced marriage,
slavery by descent and child labour. The question is whether
parliamentarians worldwide will be prepared, like William Wilberforce, to
similarly dedicate themselves to the eradication of all forms of modern-day
slavery.

We particularly need to support anti-slavery movements worldwide,
particularly in this bicentenary year. Let us seize the abolitionist
spirit. Thank you.


                               CLIMATE CHANGE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Chairperson, climate change is an impending global
catastrophe and it will affect the livelihoods of people across the world,
particularly the most vulnerable who live in developing countries. It is
imperative for us to take action now to avoid the dangerous destabilisation
of the earth’s climate. This requires action on an international, national
and local level. It also requires action on an individual level.

Today I did what most politicians are loathe to do: I got my hands dirty. I
am not talking about corrupt activities; I am talking about planting trees.
I planted 20 trees at schools in Philippi and Khayelitsha to offset my
carbon emissions from air travel. Due to the nature of our work, Members of
Parliament have a high carbon footprint, because of air travel.

I therefore urge all members of this House to stand up as leaders and also
offset their emissions by purchasing trees and planting them in needy
areas. I also call on Parliament to institute an initiative whereby our
collective emissions can be offset by either tree planting or investments
in renewal energy sources.

As the hon Minister of Finance said last year, the environment is not a
party-political issue, but it must be the responsibility of us all. This is
an opportunity to rise to the challenge and prove to the public that we
take responsibility for all the hot air that we produce in this House.
Thank you.




                        ERADICATION OF BUCKET SYSTEM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mof N N MADUMISE (ANC): Modulasetulo, ke ema mona ka ho hlahisa polelo ka
kaho ya matlwana, eleng “Eradication of Bucket System” mane Masepaleng wa
Matjhabeng, moo nna ke dulang teng. Mokgahlo o moholo wa ANC o boetse o
bontshitse botshepehi ba ona, ka ho neha bo-masepala tjhelete ya kaho ya
matlwana. Sepheo e le ho fedisa tshebediso ya mabakete metseng e
fapaneng,jwalo ka ha Mopresidente Mbeki a tshepisitse puong ya hae ya pulo
ya Palamete selemong sena.

Kahoo mothating ona, masepala wa Matjhabeng o bonahala o le matholeng a ho
phethahatsa thomo eo o e entseng dikgethong tse fetileng tsa bo-masepala,
ka ho ahela baahi ba se nang matlwana, matlwana dibakeng tsa Meloding,
Kutlwanong le Phomolong.

Hona ho tla phethelwa ka kaho ya matlwana a 7 000, le ho fana kapa ho
hlahisa mesebetsi ya nakwana batjheng ba ... [Nako e fedile.] (Translation
of Sesotho member’s statement follows.)

[Ms N N MADUMISE (ANC): Chairperson, I want to comment on the eradication
of the bucket system in the Matjhabeng municipality, where I stay. The ANC
has again showcased its commitment by giving municipalities funds for
sanitation. The objective is to eradicate the bucket system in our
communities, as President Mbeki promised in the state of the nation address
this year.

Matjhabeng municipality is therefore on the verge of accomplishing its
mandate set in the past municipal elections. It has built toilets in areas
of Meloding, Kutlwanong and Phomolong.

This will be completed by building 7 000 toilets and giving or creating
temporary job opportunities for the youth of ... [Time expired.]]

                        INEFFICIENT SERVICE DELIVERY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M T LIKOTSI (PAC): The PAC of Azania wishes to bring to the attention of
this House that as we are comfortably seated in this Chamber, there is
economic, social and political unrest in North West at Ikageng, Boikhutso,
Boitumelo, Khutsong and some other areas such as the Barcelona informal
settlement extensions 25, 26 and 27 at Ekurhuleni due to inefficient
service delivery. The PAC wants to repeat what it said in the past: Our
people are fast losing patience, and due to their revolutionary background
they will do anything to fight any form of oppression that comes their way.

The councillors, provinces and the Cabinet must stop intellectualising
about service delivery and provide people with what they want: employment
opportunities, housing, better equipped educational and health facilities,
equitable distribution of land and wealth. Let us all, as the members of
this House, get out of our shell and attend to the grievances of the
struggling masses of our country, nationally. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    RAPE AND MURDER OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Chairperson, the rape and murder of women and children
is a serious reality. While the tragedy and loss affect all of us, we need
to realise that there are many more horrific and barbarous crimes of rape
and murder that we do not hear of, but which occur on a daily basis. Our
police stations report a frightening amount of these cases being reported
throughout the day.

Headlines talk of the South Coast victims to a number of cases of rape and
murder of women, the handicapped, and children. In most cases victims know
the perpetrators, and this instils more fear in us. There should be greater
determination to clamp down on these criminals.

We appeal to all parents and guardians that they should not be obligated to
trust anyone, but they are obligated to protect their children. Temptation
is a human flaw. A rapist is a criminal and doesn’t have one face. It has
many faces, shapes, sizes and colours, and different sexes. Please take the
necessary precautions to protect. Don’t regret.

We further call for a revision of legislation governing the crime of rape
and murder with the intent to legislate harsher punishment for the
protection of our people from these sick, perverse monsters. The MF calls
on all communities to get together and assist our police departments to
overcome crime in our communities. Thank you. [Applause.]

                            TSHWANE METRO COUNCIL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M van DYK (DA): Voorsitter, die Tshwane Metroraad is besig om baie
sleg agteruit te gaan. Sedert die burgemeester, Dr Gwen Ramokgopa verlede
jaar aan bewind gekom het, is ‘n mosie van wantroue reeds verskeie kere
teen haar in die raad geopper. In ‘n verslag wat aan die raad se
korporatiewe en gemeenskaplike dienste komitee voorgelê is, blyk dit dat
ongeveer 50% van die huishoudings in die Tshwane Metrogebied ontevrede is
met dienste wat deur die raad gelewer word.

Een-en-sewentig persent van die inwoners word nie met die eerste foonoproep
gehelp nie. Sewe-en-sestig persent moet drie of meer oproepe maak voordat
klagtes aangespreek word.

Twee-en sestig persent van die inwoners beleef gereeld kragonderbrekings.
Dan praat ek nie eers van die chaos by lisensiekantore en die foutiewe
diensterekenings wat uitgestuur word nie.
Boonop, is die topbestuur van die raad besig om uitmekaar te tuimel. Sowat
15 topbestuurslede het die raad verlaat sedert Ramokgopa burgermeester
geword het. Verlede week het twee lede van die burgerskomitee ook bedank.
Die munisipale bestuurder het ook bedank vanweë Ramokgopa se bestuurstyl.

Daar word nou bespiegel dat Ramokgopa blykbaar die swakste van vier
kandidate gaan aanstel as nuwe munisipale bestuurder omdat dié persoon die
burgemeester se gunsteling is.

Ons vra dat die Minister van Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering dringend sy
invloed by die President gebruik sodat Burgemeester Gwen Ramokgopa vervang
word voordat sy die Tshwane Metroraad verder skade aanrig. Dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Chairperson, the Tshwane Metro Council is
deteriorating very badly. Since the mayor, Dr Gwen Ramokgopa, came into
office last year, a vote of no confidence in her has been proposed several
times in the council already. In a report tabled in the  council’s
Corporative and Community Services Committee it is apparent that nearly 50%
of households in the Tshwane Metro area are dissatisfied with the services
provided by the council.

Seventy-one percent of the residents are not attended to with the first
phone call. Sixty-seven percent have to call three or more times before
complaints are dealt with.

Sixty-two percent of the residents are experiencing power failures
regularly. And that is not to mention the chaos at licence offices and the
incorrect services accounts that are sent out.

Furthermore the top management of the council is also in the process of
disintegrating. Approximately 15 members of the top management left the
council since Ramokgopa became mayor. Two members of the mayoral committee
also resigned last week. The municipal manager also resigned as a result of
Ramokgopa’s management style.

Presently there is speculation that Ramokgopa will probably appoint the
poorest of four candidates as the new municipal manager because this person
is the mayor’s favourite.

We urgently request the Minister for Provincial and Local Government to use
his influence with the President in order to replace Mayor Gwen Ramokgopa
before she causes even more harm to the Tshwane Metro Council. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

                              CRIME IN MAFIKENG

                            (Member’s Statement)
Moht N R MOKOTO (ANC): Modulasetilo, mokgatlho wa ANC o tshwentse thata ke
kokotsego e e makatsang ya bosenyi, bogodu le go kgothusiwa ka dikgoka mo
go tsweletseng go itemogelwa ke baagi ba kgaolo ya Mafikeng. Mo dikgweding
tse pedi tse di fetileng, baagi ba Mafikeng le metse e e mabapi, ba
itemogetse mefuta e e latelang ya botlhokotsebe: Go tseelwa dithotho ka
dikgoka, go kgobogelwa ke magodu, go betelelwa le go thubelwa mo matlong.

Re le mokgatlho wa ANC ga re kitla re letlelela magodu go pateletsa baagi
go itseela molao mo matsogong a bona. Re tla tswelela go ema nokeng
kgaratlho ya bona go netefatsa gore mo re dulang teng re dula ka
tshireletsego, kagiso le kgololosego. Ntwa kgatlhanong le bosenyi re tla e
fenya fela ka tirisanommogo ya baagi le mapodisa le fa re nna le kgatlhego
ya go tsaya karolo le go nna maloko a di diforamo tsa sepodisi tsa baagi
(Community Policing Forums) le batlaleletsi ba sepodisi (Police
Reservists).

Kwa bokhutlong, rona mokgatlo wa ANC re ikuela kwa go ba SAPS gore ba
oketse mapodisi a bona mo metsemagaeng, kwa ditoropong le gotlhe kwa batho
ba dulang gona go netefatsa ponagalo e e tiileng ya mapodisi ka nako
tsotlhe, le go kgapela basenyi kwa sekhutlwaneng se se ba tshwanetseng. Ke
a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana member’s statement follows.)

[Ms N R MOKOTO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC is very concerned about the
substantial increase of crime, theft and mugging that is continuing to be
experienced by the people of Mafikeng. During the past two months, the
residents of Mafikeng and neighbouring villages experienced the following
types of crime: robbery, rape and housebreaking.

We, as the ANC, will not allow these criminal elements to force the
community to take the law into their own hands. We will continue to support
their efforts, to ensure that the places in which we stay are safe and
peaceful, and that we have live in freedom. We will win the war against
crime only if the community and the police work together by taking part in
community policing forums and becoming police reservists.

Lastly, we, as the ANC, would like to appeal to the SA Police Service to
increase the number of police officers in the villages, towns and places
where people stay to ensure that their services are available at all times,
and to get rid of these criminals.] [Applause.]]

                TEACHER PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Chairperson, the Department of Education has been
accused of poor planning and a lack of urgency towards implementing teacher
professional training despite the availability of funds. According to
recent research more than 12 000 teachers lack proper qualifications and
those that were qualified were battling to implement the new curriculum and
new education policies.

The IFP believes that continuous teacher professional development is
critical to the improvement of the overall quality of education. Lack of
teacher training, together with our crowded classrooms, low pay, school
violence and lack of support, will drive many students and teachers away
from the teaching profession.

The shortages of teachers are felt in classrooms across the country. A
shortage of 35 000 teachers is predicted by the year 2008. Many teacher
unions believe that a well-planned teacher training programme will restore
the image of the teaching profession. Teachers who are well-trained and
supported by the department are unlikely to leave the profession.

The IFP therefore urges the education department to fast-track the roll-out
of its policy framework on teacher development. The policy framework should
come with clear strategies for training students, the induction of new
graduates and retraining of teachers in the profession. Somlomo. [Thank
you, Chairperson.]

                    BRUTAL EVICTION OF PEOPLE FROM FARMS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr S E KHOLWANE (ANC): Chairperson, I am deployed to the Lydenburg
constituency office in Mpumalanga. The ANC-led government has put in place
legislation and policies to regulate relations between farm owners and the
people living or working on farms to realise the objectives of the Freedom
Charter.

However, we are concerned that around Lydenburg, particularly in
Badfontein, most of the farmers still disregard the implementation of the
sectoral determination and other pieces of legislation. There are illegal
and brutal evictions, such as that of Mr Moyo, who was evicted and had his
property, including livestock, confiscated by the farm owner.

Our people are not allowed to have visitors. Their electricity and water
supplies are cut. They are forced to drink water from the same source as
their livestock, not to mention that they are refused permission to bury
their loved ones on the farms. Indeed, these are really inhumane practices.

We will continue to work with government institutions and other role-
players in educating our people about their basic human rights, whilst
condemning strongly the unscrupulous farmers who continue to violate the
laws of the land and who have no regard for basic rights and human dignity.
Thank you. [Applause.]

                   MISMANAGEMENT OF FUNDS BY ANC OFFICERS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Chairperson, the Minister of Labour’s sudden interest in
the affairs of Sector Education and Training Authorities, Setas, in the
wake of the Fidentia scandal begs the question: Why only now? The DA has
brought a number of matters to the Minister’s attention, but he has failed
to act. Why has he not intervened in the ongoing problems of the
Construction Education and Training Authority Seta and the Media,
Advertising, Publishing, Printing and Packaging, Mappp-Seta, where the CEO
has had death threats made against herself and her family?

The DA recently revealed a forensic report into alleged financial
mismanagement at the Seta. The findings have criminal implications. Yet the
Seta’s response has been to deny the seriousness of the report. The
chairman said that there was nothing new about the allegations and that the
Seta, the Department of Labour and the Auditor-General all had copies of
the report. He is wrong!

There is strong evidence that the general public was deliberately kept
uninformed about the deficiencies in the construction Seta’s management.
Financially, the Seta is technically insolvent. Money has been stolen and
high-level management is involved in the theft, fraud and corruption.

A culture of unaccountability has come to define the ANC government’s
mismanagement of the public’s money. If the people in charge mismanage
money, there must be consequences. Until the ANC government realises that
it is accountable to the South African people, it will continue to
mismanage their money.

The Minister of Labour and the Director-General, who is also the
department’s financial officer, need to start leading by example and
putting principle ahead of excuses. The Minister needs to act. [Applause.]

              CONGRATULATIONS TO THE SA NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T V TOBIAS (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC hereby takes this opportunity to
congratulate the SA National Defence Force for the sterling work that it
continues to do in disaster management in Africa. It has been reported that
the SANDF will be spearheading the flood-relief project in Mozambique,
after the country has experienced more unfortunate floods for the second
time in a short space of time.

As part of the ANC policy outlined in the Defence Act, social engagement is
important to ensure that the army does not just participate in military
aspects, but also in social, environmental and economic security programmes
that seek to create a peaceful and stable continent. It is only the ANC,
through its policies, that can do this.

Phambili ngamasosha eNingizimu Afrika, phambili! Ngiyabonga. [Forward with
the South African Defence Force, forward! Thank you.]

   THE CHALLENGES FACING SETAS; INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY; CLIMATE CHANGE;
                              FARM COMMUNITIES

                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMISEBENZI YOMPHAKATHI: Sihlalo ohloniphekile namalungu ale
Ndlu, ngiyabonga ngethuba esilitholayo lokuba siphendule. Ngithanda nje
ukuqala ngokuphendula uzakwethu lo okhulume mayelana namaSeta, lapho ebuze
khona ukuthi yini uNgqongqoshe Wezabasebenzi abe nomdlandla manje emveni
kwalo mkhonyovu otholakale kwi-Fidentia. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Chairperson and members of this House,
thank you for the opportunity that we get to respond. I wish to start by
responding to my colleague who spoke about the Setas. The member concerned
asked why the Minister of Labour had started showing an interest now that
corruption has been found in Fidentia.]

I think it will be important to correct the perspective that there hasn’t
been an interest from the Minister of Labour on the challenges that are
facing Setas. Hon members will recall that the Minister of Labour has on
more than one occasion in this House, both in the answering of questions
and also in his own budget statement, indicated some of the challenges that
the Setas are facing and what he and his colleagues are doing.

In my capacity as Minister of Public Works I am responsible for the
construction Seta, and we have been working with the construction industry
to try and resolve some of those challenges and find a way in which we can
bring that Seta into better management. In our analysis of the problem,
we’ve not shied away from accepting that there has indeed been
mismanagement. There have indeed been problems, but this does not mean we
need to sit back and complain. Our solution has been to find the way in
which we can resuscitate and rebuild that construction Seta. I must say, I
thank the construction industry which has been part of that process in
working with us in resuscitating the construction Seta in particular.
Therefore, what the member is saying about the Setas is not new. It is a
matter that he has continuously dealt with.

Hon members, I also would like to say on this important day, which is
International Women’s Day, that one cannot but agree with the hon member of
the MF who raised sharply the issue of rape amongst women and also the
crime that has engulfed some of our communities, but what she says, which I
agree with is, how we as community members must work with the law
enforcement agencies to ensure that we bring down the level of crime and
actually eradicate it as it affects our communities. It cannot happen only
by saying the police must do this. It will happen as a result of how we see
our responsibility as citizens in working with our law enforcement agencies
to actually deal with the scourge.

Hon member of the PAC of Azania, even though we are in South Africa, I
would like to say that we did acknowledge the issues you are raising about
the challenges of service delivery in a number of our municipalities. You
will recall that last year and the year before both the Minister of Finance
and the Minister of Provincial and Local Government, working together with
their colleagues, put in place a programme which is known as Siyenza Manje
and also looked at Project Consolidate to find a way in which we can assist
handson that sphere of government, given the challenges that is facing, and
we will continue to do so. But it is also important to indicate to our
citizens that it does not help to actually destroy the infrastructure that
we have just because of anger at the lack of service delivery. It is our
responsibility to find a way in which we can support one another - even
those municipalities - to actually change the situation for the better.

On the issue of climate change, I must say I am very happy that this
Parliament has raised this important matter twice in a week. One hon member
from the DA, I think, on Tuesday raised the importance of us finding some
programme of action and policy on how we could work on this important
challenge that faces the world.

And again our hon member from the DA has just indicated how we, as
citizens, can also get hold of the spanner to fix the problem. I am sure
that the Ministry and the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
will be very happy that we are indeed becoming conscious even about our own
responsibilities in managing this situation.

Lastly, on the matter raised by the hon member deployed in Lichtenberg, it
is indeed a pity to note once again that we still face such challenges in
our country, where some among us still disregard the human rights that must
be enjoyed by all of us as citizens. It is sad that some farmers who
continue to treat their workers badly actually spoil the name of many
farmers who have been working in partnership with their communities to do
better. We do hope that the sectoral determination that has been put in
place by the Minister of Labour in dealing with the issue of wages at the
farm level will be taken positively. We all know that this is one sector
where there have been low wages among those workers on farms, and this is a
measure to ensure that at least some people can also have a living wage.
Thank you very much.

Mr L W GREYLING: On a rmpoint of order, Chair, can I just remind the
Minister that I haven’t crossed the floor and I am not a member of the DA.
I am a member of the ID. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Those might be the effects of
climate change. [Laughter.]

          CONGRATULATIONS TO THE SANDF; REDUCTION IN VIOLENT CRIME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, Chairperson. There
are two statements I would like to respond to: The first one is from the
hon member Tobias, and I want to add my voice to hers in congratulating the
SANDF for their efforts. As government, we have, since 1994 committed
ourselves to the creation of peace, stability and development on the
continent. This commitment also extends to assistance in times of disaster
and to the rebuilding of those communities affected by disaster. As I said,
I also wish to add my voice in congratulating the SANDF.

The next one is the statement by hon member Mokoto on crime. May I just say
that the reduction of violent crimes and crimes against women and children
top the list of government’s priorities and it has been so since 1994.
Those committing these crimes must be assured that they will face the might
of the law, especially now that we today, as we speak, have launched the
365 days of activism of no violence against women and children and we would
like to urge all members of this House to rally their communities, their
constituencies, in support of this campaign. Thank you.

      ERADICATION OF BUCKET SYSTEM; SISONKE AND RIVERSIDE IN MZIMKHULU

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, on this
International Women’s Day I would like to wish all women of this country a
very happy day indeed.

I rise on two statements. With regard to the first one, I would like to
join hon member Madumise who congratulated the municipality on the progress
that it has made with regard to bucket system eradication. Indeed, as we
all know, we have set ourselves December 2007 for bucket eradication in all
established settlements in our country. I might also say that we are on
track with delivering on that commitment.

We all know that sanitation is about health and hygiene, and it is also
about respect and dignity of our people and this ANC-led government has
taken the decision that it wanted to restore the dignity of our people to
ensure that everyone who doesn’t have basic sanitation in our country
actually gets it.

As the ANC-led government, we will leave no stone unturned until all our
people have access to basic and decent sanitation. The highest backlogs as
we speak of sanitation are in the North West, Eastern Cape and the Free
State.

I must say that all these provinces have programmes in place to ensure that
we eradicate the bucket system. Municipalities who face problems are being
assisted by national government. We have a programme like Masibambane where
we are hands-on as all departments, the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, and provinces.

We have a programme with the Development Bank of South Africa, Siyenzamanje
Manje - We are doing it now. Again, it is a programme that seeks to
accelerate the delivery of this service. We have deployed engineers to all
the municipalities that are struggling with the planning, implementation
and spending of their money.

It is all systems go with this. We have a budget from the Minister of
Finance to deal with bulk water infrastructure and I can assure members
that we will meet this target. All we ask is that all of our people assist
us in ensuring that we deliver these services and in the event where
waterborne sanitation is not a solution or an option, they must understand
when we have to implement alternative types of sanitation.

The next statement that I would like to respond to is the one that was
about Sisonke district and Riverside in Mzimkhulu. Indeed, I was part of
the delegation that accompanied the President during that imbizo, and what
was unacceptable to all of us who were there is that, here is this district
municipality which is bordered by three rivers, and yet there was such an
acute shortage of water.

So, we are very happy and excited that our visit to the Sisonke district
has yielded such quick results. As you know, that district is rich in
agriculture and it is somewhat of a food basket in that area.

We are going to continue holding izimbizos to make sure that we consult our
people on what their needs are. Indeed, this is the success story of this
very innovative programme that is held by the Presidency, assisted by the
Department of Provincial and Local Government, to ensure that we talk to
our people and explain to them what our plans and programmes are, in
bringing delivery to their areas, and we are happy when there is delivery
that everyone can see.

It is important, hon members that we also congratulate the municipalities
who do well so as to encourage them because most of the time they are under
attack for not delivering services. [Time expired.] I thank you.

                           WELCOMING OF DELEGATION

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doige): Before we proceed to the first
Order of the day, I would like to welcome the delegation from Fatah in the
gallery, which is led by Jamal Shobaki. You are most welcome. Thank you
very much.

     DEBATE ON INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY: DEEPENING THE DEBATE ON GENDER
                   MAINSTREAMING IN THE WORK OF PARLIAMENT

Ms S P RWEXANA: Chairperson, on 10 February 2007, we laid Mama Adelaide
Tambo to rest. As the ANC Women’s League and the nation, we paid tribute to
her commitment to the ANC. She was a towering figure in our struggle. We
will miss her positive contribution towards the upliftment and the
empowerment of women in rural areas.

Our nation mourns her passing away and that she is remembered by all
nations across the globe. Once again, we congratulate the Foreign Minister
of Tanzania, Asha-Rose Migiro, who was appointed to the post of United
Nations Deputy Secretary-General. As South African women, we pledge to
offer her our full support.
Allow me to begin this debate on International Women’s Day by alluding to
the words of the late Comrade Samora Machel:


   The emancipation of women is not an act of charity; the result of a
   humanitarian or compassionate attitude. The liberation of women is a
   fundamental necessity for the revolution, the guarantee of its continuity
   and the precondition for its victory.


   The main objective of the revolution is to destroy the system of
   exploitation and build a new society, which releases the potentialities
   of human beings. This is the context within which women’s emancipation
   arises.

Gender mainstreaming is defined as a means of addressing gender imbalances
that existed within our society. It therefore seeks to insert gender into a
decision-making process and that is critical to good governance.

During the last decade the ANC-led government has developed, enacted and
implemented a comprehensive legislative framework that gives effect to the
right of women to be free from gender-based violence.

The national gender machinery, which is another aspect of the Constitution,
contributes to the direct promotion of women’s equality. It has been
functioning hand in hand with the Commission on Gender Equality which is
one of the constitutional institutions to strengthen constitutional
democracy.

Gender mainstreaming in the work of Parliament has been conducted in
various ways. Departmental monitoring is required to supervise the
implementation of gender mainstreaming programmes so that we are able to
identify the progress made and the obstacles that have been encountered.

The Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and
Status of Women was primarily established to monitor government’s
implementation of Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women and the Beijing Platform for Action. Its functions relate to
formulating specific legislation on gender issues and legislation that is
gender sensitive.

The multiparty women’s caucus was appointed last year by the initiative
from the office of the Speaker.  It consists of all women members of the
National Assembly and permanent women delegates in the National Council of
Provinces. It functions as an advisory, influencing and consultative body.
Its functions include engaging with civil society. At this stage it has
been referred by the Joint Rules Committee to the review of Rules Committee
for finalisation.

Awareness of gender equality became one of the crucial areas for the
Commission on Gender Equality. This commission is trying to make education
awareness to promote gender equality through the use of radio stations that
broadcast in all the indigenous languages.

It gives me pride and joy to say that our Constitution in South Africa is
among the best leading globally for its recognition for its equality
clause, which leads to the implementation of the promotion of the Equality
Act. This legislation seeks to eliminate gender discrimination.

Section 39 of our Constitution allows us to apply and make use of
international instruments. These foreign instruments create an obligation
on the state to take action to bring domestic policy and practices in line
with relevant international standards. We are collaborating with other
international human rights instruments that constitute the international
legal framework aimed at eliminating gender discrimination and advance the
status of women globally.

The African Charter renders any custom, tradition, culture or religious
practices that are inconsistent with the rights, duties and obligations
contained in its charter null and void. It further compels state parties to
apply all appropriate measures to abolish customs and practices that are
harmful to the welfare, dignity normal growth and the development of women
and girl children.

We would like to congratulate the trauma centre in Cape Town which offered
to give counselling to the young girls that were kidnapped for a long time
by a serial killer in Caledon. Further, we call on government, civil
society, NGOs and the business sector to stand together and fight gender
violence against women and the girl children.

We have collaborated with the international protection for women and girls
against gender-based violence, which is a comprehensive body of
international law which sets the norms and standards that hold governments
accountable for allowing patterns of violence against women and obliges
them to prevent violations where possible.

In 2003 the African Union Assembly held its second ordinary session in
Maputo, Mozambique, where it adopted the protocol to the African Charter on
human and people’s rights on the rights of women in Africa. This protocol
recognises that despite the African Charter on human and people’s rights
and the other international instruments, women in Africa still continue to
be victims of discrimination and harmful practices.

This resulted in the adoption of the optional protocol which contains
provisions such as the elimination of discrimination against women by state
parties through appropriate legislative, institutional and other measures,
the right to participate in political life and decision-making. Our
Parliament adopted the optional protocol on 17 November 2004.

The ANC constitution provides that one third of the representation should
be by women. I am proud to say that today we have gone beyond that.
Relevant structures such as Chapter Nine Institutions and policies have
been put in place to ensure that gender discrimination is eliminated, women
are empowered, their voices are heard and they participate equally with men
in decision-making. Quoting from one of our great leaders, the late O R
Tambo, when he delivered a speech in Luanda on 14 September 1981:

  We need to move from a revolutionary declaration to revolutionary
  practice. We invite the ANC’s women’s section and the black women of South
  Africa, more oppressed and more exploited than any section of the
  population, to take up this challenge and assume their proper role outside
  the kitchen among the fighting ranks of our movement. The women’s section
  is not an end in itself. It is a weapon of struggle to be correctly used
  against all forms and levels of oppression and inequality in the interest
  of a victorious struggle of our people.

We express our people’s solidarity with the women of Somalia and Darfur. We
stand firmly with our comrades who are fighting for social and political
freedom. Our conviction in the certainty and their victory is unshakeable.
Malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi! [Praise the name of women!]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, today we celebrate International Women’s Day
and yes, we are having yet another so-called “women’s debate”. The men
might roll their eyes and yawn but the women of this Parliament, and
indeed, the women of this country, have news for them. Gender is not just
about women; it is also about men and until men and women are equal not
only in law but at home, at work and in this House, we will keep on having
these debates. [Applause.]

Only once we have closely examined all the organisational policies and
practices of Parliament, to see how they impact on men and women, can we
really determine whether these policies are equitable and
nondiscriminatory.

Debates are all very well but as my leader, the hon Tony Leon, is fond of
saying, “talk is cheap but money buys the whisky”. So we can talk as much
as we like, but only when the hearts and minds of all of us in this House
are committed to change in terms of gender transformation, can we truly say
that gender mainstreaming has been achieved within this institution.

This is not only about the number of women versus men. Nuket Kardam defines
mainstreaming gender as:


  Both a technical and political process which requires a shift in
  organisation of culture and ways of thinking, as well as in the goals,
  structures and resource allocations of international agencies,
  governments and NGOs. Maintaining gender requires changes at different
  levels within these institutions, in agenda setting, policy-making,
  planning, implementation and evaluation. Instruments for the
  mainstreaming effort include new staffing and budgeting practices,
  training programmes, policy procedures and guidelines.

How do we relate this to our institution, Parliament? My friend, Claire
Mathonsi, from the Gender Advocacy Programme says:


  Parliament has a multifarious, radial relationship with gender
  mainstreaming, because Parliament is a key player in the process of
  relations between other key players, the state, civil society and the
  market within different domains.

Parliament should have a dual focus; on one level there is a need for
gender sensitive responses to all legislation - a task undertaken by the
JMC as mentioned by the previous speaker; and on the second level, there is
a need for gender mainstreaming within the internal structures of this
institution.

However, while the gender sensitive response of legislation is monitored
and evaluated, implementation must also be monitored. The Domestic Violence
Act is a good example.

Internally, the organisational culture of Parliament also needs to be
transformed. This organisation, like most others in our country, and indeed
around the world, is based on deeply historical political patriarchal norms
and values which must be transformed if you are truly going to talk about
gender mainstreaming.

The organisational structure of Parliament needs to be seriously
interrogated to ensure that Parliament itself complies with the principles
of gender equity and equality beyond numbers of men and women present. Yes,
we do now have enough toilets for female members although they all appear
on one side of some buildings, but what happened to the crèche for children
of working parents in this institution?

Why is there no sexual harassment policy that applies to everyone who works
here? When I tried to put this question to the Deputy President it was sent
back by the Questions office. Which Minister is going to champion this
course and why does it have to be a woman? Is it only because women are
victims of sexual harassment or are they the only ones who are brave enough
to talk about it?

Post-1994 parliamentary hours were changed to accommodate working parents,
but we are now looking at a new form of programming which reverts to late
hours one evening a week. Did anyone look at this from the view of gender
mainstreaming?

Most of us acknowledge that gender equality is critical yet it is quite
appalling how consistently your so-called “gender machinery” is
underprioritised and underfunded. All government departments are supposed
to have gender focal points.

No lesser person than Prof Kader Asmal recently asked: What is a gender
focal point? I am sure a lot of other people would ask the same question.
Why is the issue of gender so jargonised? It gives people the perfect
excuse for not understanding what we are talking about. The gender focal
point is the person who is supposed to keep the gender mainstream flag
flying.

The problem is that the effectiveness of gender focal point is largely
dependent on the level at which that person is appointed and who they
report to. If that department has not changed in the fundamental way
necessary to hear and accept critical gender voices, participation and
influence, then the necessary enabling conditions for the implementation of
development priorities and accountability for genuine gender mainstream
will not exist either, regardless of the gender focal point. All too often
top leadership takes the position of “add women and stir”. In other words,
we have our gender focal point, and the gender mainstreaming ends right
there.

Gender analysis of departmental budgets is another area where gender
mainstreaming can play a huge role - and I intend to ask questions to all
departments in this regard.
We have come a long way in terms of gender mainstreaming since 1994 but
there is still plenty of work to be done in this institution and throughout
our society. Let’s match the talk with action and genuine conviction from
men and women in this House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, first of all allow me to thank the
presiding officers of Parliament for setting aside time in the
parliamentary programme for today’s debate. Some may consider it a small
matter but International Women’s Day means a tremendous amount to billions
of women around the world.

Today marks a day when we celebrate women’s achievements and honour their
roles and contributions to global society. It is also a day on which we
identify the problems that many hundreds of millions of women face every
day. We should therefore note specifically that the theme for this year’s
celebration of the role of women is “Ending Impunity for Violence against
Women and Children”. I will return to this theme a bit later.

It is also apt that the focus of this debate should be on gender
mainstreaming in the work of our Parliament. With perfect hindsight it can
be argued that this Parliament could have done more for gender
mainstreaming since 1994.

Understandably, when the democratic Parliament was first established there
were many competing issues that had to be addressed and perhaps one of the
issues we got to a bit later was to examine our own internal organisational
functioning and culture from a gender perspective.

In the first years of the democratic Parliament some attention was paid to
investigating and overseeing the gender mainstreaming of budgets to see,
for instance, how they impacted on women and water, women and sanitation
and women and health.

In later years it seems that the emphasis has shifted to other aspects of
oversight and holds the executive to account and less critical analyses of
gender budgets have been done. There is also a school of thought that
suggests that the available resources within Parliament have not been
properly allocated to gender mainstreaming.

It is a sad fact of life that some form of violence is perpetrated against
women and children every minute of the day both in our country and around
the world. All we have done and accomplished for women’s rights over the
decades has not eradicated this societal aberration. It continues unabated
across race, ethnic, religious, cultural and class lines and has serious
implications for every single society in which it occurs.

In 1998 this Parliament adopted the Domestic Violence Act in the hope that
legislative intervention would protect women and children from violence. It
has not. It may have helped to a certain extent but clearly legislation is
not the answer to the problem. The answer lies much deeper, in changing
societal attitudes and addressing the root causes of crime against women
and children.

In the next few months parliamentarians will scrutinise the budgets of
various departments and institutions. It is in this process that gender
mainstreaming in our work can be advanced by hon members, critically
analysing budgets to gauge their impact on women and children. For
instance, we have to ask how the Water Affairs budget will benefit women in
providing access to clean water and sanitation. How will the Social
Development budget provide for the women that are unemployed and
vulnerable? How will the Justice budget cater for victims of domestic
violence and will it improve the maintenance system? Will the Tourism
budget provide employment and business opportunities for women
entrepreneurs?

I can go on and on but the picture is clear. We have to re-introduce and re-
emphasise critical analysis of budgets and government programmes to
determine their effects on women. In this way, we will definitely deepen
the debate on gender mainstreaming in Parliament. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M R MORUTOA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Members of Parliament and
distinguished guests in the national gallery, I must say, ``Malibongwe!’’.
[Let it be praised!] [Interjections.]

International Women’s Day is an annual day for the recognition of and
struggle for women’s economic, social and political rights, and
opportunities for awakening self-consciousness among women workers and for
the unity of the working class.

Women’s Day emerged out of the simultaneously growing workers’ and women’s
rights movement during the rapidly industrialising period of the early 20th
century. In the United States, in 1908, the Socialist Party’s newly formed
women’s national committee responded by calling for the party to designate
a day each year to campaign for women’s suffrage.

International Women’s Day is an important occasion for women all over the
world. It is not only an occasion for women from all continents to
celebrate our triumphs and achievements, but to take stock of what still
needs to be done.

In South Africa, we also have a lot to celebrate. During the brutal years
of apartheid, women were at the forefront of the battles against that
dreaded system of systematic oppression. Our history is filled with stories
of heroic deeds carried out by patriotic South African women who were not
prepared to concede to the yoke of apartheid.

Women in urban and rural areas, black and white, rich and poor, religious
and nonreligious, stood together side-by-side to fight emphatically and to
defeat apartheid.

The struggle for women’s emancipation in South Africa is as old as the
struggle itself. In the first instance, it is worth noting that women
played a central role in production and reproduction during the pre-
colonial era. As a response to the increased attempts of the apartheid
government to enforce a systematic control over movement through the pass
laws, women stood up against Prime Minister Strydom and organised a massive
anti-pass march to the Union Buildings in Pretoria on 9 August 1956.

Two years before the historic Women’s March, the first Women’s Charter was
adopted at the founding conference of the Federation of South African Women
in the same year that the Bantu Education minister enforced a separate and
unequal education system for African children.

Way before the advent of feminism in the West in the sixties and seventies,
South African women started a movement that situated women’s emancipation
within the context of a broader liberation struggle. At its core, the
Women’s Charter denounced and challenged a struggle for liberation that
benefitted only one section of society.

Since 1994, South African women have achieved many milestones. These
include, one, having amongst the highest proportions of women parliamentary
representivity in the continent, and a Constitution that guarantees the
right of women to dignity, protection and access to opportunities. Many
women have made their mark in the political and business arenas. We have a
woman Deputy President, two women Speakers of Parliament, and a record of
12 Ministers in our national Cabinet.

South Africa performed very well in respect of the indicators mentioned in
the gender and Millennium Development Goals, to which our government has
subscribed. The third MDG prescribed indicators are: Indicator 9 - ratio of
girls to boys in primary, secondary and tertiary education; indicator 10 -
ratio of literate females to males of 15 to 24 years of age; indicator 11 -
share of women in wage employment in non-agricultural sector, and indicator
12 - the proportion of seats held by women in national parliament.

Despite the fact that we have performed very well on the MDG’s specified
indicators, I want to point to a few achievements as well as areas that
still need attention.

I want to speak about women and poverty. More than one billion people in
the world today, the great majority of whom are women, live in unacceptable
conditions of poverty, mostly in the developing countries. Poverty has
various causes, including structural ones.
Poverty is a complex, multidimensional problem with origins in both the
national and international domains. The globalisation of the world economy
and the deepening interdependence amongst nations present challenges and
opportunities for sustained economic growth and development, as well as
risks and uncertainties for the future of the world economy.

The gender disparities in economic power-sharing are also an important
contributing factor to the poverty of women. Migration and consequent
changes in family structures have placed additional burdens on women,
especially those who provide for several dependents.

Macroeconomic policies need rethinking and reformulation to address such
trends. These policies focus almost exclusively on the formal sector. They
also tend to impede the initiatives of women and fail to consider the
differential impact on women and men.

While poverty affects households as a whole because of the gender division
of labour and responsibility for household welfare, women bear a
disproportionate burden, attempting to manage household consumption and
production under conditions of increasing scarcity. Poverty is particularly
acute for women living in rural households.

Women’s poverty is directly related to the absence of economic
opportunities and autonomy; lack of access to economic resources, including
credit, land ownership and inheritance; lack of access to education and
support services, and their minimal participation in the decision-making
process. Poverty can also force women into situations in which they are
vulnerable to sexual exploitation.

Gender mainstreaming is a globally accepted strategy for promoting gender
equality. Mainstreaming is not an end in itself but a strategy, an
approach, a means to achieve the goal of gender equality.

Mainstreaming involves ensuring that gender perspectives and attention to
the goal of gender equality are central to all activities - policy
development, research, advocacy, dialogue, legislation, resource allocation
and planning, implementation and monitoring of programmes and projects.

Pertaining to gender mainstreaming in business, in the next five years, as
it embarks on its R84 billion infrastructure programme, power utility Eskom
has to appoint two new members of staff every working day, and it is
adamant that one of them will be a black woman.

The need to recruit 5 000 skilled employees will impose unique challenges
even for Eskom, widely acknowledged as South Africa’s most empowered
company. Having launched an affirmative action and employment equity drive
in the early 1990s – well before it became a moral and regulatory
imperative – Eskom is in a better position than most to meet the skills
crunch head-on, while retaining its empowerment momentum.

The state-owned enterprises have been tasked with spending more than half
of the R400 billion government is setting aside to improve public
infrastructure over the next few years. However, in this endeavour they
have to contend with shortages in key skill categories, particularly
engineering, technical and project management skills.

The sharp decline in technical and artisan skills in South Africa over the
past decades is hurting the private sector as well, but the damage is more
severe in the SOEs. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, the quest for gender equality continues. This
Parliament has demonstrated in a number of ways that gender equality
matters, but still there remain improvements that we can make to advance
the cause.

We concur with the suggestion that the Parliamentary Women’s Group should
be formalised in the Rules of Parliament to ensure that it is taken more
seriously by the institution. At the same time, we must ensure that such a
structure rises above party politics, otherwise it will not succeed.
We also agree that gender budgeting is a vital parliamentary tool. Speeches
and discussions about gender mean nothing if they do not lead to actual
change. As we all know, real change occurs when budgets are allocated and
spent.

We must ensure when this Parliament asserts a greater role in the overall
budget process that gender is one of the leading criteria for evaluating
budgets before they are approved.

The continuing scourge of sexual violence against women and girl children
is a blight on our society. These violent crimes remind us that patriarchy
did not die with the advent of democracy.

The ability of Parliament to engage government on this issue and to force
positive change will, in the end, be the yardstick with which our efforts
at gender equality are measured by future generations. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, hon members, I want to deal with this so-
called notion of “deepening the debate”. I think it is totally unacceptable
that on such an important day as International Women’s Day we can deepen
the debate in one minute. How is that possible? The ANC must understand
that they do not hold the monopoly on ideas in this country.

It is an indictment on the two women Speakers of Parliament to actually
allow this to happen. It is the International Women’s Day and we must come
and stand here for only one minute. I want to appeal to the Speakers and
the Whips that instead of allowing a long weekend, which is meant for
constituency work on a Monday, we should rather use that time to add extra
time for debates in this House. Then we can talk about deepening and
strengthening the debate.

The ID do not want just more dresses in Parliament; we want more women who
can take up the issues of women outside here, like our MP Florence Batyi
who has put 20 men behind bars for failing to pay their maintenance. Those
are the issues that we in Parliament must do for women. Women don’t just
want long speeches from us here; they need our help out there and we should
stop claiming to speak on behalf of them when we don’t even know where they
live in this country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M L NGWENYA: Chairperson, I just want to say that I feel pity for hon
De Lille, for, I thought, that if you really want to get hold of more women
you should go to their constituencies and meet more of them. [Applause.]
But, maybe you are right, hon member.

Lehono ke Letšatši la Basadi Lefaseng ka Bophara. [Today is International
Women’s Day.]

Hunger and poverty are enemies of human dignity; and women are the primary
victims of hunger and poverty. Yet women are also crucial partners in
finding sustainable solutions to these twin scourges. Without women, the
target we all set in 1996 to halve the number of the hungry in the world by
2015 will not only remain elusive; it will become impossible to attain.
Women and girls constitute three-fifths of the world’s poor. Their poverty
level is worse than that of men as clear gender disparities in education,
employment opportunities and decision-making powers exist.

Basadi ba bantši mo Afrika ba swaragana le thankga ya go fepa malapa a
bona, mola ka lehlakoring le lengwe ba rwalela dikgong šokeng le go ga
meets kgole, go ruthufatša malapa a bona. [Most women in Africa are
struggling to provide for their families. On the other hand, they still
have to get wood from the fields to keep their families warm, and water
from the wells, which are far away from their homes!]

Statistics show that in Sub-Saharan Africa women food farmers produce 80%,
do 90% of the work to process the food, 80% of the work to transport and
store the food, 60% of the work to market the food and provide 90% of
water, wood and fuel. This they do using rudimentary hand-held tools and
without appropriate modern technology. Indeed, women meet the basic
survival need of the continent, despite the fact that they own only 1% of
the land, receive less than 7% of farm extension services, and receive less
than 10% of the credit given to small-scale farmers.

Provision of household water needs is a major problem facing African rural
women. Only 47% of urban women in Africa have access to safe drinking
water. Most of those in the rural areas have to trek long distances from
their homes in search of water, no matter the quality. This remains a
challenge for African governments and international funding agencies.

A large number of women are mainly engaged in subsistence agriculture as
well as the micro and small-scale enterprises. In most of the developing
countries, particularly in Africa, women consist of 70% to 80% of the total
agricultural labour force and they account for over 80% of food production.
It is not surprising therefore to find many women engaged in food
processing, weaving, personal services, beverages preparation and selling
of snacks.

To strengthen the partnership with rural women, one of the vital challenges
would be to support their continued empowerment. This is viewed as a
necessary catalyst to ensure that they can fulfil their potential and
participate on an equal footing with men in the formulation and
implementation of agricultural and rural development policies and
programmes. Several instruments for bringing about this change are already
available. In 1979, the international community reached a milestone with
the adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, which contains important legally binding
provisions in support of women in agriculture.

In South Africa, land is an important source of capital used in economic
activity and a factor of production. During the apartheid years, around
four million people were removed and displaced from the land they were
occupying. A small percentage of African people gained access of land
through freehold title prior to introduction of the laws in 1913 and 1936.
Many of these people have since been dispossessed.

Since 1994, an opportunity has presented itself to all the citizens of
South Africa, particularly the previously disadvantaged, including rural
women. That opportunity is the enabling legal and policy framework of land
reform. However, rural women have not been able to take advantage of this
opportunity and use it for improving their quality of life.

Mmušo wa rena wo o eteletšwego pele ke ANC, o kgonne go thuša batswadi ba
dikobo-di-magetleng go godiša le go fepa bana ba bona ka tšhelete ya kgwedi
le kgwedi, mola diputswa kgwedi ka kgwedi di hwetša mphiwa-fela go lwantšha
tlala le bohloki ka malapeng. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[The ANC-led government has managed to make children’s grants available
monthly in order to assist poor parents to provide for their children. The
elderly people also get pensions monthly to fight hunger and poverty in
their homes.]

The Department of Land Affairs has encouraged participation of women in
land reform projects. However, there has been no concerted effort to
mainstream women’s issues in such projects. Recognising this weakness in
strategies for implementation of the land reform programme, the department
has resolved to develop strategies for gender, particularly mainstreaming
of women’s issues in land reform.

These are some of the strategies that the department may explore. Firstly,
representation of women, particularly rural women, at all levels in
decision-making positions in rural development public institutions.
Secondly, giving women a voice at village level and village development
structures to try to avoid and reduce patriarchy. Thirdly, we need to
establish women-only land reform projects. Fourthly, establishing
communication and information sessions of land reform programmes that would
target rural women.

Essentially, these strategies will contribute to enabling rural women to
develop tools that they need to bring about organisational transformation
in rural development structures, particularly those dealing with issues of
access to land and land tenure rights.

Rural women must stand up and fight for their socio-economic rights. No one
but they themselves will free them from the shackles of poverty,
victimisation and abuse.

A plan or strategy must be designed and implemented in close co-operation
with various development partners in different specialised areas, notably
education, health, human rights as well as environment and energy.

There is a need, therefore, even in South Africa, to strengthen the public
administration to make ...[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, according to a report compiled by the Inter-
Parliamentary Union based on information received from 189 parliaments as
at 31 January 2007, it is the country of Rwanda on the African continent
that has the most women representatives in parliament. Rwanda leads all
parliaments by 48,8%. Mozambique is at number 10 with 34,8% and South
Africa at number 13 with 32,8%, doing much better than the countries like
Australia, New Zealand and Germany, that follow at numbers 14, 15 and 16.
South Africa therefore still needs to do a lot. The colonial power who
dominated the world during the previous century, the UK, only rank at
number 53, with a mere 19,7% of women representation.

Many African countries still need improved policies in order to tackle
gender inequality and to fight poverty and HIV/Aids.
The ACDP supports the campaign launched by the NGO Gender Links to increase
the numbers of women representation in the South African Parliament and
other spheres of government. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson, on International Women’s Day, let us salute
the brave souls who went on hunger strikes, who created the Suffragette
Movement for women.

Size sibonge ngisho iNgcugce imbala. [Let us salute even the women’s
regiment, iNgcugce.]

Let us create a sense of unity and energy between women. Let us work
towards the betterment of all women, rural and urban. Let us all unite. The
women of Parliament need to give much more to other women who are outside
of Parliament, because they are the women who suffer most; they are the
women who need most help and we here in Parliament are the ones best suited
to be of help to them. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr K M KHUMALO: Chairperson, before I speak, I just need to dedicate this
speech to women who contributed to the struggle internationally. One, I am
speaking about Indira Gandhi of India, who fought quite fiercely; two, Aung
San Suu Kyi, who is currently under house arrest in Myanmar, formerly
called Burma; three, Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan who fought, and actually
after her father was assassinated, led the people of Pakistan; four,
Comrade Ray Alexander, a trade unionist from the ICU, and five, Lillian
Ngoyi. So this speech will actually be a dedication to women.

I just want to clarify that the debate on women is not about women only,
but about both men and women. For us to achieve an equal society, both men
and women must be dedicated to eradicating all forms of discrimination.

A writer in Africa known as Buchi Emecheta writes in her book called The
Joys of Motherhood that the pain and suffering of women are normally seated
in the context of their barrenness, witchcraft and many other things.

Now it is quite clear that it is not only in pre-colonial society that
these things are prevalent. It is unfortunate that today the suffering and
pain of women continue to persist in postcolonial society, democratic
states and independent states. These are the things that we need to fight
for quite seriously.

The consequences of such perceptions lead to serious discrimination against
women, and all of them lead to something called misogyny, which is hatred
towards women. Now, we need to make sure that we deal with this, because
this may lead to serial rapists, murder, systematic exploitation of women
and all those forms of discrimination.

Young women are quite vulnerable in our society. They are exploited, raped
and they disappear amongst all forms of discrimination. This is a fight
that men and everyone must engage in and something they must fight against.

It is important for us to make sure that the current debate on the issue of
learner/student pregnancies is understood in the context of society that
counts on a particular past that needs to be corrected. One aspect of this
is that these pregnancies that we need to deal with in our schools are a
reflection of a society that is quite sick. It is the type of issue, which
we as parents, young people and teachers must attend to.

It is important to note that the protection of young women will need to be
achieved not only through laws and legislation, but also by men and women
of strong morals and values, to inculcate the culture of human dignity,
respect, and honour. Extensive sexual education in schools, within youth
organisations, nongovernmental organisations and higher learning
institutions must be intensified. Current statistics will indicate that,
today, there are more young women living with the prevalence of HIV/Aids.
It is important for us to make sure that we deal with that particular issue
and attend to it.

I also want to deal with the issue of women and disability, just to
indicate to all of us that we are all susceptible to some form of
disability or another. In the past, we used to cage people with mental
disabilities, keep them in institutions and places like Witrand in
Potchefstroom, Sterkfontein and Bephelong. It is important for us to show
some love and respect for those of us who are living with mental
disabilities, and make sure that we help them so that they feel part of
society.

It is also important that when government engages in programmes of
construction and housing, it must make sure that it accommodates people
with disabilities, in particular those in wheelchairs. If I could raise an
example: The houses that are being built currently are not designed in such
a way so as to accommodate those people in wheelchairs. Therefore, when we
build them, we must take into account that the doors need to be bigger, and
the toilets must be built so that they are compatible for people in
wheelchairs. The electric plugs that are installed must also be able to
accommodate those in wheelchairs. These are the things that we believe that
women and men with disabilities must be provided with.

We also wish to request that the SABC must make sure that in all their
programmes, and not only in the news programmes, subtitles and sign
language are used; thus in each and every single programme that is run.

We also request that when the Ministry is imposing quotas on
specifications, those RDP houses, houses of development, government
institutions, buildings and everything must be accessible to all by means
of ramps and many other things.

We also believe that in most of the municipalities around the country there
are no translation and interpreting facilities. Now, it is important that
these institutions must have those, so as to allow those people who cannot
hear or see or are suffering from any form of disability can be
accommodated.

We also request that these government departments, even Parliament, must at
least avail national documentation application forms and all other
important documentation in Braille so that those who are blind can get
access to information, and all other important things.

In terms of gender and education, two economists called Michael Todaro and
Stephen Smith wrote quite extensively regarding the discrimination against
women and youth in terms of gender. In the study that they conducted, they
discovered that out of 108 countries, 66 had a 10% to 20% discrimination
average of girls against men, but then Todaro and Smith indicated that
there were areas were quite important to us, and to prove that point there
is empirical evidence that once you teach young girls they sometimes
perform better than men.

They mention quite a number of reasons. Firstly, that the rate of return on
investment on education for women is higher than for men in developing
countries. Secondly, an increase in women’s education increases
productivity in the workplace, leads to marriage, lowers fertility, and
improved health and nutrition. Thirdly, they indicated that improved child
health care and nutrition and more educated mothers lead to the multiplier
effect on a nation’s human resource and generation income. Fourthly, they
also discovered that once you educated the young girls, compared to
educating men, education can have an important impact on breaking the
vicious cycle of poverty and inadequate schooling of young girls.

In terms of rural women, those who are disabled are likely to be neglected,
left by their spouses, their children, and they also face degradation,
isolation and helplessness.

It is the duty of every man and woman in this House and out there to make
sure that young women are protected and that women with disabilities can
live properly, be respected and get love and care. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Igama lamakhosikazi! Igama lamadoda futhi! [Uhleko.] [The
name of women! The name of men too! [Laughter.]]

Chairperson, today we commemorate the greatness of women of South Africa
and around the world. It is crucial today to applaud our Bill of Rights
that has, with the birth of our democracy, enshrined our equality to men in
every factor and sector of the community and in our daily lives. When we
look around us in the House today, I am proud to note the growth of female
representation in the NA and the NCOP, and the Cabinet, as well as the
office-bearers of both Houses.

South Africa is noted as being one among the top developing countries such
as Jamaica, Belize and Antigua, as our women are at the helm of both
Houses. The MF however has a vision that, some day, we shall have an equal
number of male and female representatives that shall encourage a balanced
representation of all sexes.

I take this opportunity to thank all the comrades that strove to achieve
freedom, democracy and a voice for all women. I wish all South African
women who strive to preserve their culture, customs and religion in a fast-
changing society the very best.

To our mothers, sisters and daughters of South Africa, we celebrate and
salute your greatness. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nkszn P TSHWETE: Sihlalo, malungu abekekileyo ePalamente, iindwendwe
ezibekekileyo, kunye nabemi boMzantsi Afrika uphela, xa sisithi ngalo nyaka
we-2007 sivuyisana nomhla wesi-8 kaMatshi singuMzantsi Afrika, sisithi
uMzantsi Afrika uyabalwa nawo kumazwe athe anyusa izinga loomama
kurhulumente wabo sithi siyabulela koomama beli abalwela inkululeko
kwanakuMongameli weli.

Xa ndingqina ndithetha ukuba uMzantsi Afrika walungiselela amakhosikazi
nakuMgaqosiseko wawo ngokumisela iziko esithi yi-sithi Commission on Gender
Equality, CGE. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs P TSHWETE: Chairperson, hon members, hon guests and South African
citizens, as we celebrate the day of 8 March 2007, we want to express our
sincere gratitude to the women of this country who fought for liberation,
as well as to the President. Today South Africa is counted amongst the
countries that have raised women representation in their government.

Furthermore, South Africa provided for women even in its Constitution. They
established what is known as the Commission on Gender Equality, CGE.]

The CGE is one of our constitutional institutions that was established
under Chapter 9 of the Constitution to maintain and promote democracy
through gender equality.

One of the most important tasks of our democratic government was to repeal
old laws and policies that discriminated against women. The new laws and
policies give women the rights that they were previously denied.

In South Africa, more than half of the population is female. We are still
undergoing a process of gender transformation within our country and
globally. Women are still under-represented in other spheres of government,
especially, in important positions of power.

It is the duty of Parliament, government and civil service to acknowledge
the role of women and ensure that their voices are heard in the democratic
South Africa.

The Commission on Gender Equality’s mandate, among others, is to monitor
and evaluate policies and practices of state agencies, public bodies and
the private sector in order to promote gender equality and the rights of
women.

CGE not only designs legislated society, which equally balances the needs
of both women and men of democratic South Africa, but it analyses
priorities set by government to impact positively on gender issues as it
has done in partnership with the Office on the Status of Women.

CGE has much broader tasks practically to encourage both men and women to
speak out and demand a stop to the violence they experience daily.

Sisenenxaxheba ekufuneka siyithathile ke boomama le yokufundisa ootata
ukuba nabo bathethe, bathethe xa bedlwengulwa, beze ngaphambili.
Mayingasoloko ingomama abaza ngaphambili xa bedlwengulwa. Sinenxaxheba
ekufuneka siyithathile, ngoba ubukhulu becala ngoomama abatshoyo ukuba
baphatheka kakubi. Amadokethi amapolisa akhoyo phaya ezikhululweni
ndiqinisekile ukuba ngawoomama, alikho idokethi likatata elithi, ‘Mna
ndiyabethwa ngumfazi wam yonke le mihla.’ Ngoko ke siyanqwena ukuba ootata
beze ngaphambili, ukuze nabo sibancede kwezi nkathazo bakuzo. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We still have a role to play as women to educate men about sexual abuse.
Those men who have fallen victim to this must come forward and speak out.
It should not only be women who report it when they are abused. I can
assure you that most police dockets have the rape cases of women rather
than men. Men do not go to court to report abuse. You will never find a
police docket in which a male complainant wrote: “My wife beats me up
daily.” Therefore, we wish to make an earnest appeal to men, that they must
come forward to get help.]

The “alpha male’’ mindset is still dominant among culturally diverse South
Africans. This is what further complicates the transition to gender
equality.

Our practical participation should be to encourage the CGE on their mandate
and deepen the “how to” discussions on gender issues through studies and
asserted research so that we can stop these brutal killings of womenfolk
and attacks on children.

Members of Parliament can be utilised as a link between the CGE and
constituencies where the MPs in both the NA and NCOP can be empowered in
areas of gender equality so that they can take the influence down to their
constituencies. For instance, to participate in implementing legislative
measures that would keep out of our beloved country the damaging exposure
of media materials that stimulates inappropriate sexual awareness. We have
to deepen our participation and invite CGE to encourage survival-friendly
environments in law facilities, communities and families.

So, when sexually violated survivors are interviewed and not interrogated,
we, as the ANC, welcome the idea that CGE can be invited to workshop the
committees so that they may encourage awareness in decreasing the “silent
father” syndrome that I’ve been talking about.

“I-silent father syndrome” le bendithetha ngayo yokuba ootata abathethi ...
[The “silent father” syndrome I spoke about, that men do not speak out ...]

... and both parents being active participants in child rearing.

In 1994, we were honoured with the Constitution that even respects and
promotes a nonsexist environment of democracy and equality. The battle of
addressing gender imbalances became manageable through the role played by
Chapter 9 institutions. Kula maqhawe sithi, nangamso! [To those heroes we
say: Well done!] As South Africans, we can never say that we have achieved
democracy. It is not enough without equality for both men and women.

Ngubani owayesazi ukuba ngonyaka wowe-1956 xa oomama baphuma iphulo
beyokukhalazela amalungelo abo kabuhlungu phambi koStrydom kwi-Union
Buildings ukuba namhlanje siza sisitya iziqhamo zemizamo yabo, sihleli
eziPalamente nathi singoomama?

Xa ndigqibezela ndithi, ndiyabulela kwabo mama abathatha inxaxheba. Sithi
kaloku ne-Comission on Gender Equality kufuneka siyiqinise, sibonakalise
ukuba nathi siyabaxhasa kwimizamo yabo abayenzayo kumaphondo ethu. Sithi
ke, Phambili ngomhla wesi-8 kuMatshi oyi- International Women’s Day!
Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[No one ever thought that when women vigorously faced Strydom and others at
the Union Buildings in 1956, that it would bear the fruit we are enjoying
today. Today, we women, are in Parliament.

In conclusion, I would like to thank those women who took part in the
struggle. We therefore, need to put our weight behind the Commission on
Gender Equality and support their hard work they are doing in our
provinces. We say forward with the 8th of March, International Women’s Day!
I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD is aware that South Africa has a proud
history of the role of women in political activism. In justification of the
efforts and astute political tradition, South Africa is ranged 13th in the
world, with 32% of women holding positions in Parliament.

However, women’s representation is not only about numbers; it is also about
driving policy issues that impact on the total wellness of women in our
society. Women parliamentarians ought to drive the processes that will
advance gender influence in the political arena.

Men have a supportive role to play to give women their rightful place in
society as equal partners serving complementary functions for the benefit
of the family and society at large.

The FD believes that women’s presence should be felt in all spheres of
government. Most women are naturally peace loving, and we therefore want to
see more women taking leading roles in decisions affecting defence and
world peace.

Women’s perspectives are what is needed in our hostile world. However, to
be effective, women ought also to show leadership when they are in
positions of power, especially in the perspectives of an inappropriately
male dominated world.

We have women in powerful positions in Parliament, yet there is very little
example of how women have shaped parliamentary processes, specifically for
their needs, for example. Where there is legislation affecting women,
certain parliamentary processes could be set in place whereby the passage
of legislation goes through, for example, a women’s ad hoc committee to
assess its impact on women in society. And the women’s caucus can play a
leading role in this regard.

In conclusion, if all women in this House would form a political movement,
they would represent 32% of the members in this House. They would become
the official opposition overnight. We men, we would be in serious trouble.
I thank you.

Ms F HAJAIG: Chairperson, comrades and colleagues, I should begin by
quoting Kofi Annan, the former Secretary General of the United Nations. He
noted that: African women had always been a force for peace and
development. Africa was now showing an economic growth and a renewed sense
of hope and determination as well as an increased respect for Human Rights.
However, violence and conflicts were still rampant and women were more
affected by both.

He further emphasised that, at international level, global conferences had
provided a new purpose to the course of women. The countries that had
ratified conventions with reservation were doing so against the tide of
history. He emphasised women’s rights as Human Rights, which should include
qualitative education, health care, economic rights, freedom from violence
and participation and decision-making. Without recognition of women’s
rights as Human Rights and as a cross-cutting issue, the development
process would falter. He urged the African countries to respect and protect
women’s rights. Gender equality was a goal in itself and a precondition for
poverty eradication, sustainable development and good governance.

After the Cairo and Beijing Conferences a number of UN agencies began to
engage women in a more constructive manner. In situations of armed conflict
women were doubly exposed. They were targeted at home and in camps due to
the unequal power relations. With regard to the use of rape – a military
strategy - the UN Refugee Commission had adopted three strategies, namely
prevention, protection and solution of the problem. Refugee women were like
any other women but had particular immediate needs. The UNHR planned to
continue to support post-conflict initiatives for returnees and assist in
the reconstruction and reconciliation process.

UNICEF noted that true gender partnership needed to take into account the
feminisation of poverty and that women needed space for participation in
the economy. Women needed to be aware of globalisation and that process
should also be accountable to communities and not only to capital markets.
In this respect, women should participate in the development of trade
policies and have a voice in macro-policy development. The use of ITC
should be encouraged.

UNICEF also addressed issues of violence against women. It said that the
empowerment of girls was in principle enshrined in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and Cedaw, not forgetting the, Vienna Convention of
1993. Girls’ education was at the heart of the matter. There were 140
ongoing education projects in Africa sponsored by Unesco, the World Bank
and a UN system-wide special initiative in 15 countries, particularly in
the Horn of Africa, in the Sahel, Kenya and Uganda.

The UNDP informed that among the challenges that constrain women’s
participation in development were lack of resources to enhance women’s
productivity and the exclusion of women from economic management and
decision-making. UNDP programmes will include mainstreaming gender and
capacity-building training. These human development reports will be given
to respective governments where they will have an opportunity to analyse
the situation of women. The reports can give women a platform on which they
can lobby for change.

Unesco said that peace-building is much cheaper than peacekeeping. Unesco
had a project in place to develop education for women on traditional
peacekeeping strategies. In collaboration with the UNDP and FAWE, Unesco is
training women trainers to support peace initiatives.

Although African women have made significant progress in the two past
decades, the process is not easy. Women contend with cultural factors,
belief systems that often impose limitations on what a woman can aspire to,
irrespective of whatever talents and capacity she may be endowed with.

The African Union took a major step by promoting gender parity in its top
decision-making positions. In 2003, five males and five women were elected
as AU Commissioners. The following, Ms Gertrude Mongella was chosen to lead
the African Union’s Pan-African Parliament, where women make up 25% of the
parliamentarians. Madam Savane leads the APRM which oversees standards for
good governance.

On 25 November 2005, at last, the protocol to the African Charter on Human
and People’s Rights relating to women’s rights came into effect. The
protocol, beyond recognising women’s rights, addresses the fundamental
issues pertinent to the lives of women in Africa. The protocol, through its
provisions, allows scope for addressing crucial issues such as multisided
violations of rights in marriage violence; and attacks to life, physical
and moral integrity to women and girls’ security.

The coming into effect of the protocol provides an irreplaceable legal
framework to put an end to violations of which women and children,
particularly girls, are victims in periods of conflict as civilians,
refugees or soldiers and to take up the challenges of peace in Africa and
indispensable condition for development.

The coming into effect of this protocol will enhance the credibility of the
African Union’s re-equitable representation of women in the AU Commission
and equitable representation of judges at the African Court of Justice and
the African Court on Human and People’s Rights.

A special advisor on gender issues at the United Nations states that
because the continent is diverse, the problems are complex. Therefore, in
global debates, the problems in Africa should not be made simplistic or be
reduced to a single denomination - for example, girls do not only need
access to education but must also be protected from violence and harmful
practices.

While there is a need to continue with basic strategies to lift women out
of poverty and to halt HIV and Aids, there are also important, second and
third generation strategies to put in place. These include ensuring that
global trade agreements, new information and communication technologies
provide immediate benefits to women. Empowerment of women should not be
confined to a narrow range of factors within countries but should also
ensure equal participation of women in fast moving global processes.

Women throughout Asia confront systematic discrimination and abuse, often
with little hope of any redress. From deeply entrenched social norms that
subordinate women to pervasive and horrific acts of violence, women’s
rights violations remain one of the most enduring and grave human rights
crises in the region. Recent decades have witnessed the proliferation of
women’s rights groups and activism in many countries, new legal reforms,
strides in education and public participation.

Despite these hard-won changes, hundreds of millions of women in Asia still
struggle on a daily basis. Among the major human rights violations against
women in the region are exploitation and abuse of women workers; high rates
of gender-based violence; discrimination in education, health care and
property rights; and barriers to women’s free movement and participation in
the public sphere.

I’m going to skip a few things. I just want to outline something which I
think all of us ought to know. I think one of the members did make some
reference to it. As you know, Rwanda’s Parliament leads in the
participation of female representation. It’s interesting that the five
permanent members of the UN Security Council are not included among the top
20 countries as far as women’s representation in Parliament is concerned.
China is ranked number 48, the United Kingdom number 50 and the United
States of America number 69. In Afghanistan, and, as you know, it is a very
poor country, there are 27% of women in Parliament and Iraq has 25%. France
holds position number 85 with only 12% of women. Russia is ranked number
100 with only 9% of women. Currently, there are 11 women heads of state out
of 193 countries.

Women represent over half the world’s population or should I say more than
half of humankind. Let us rededicate ourselves today to level the playing
fields and let women have their rightful place for a better home, a better
country and a better world. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Chairperson, on International Women’s
Day I want to give credit to the ANC for their leadership in the field of
women’s rights. But all, well those of us who are here in this House,
deserve a pat on the back for embracing these values and contributing to
South Africa becoming internationally reckoned as a frontrunner in the
field of gender parity.

Pre-1994 South Africa was virtually unaware of the tremendous drive for the
equality for women, along with equality and human rights for all which was
bubbling up throughout the world. Compare us to Mongolia, a country that
had already ratified three important international conventions on rights
and equality for women in the 1960s.
Somewhat unreconstructed chauvinists still survive here and they should be
consigned to a dustbin, but I have sympathy for those parliamentarians who
have a slightly puzzled response to the language used to keep gender in the
mainstream of political thinking and also for the difficulties it presents
to the language service.

Byvoorbeeld, indien ek hierdie debat in Afrikaans gevoer het, sou ek
gepraat het oor “geslag in die hoofstroom van die Parlement,” en dis nie
wat ek sou bedoel het om te sê nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[For instance, if I were to conduct this debate in Afrikaans, I would have
spoken about “gender in the mainstream of Parliament” and that would not
have been what I had meant to say.]

But, to serious matters: Are we doing enough? Of course not. The periodic
country report of government to the United Nations on our levels of
compliance with Cedaw, the Convention on Elimination of Discrimination
against Women, is not tabled in Parliament before submission to the United
Nations.

According to the Minister in the Office of the President, hon Pahad, there
is no need to do so. I don’t agree. It cannot be right that Parliament
ratified Cedaw and is then sidelined in the report on our compliance.

Parliamentarians doing oversight work must keep the issue of gender-
mainstreaming foremost in their business. This is all the more self-evident
if we recognise poverty-mainstreaming as the flip side of gender-
mainstreaming. If we don’t succeed with the one, we will fail with the
other. Gender-mainstreaming is not only best practise for women, but for
Parliament as an institution and for the people as a whole.

The World Bank makes a clear business case for mainstreaming gender for the
simple reason that the development of women is the most cost-effective way
of spending development funds. From Andorra to Australia and Zambia and
from St Kitts and Nevis to Kazakhstan, gender-mainstreaming is occurring in
some form or another.

In Nigeria’s House Committee on Women’s Affairs the membership is 20 men
and 20 women; in Lebanon, 8 men and 4 women; in Japan’s Committee on
Health, Labour and Welfare there are 39 men and 6 women, but in India it is
5 men and 25 women. Our own JMC, help me if I am wrong, has 3 male members
and, I think, 13 women. [Laughter.]

Kuwait has a committee on Women’s Affairs. Since there is only one gender
present in the National Assembly, I give you no prizes for guessing what
the membership is. So we can safely assume that to have a committee devoted
to gender issues is not a foolproof method for ensuring success.
Swedish studies confirm that the gender perspective is often forgotten when
a large number of proposals are considered before parliament and gender
equality is weighed against other priority areas. If Minister Manuel was
here, I would have asked him what has happened to our much-vaunted gender-
budgeting. Pfft, weg! [Phfft, gone!]

SADC also reported that regardless of the head of state affirming the need
for women in decision-making, cultural barriers present major challenges to
women in gaining access to positions of power. And in this Parliament,
specifically, almost daily, and internationally as regularly, I see how
culture is used to excuse indefensible positions and to justify
discrimination against women and we mustn’t fall into that trap once again.

With an average of 150 rapes per day in South Africa reported, with the
alarming increase in teen pregnancies, with the burden of Aids falling
squarely on women, with the unemployment rate of African women at 37%,
gender considerations cannot be left out of any sphere of parliamentary
operation for any reason.

The World Health Organisation puts it this way:


  Gender is not something that can be consigned to watchdogs in a single
  office, since no single office could possibly involve itself in all
  phases of each of parliament’s activities.
I cannot say it any better. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, on a point of order: In the past 12 years, this
has been the first time we heard a wonderful speech from a DA member. I
therefore want to propose that she becomes the leader of the DA. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Unfortunately we can’t endorse any
such decision here, Mr Chauke, but I am sure Mrs Botha will consult with
you outside the House.

Nkskz R A NDZANGA: Mgcinisihlalo, ndibulela eli thuba undinike lona lokuba
mandize kuthetha apha. Ndimamele intetho kamama onguSekela Sihlalo
namhlanje, kwaye uyandothusa, ngoba bona emakhayeni abo umntu omnyama
wasethyini ebengumntu obahlambela iimpahla, abaphekele nokutya.
Babengakhathali nokuba loo mntu unabo na abantwana. Babengambuzi nokuba
baphekelwa ngubani bona. Namhlanje bafunde isifundo apha kuKhongolozi.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mrs R A NDZANGA: Chairperson, I would like to thank you for affording me
the opportunity to come and have a word here. The speech of the Deputy
Chairperson really surprises me because black African women used to wash
their clothes and prepare their food. They were not interested in knowing
whether that person had children nor did they bother to ask any questions
about who made food for her children. Today they have learned a lesson from
the ANC.]

Chairperson, thanks for affording me the opportunity to take part in this
debate. The issue of global warming is a world concern, the concern being
that reduced rainfall will lead to a decrease in maize production and that
grazing for livestock would also be reduced.

Global warming effects are being felt in hot areas where adult plants
survive the heat as old plants have water storage capacities and younger
plants die because they cannot hold water. The general opinion is that some
parts of the world are becoming hot and dry and the question is what effect
global warming will have on the future of poor farming communities who farm
in dry hot areas in our country.

Climate change and global warming are issues linked to all the citizens of
the world. While global warming increases temperatures, damage to crops is
expected, especially in hot rural areas. Wildfires occur regularly
resulting in the death of animals, both wild and domestic. Shortages of
drinking water for both domestic animals and human beings are experienced.
There are always shortages of food and medicine in hot rural areas.

Sources of energy are sought and as a result women, the people who suffer
most, cut wood in forests due to a lack of another means of energy to
prepare whatever meals they can find for their families as well as to keep
their families warm during severe, cold winters. Energy and clean drinking
water is still a problem in our poor rural areas. Young mothers suffer most
as they have to take care of their infants both during summer and severe,
cold winters; the babies have to be kept clean and well-fed.

We could start by acknowledging the amount of work that is being done by
the SA Weather Service on global climate change, which is a great
environmental change facing our country in this century. We are thankful to
the SA Weather Service for helping to safeguard lives, to safeguard the
environment and we hope that their services will in future be extended to
our deep rural areas as well. The indigenous methods of detecting weather
disasters have passed on with the elders of our communities.

I would also like to thank Parliament for always celebrating March 8,
International Women’s Day, to remind the women of the world that women in
our rural areas celebrate with all other women. Our democratic government
under the ANC has done a lot to provide water and electricity in our rural
areas. Our rural areas are vast. We still have areas that are in need of
clean energy and clean drinking water.

Climate change is always associated with tornados, with floods, with heat
waves and spells of severe cold. The SA Weather Service uses some of the
most sophisticated types of technology to serve our country, and is of
great assistance to our country’s disaster management authorities.

Our South African weather personnel participate in international
conferences and groups focusing on climate change. The SA Weather Service
has representatives in international working groups and intergovernmental
panels on climate change.

The priority of our SA Weather Service is saving lives through effective
and timely warnings. I wish to thank you very much for this opportunity.
Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!] [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: A pula e ne! [Let it rain!]

An HON MEMBER: Yebo Mama! [Yes, Madam!]

  DEBATE ON PROMOTING DIVERSITY AND EQUAL RIGHTS FOR ALL THROUGH UNIVERSAL
                     DEMOCRATIC AND ELECTORAL STANDARDS

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, the formation of the ANC was an affirmation by
Africans, in Southern Africa, that they are better off working together
politically in their diversity to seek remedies for the concerns they had
as individual types. Its formation was a positive reaction to a universally
growing spirit of the right of people to self-determination.

Through struggle the movement learnt to appreciate more the value of unity
and increased its campaign to fight exclusion, fragmentation and always
looked forward to working with others to pursue common objectives. The
promotion of diversity and equality was as much an internal imperative as
it was an external reason for its existence. Systematically the ANC
campaigned to win over people to its objectives for a common South
Africanness that the majority were denied.

The rejection of colonialism and apartheid was a rejection of an imposition
of alien rule and its immoral inhumanity and exploitation that stood in
dramatic opposition and contrast to our people’s philosophy of “botho” or
``ubuntu’’ [humanity].

In addition, and following decades of struggle, the ANC grew to appreciate
even more the value of inclusiveness and, through a deeply democratic
process, collected demands from people across the country that ended being
quoted in the Freedom Charter.

As many members now know, the Freedom Charter, following its adoption by
the ANC in 1956, became its basic political statement. It became the beacon
that pointed its members and allies, including the people of South Africa
as a whole, towards the kind of society that it stood for.

The key statement that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black
and white, was a clarion call to reject fragmentation on racial grounds or
any other grounds. The equality before the law clause of the Freedom
Charter was self-explanatory.

The problematic and one of the practical steps that the apartheid system
insisted on was the removal of blacks and others representing them from the
problematic voters’ roll that existed then, pushing for a separate
arrangement only on the basis of racial and/or tribal affiliation. People
saw through these sham electoral schemes, and rejected them as meaningless.

The 1994 breakthrough signalled a profound change from the past. The
majority of South Africans emphatically endorsed a democratic dispensation
that provided a democratic a universal right for anyone above 18 years to
vote and/or stand to be voted for, irrespective of race, colour or creed.

Respect for diversity is not just our historical practice in the ANC, but
it is now a value in our supreme law of the land, the Constitution, which
unites all South Africans. So is equality such a value as well, even as we
continue to strive for the realisation of that provision in practice in
every sphere of life.
Elections and electoral processes are only part of a broader dispensation
that is required to entrench the values of respect for diversity and equal
rights for all. The huge campaign to eradicate poverty in our country is
critical to making such equality meaningful.

Poverty and its many negative manifestations, including crime and
corruption, can effectively render aspects of our Constitution meaningless.
It is not an accident that our Constitution contains both social and
economic rights. It is precisely because of the value of this that they are
inseparable, and that we insist on their full implementation.

By concerted efforts across the boundaries, we have to recognise the
importance of poverty eradication to making democracy and elections
meaningful. The work that is now underway in South Africa and elsewhere is
crucial. The Interparliamentary Union, where these debates will be taken up
further, has to concretise a programme of work to identify and remove those
factors that affect the poorest, most marginalised, from full benefits of
democracy and elections.

South Africa, in 2004, during the 10th anniversary of our freedom, joined
Idea, an intergovernmental Institute for Democracy Through Electoral
Assistance. This body does its work by sharing knowledge, resources and
providing assistance when called to do so by government. Its website and
links are rich repositories of useful material to compare and contrast our
work, so go and learn from that.

Idea, as an institution, provides newsletters, various forms of information
and holds conferences, and in so doing, brings nearer and closer to people
the kind of information that will make the quality of their lives improve.
This body has relations with several United Nations organisations and
agencies – with the International Union of Local Authorities, International
Union of Journalists, International Commission of Jurists and others that
advance its cause.

In so doing, South Africa, by being part of this body and as part of a
collective international effort, is spreading the values of respect for
diversity, equal rights for the entrenchment of democracy and proper
electoral standards. The elections that we have had in our country since
independence are a forceful example, a modelling of what we wish others to
emulate. The accolades that South Africa’s Independent Electoral Commission
has received for the work it does, both inside the country and outside, is
a good example of what we want to see in the rest of the continent and
globally.

That excellent work is complemented by similar accolades that the President
received for the hands-on support he lends to countries in difficult
conflict situations that are clearly struggling with issues of diversity,
of democracy and electoral concerns. The time, energy and resources he
expends in those efforts will contribute enormously to our own peace,
development and prosperity.

To put it like Nkrumah did when talking about Ghana’s independence, South
Africa’s independence, prosperity and its development will be unsustainable
without the neighbours themselves on the continent also developing and
moving significantly to stop debilitating conflict, and embrace emerging
and strong democratic impulses that exist in those countries.

It is on this note of collective solidarity that the principles of respect
for diversity and equal rights for all will stand or fall. Our country is
on the right track under the steadfast guidance by the oldest movement in
Africa, the internationalist 95-year-old ANC. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Madam Chair, diversity is a key feature of South Africa. We
have 11 official languages. We form a cultural melting pot. We have various
ethnic groups and we have different religions. We hold various beliefs -
the list is endless and despite all these differences, we as South Africans
have committed ourselves to being united in our diversity.

It is, however, disturbing to note that after almost 11 years since the
lofty ideals regarding what we are and how we would like to be were enacted
into law in order to hold the rainbow nation together, some South Africans
feel that they are no longer treated equally. They feel some sense of
alienation.

In this regard, I would like to refer extensively to the verbal exchange
between Sunday Times Editor Mondi Makhanya, the designated executive
officer of the Federasie van Afrikaanse Kultuurverenigings and editor of
Die Vrye Afrikaan and the Afrikaans edition of the Le Monde Diplomatique,
Johan Roussouw. Writing in his column of 25 February entitled, “We must
delve deeper into new wave of Afrikaner seize mentality”, Makhanya claims
that there is a strong feeling of alienation within some sectors of the
Afrikaner population and a sense that it is time to fight back against
something.

He goes further and asks the following questions:


   Did something recently happen that resulted in the reduction of the
   status of Afrikaners? Was there a pronouncement that said Afrikaners were
   henceforth to be regarded as lesser South Africans than others? Was there
   an edict that reduced their rights?

Makhanya fails to understand why some Afrikaners feel alienated because in
his view:


   The new South Africa has been good for Afrikaners; better than apartheid
   South Africa in many respects. Their language is no longer regarded as
   the language of the oppressor and is jealously protected by those who
   once took to the streets to reject it.

   In both the public and private sectors, it enjoys a status far above that
   of the other official languages other than English. It is thriving in the
   print and electronic media and its literature is in bloom. In business
   Afrikaners have done well. Freed from the bondage of the civil service
   they have transformed themselves into great entrepreneurs. Afrikaner
   symbols still dominate our urban landscapes and Afrikaner sportsmen are
   everybody’s heroes nowadays. One could go on and on.


This is then what Makhanya said.

Responding to this, Roussouw makes the following observation in the Sunday
Times, dated 4 March:


   Firstly, avoid the myth that Afrikaners are still suffering from power
   loss syndrome. After all the young Afrikaners singing about De la Rey
   never knew state power. Secondly, avoid reducing Afrikaners to mere
   economic beings by claiming that since some have become successful
   entrepreneurs and often ugly materialists Afrikaners should be happy.
   Thirdly, avoid the myth that Afrikaans is doing well. Two-thirds of
   Afrikaans schools have disappeared or are being anglicized and Afrikaans
   universities are all in various stages of Anglicisation, except
   Stellenbosch. Afrikaans has practically disappeared from the civil
   service. The root cause of the alienation is the fact that the
   recognition between Afrikaners and Africans that served as the basis for
   1994 have been severely eroded after the Mandela era. The important point
   is that the alienation is much more symbolic than material and there is
   no reason it can’t be dealt with speedily.


Roussouw‘s suggestions to ensure that Afrikaners do not feel unwelcome in
the new South Africa and that their fears are allayed include, inter alia,
the following:


   By all means restore all African place names but not by erasing Afrikaans
   place names, for example Tshwane or Pretoria. Increase mother tongue
   education for all children instead of targeting Afrikaans schools in the
   name of access, often anglicising those schools and winning poor
   education in a second language for speakers in African languages.


More than anything else the exchange between Makhanya and Roussouw
highlights two important lessons for South Africa. Firstly, the need to
constantly engage one another so that we are able to have some form of
mutual understanding.

Secondly, we have to guard against complacency. In a diverse country such
as ours a ceaseless conversation is imperative; after all, South Africa’s
democracy came through the use of words. In effect, the need to constantly
negotiate our diversity resonates with this year’s parliamentary theme:
“Let’s deepen the debate, South Africa”.

The theme should not just be an empty slogan; if anything, it requires a
pragmatic and meaningful application. It should not be confided to the
politicians; on the contrary, the misconceptions can only be dispelled if
there is a candid and serious debate. People’s fears and concerns should
not be taken at face value. That is one of the ways to preserve our
diversity and practically demonstrate that indeed South Africa belongs to
all who live in it.

Touted as one of the most democratic constitutions in the world, our
Constitution makes provision for a multiparty democratic system of
government to ensure accountability, responsiveness and openness. In a
nutshell, this is the fundamental role of an opposition party. It is
regrettable that some of our colleagues from the ruling party view
opposition parties as nothing more than bunch of people who are hellbent on
attracting media attention and focusing on what, in their view, are trivial
issues.

Contrary to what these sceptics believe, all that we say and do is driven
by our unshaken commitment to the democratic values of this country.
Perhaps more importantly, we have a constitutional right to express views
which may not appeal to the ruling party.

This is made possible by our electoral system, the proportional
representation or PR system as we know it. One of the measured advantages
of the PR system is that political parties or candidates have the
percentage of legislative seats that reflect their public support. Put
differently, the PR system leads to more diverse representation and it
accords with the diverse nature of South Africa.

To demonstrate that we uphold the values of our Constitution and to promote
diversity and equal rights for all, we have to listen to all South
Africans. We have to treat them equally. Let’s show them that they all
count by taking their concerns seriously. Let’s meaningfully deepen the
debate in South Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, at the forthcoming meeting of the
International Parliamentary Union at the end of next month in Indonesia,
147 parliaments from all over the globe will be discussing the very subject
that we are discussing today, namely promoting diversity and equal rights
for all through universal democratic and electoral standards. It is
therefore incumbent on this House today to air its views on this subject so
that our delegates could take an informed stance in Indonesia on behalf of
this Parliament. That is what this debate is about.

Democracies across the world are increasingly being confronted by the
realities; realities of accommodating cultural and ethnic diversity. The
idea of one nation state with one homogenous population group is an idea
that is dead and buried. Even the most traditional nation states of Europe
such as Germany and France are being challenged by minority language and
religious groups.

The greatest challenge faced by the EU is how to build a Europe-wide
identity while at the same time recognising multiculturalism.

France, for instance, recently had some severe ethnic demonstrations and
public violence. Belgium is battling to remain a single country with
Flemish and French speakers moving in separate directions. The United
Kingdom is gripped with fear that large parts of London and other cities
have lost their British character.

Spain is feeling the weight of waves of illegal immigrants. Australia last
year stood witness to public violence when Muslim and white youths embarked
on open conflict. The USA is spending billions of dollars to keep
immigrants from the south out of the country. The dream of democracy in
Iraq is in tatters due to intercommunity conflict and hatred.

We have learned precious lessons from our international experiences such as
that the protection of individual rights alone is not enough to ensure
survival of cultural identities. Recognising cultural diversity is a
strength and not a weakness. Winner-takes-all electoral methods and models
are not equipped for ethnically diverse societies where voting is, in many
instances, along group lines. Language, cultural and religious diversity is
a reality; a reality that must be recognised in the legal framework and
policy measures of states.  Recognition of diversity does not imply
discrimination against individuals on the basis of race or any other
aspect.

The state has a duty to protect cultural diversity and to enable groups to
maintain and develop their unique identity. Failure to accommodate
diversity is arguably the greatest threat in young democracies. A range of
constitutional and legal techniques as well as policy measures must be used
to build national unity and recognise diversity. For example, provincial
and local government must be resourced to serve local needs, the electoral
system must accompany the diversity of views and opinions, the Bill of
Rights must recognise that many individual rights only come to fruition
within the context of community and governments at local, provincial and
national level must be formed on coalitions to give minorities a voice in
the executive.

We have to be careful not to be held captive by an outdated, old-fashioned
approach to cultural diversity. Majority dominance is not a guarantee for
democratic stability and those that believe so are ignoring the lessons of
history. Democratic stability is ensured by giving all a space in the sun:
By allowing children to speak their mother tongue, to be taught in the
language of their mothers, to learn and practice the traditions of their
ancestors, to hear their cultural music on public broadcasters, to see
their leaders in government and to take decision over things that matter to
them - that is democratic government for a new millennium which we are
taking to Indonesia. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Chair and hon members, the objective of promoting
diversity and equal rights for all is best served by democratic norms. This
is why democracy is the pre-eminent political system in the world today,
because it best succeeds in promoting diversity and equal rights. In its
simplest definition, democracy is about allowing everybody the opportunity
to participate and to be heard and for the majority of the citizens to
govern through their elected representatives.

Promoting diversity is a continuous task. We must constantly guard against
the tendency to suppress dissenting views and diversity. Recently, the SABC
went through the public embarrassment of the blacklist saga and has
subsequently lost a number of quality media workers. This is a current
example of the erosion of diversity and of the suppression of dissenting
views.

Political intolerance remains in our midst. This morning we were shocked by
the news that a new UDM member in Cape Town, formerly from the ANC, was
shot dead. If this was a politically motivated attack, we must be concerned
about the willingness of some among us to protect and promote diversity and
equal rights for all. I thank you, Madam Chairperson. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms N R MOKOTO: Madam Chairperson, hon members, people everywhere want to be
free to determine their destinies, express their views and participate in
the decisions that shape their lives. Just as crucial for human development
as being able to broaden one’s choices is to enjoy good health and being
able to read.

In the 1980s and 1990s, a dramatic turn of events swept across the world
bringing into life new political systems and extensions of political
freedoms.

The UNDP Development Report of 2002 hinted that at the time about 81
countries took significant steps towards democracy and at the same time in
2002, more than ever before, close to 140 of the world’s nearly 200
countries held their regular multiparty elections.

It has been pointed out that even where democratic institutions are firmly
established, citizens often feel powerless to influence national policies.
Many people have traditionally occupied disadvantaged positions in society,
including women, youth and the disabled and they have entered into dialogue
with politicians at local and national levels to promote and press for
greater recognition of their concerns, as the instruments of parliamentary
democracy are not sufficient to answer their needs.

Women and youth struggles seem to be under-valued and their attempts to
form part of or even influence outcomes are neglected if not viewed as
sectoral and transitional matters, hence not so significant. This is
exacerbated by the fact that they do not have access to diverse platforms
to raise their own perspectives.

In the 1999 Gallup International’s Millennium Survey recorded responses
from more than 50 000 people in 60 countries on whether their countries
were governed by the will of the people less than a third of the
respondents said yes and only one in ten said their government responded
well to the will of the people.

As the ANC, we believe that in any democracy we have to acknowledge that
effective public participation depends not only on dedicated institutions
and procedures, but also relies on the creation of a broader environment in
which general rights can be exercised and the empowerment of the
marginalised groups are pursued.

We have to understand that the promotion of democracy does not only start
and end with the successful holding of elections and people voting in large
numbers every five years, but it is all about ensuring massive
participation of the diverse range of people in the democratisation process
right from the beginning of policy formulation through to the
implementation of and finally at the evaluation stages of those policies.

While in many older democracies, public participation and other democratic
involvement of the citizenry is the result of an evolution of political
system, in South Africa the concept was enshrined in the Constitution
itself right from the onset. The Bill of Rights, which is well-constituted
and with various supporting legislations and policy mechanisms employed by
government, provides for solid testimony to this practice.

The right to petition government generally is recognised in section 17 of
the Constitution. Petitions allow individuals or groups to raise issues in
a formal way without having to go through a particular member of the
legislature. They are useful mechanisms for unorganised sectors of society
to come together to raise particular issues for consideration by the
legislative authority.

In South Africa, where language and illiteracy or poor educational
background and lack of confidence and material resources stand in the way
of participation in political processes, administrative assistance has
served as a crucial way of ensuring that petitioners are assisted through
the intricacies of the petition process.

There are a number of ways in which members of the public or constituencies
can use their MPs to approach the legislature, including asking for motions
and statements to be put in the House and raising issues for consideration.

Another area of interest relates to the right of the public to contribute
to and participate in the implementation of laws and regulations.
Internationally, environmental legislation has led in this respect,
probably because environmental lobbyists challenged the prevailing power of
established sectors and tend to be driven from the grassroots. The
environmental lobby groups that came to fore in the 1960s and 1970s
operated outside the fringes of the political order.

Ideally, these democratic practices provided means whereby public comment
and experience with regard to existing legislation, regulations and
processes may be entertained and revisited. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Madam Chair, the ID continue to believe that we must adopt
the recommendations of the Van Zyl Slabbert report, because we believe that
it will deliver to us a system in which MPs are more responsive to the
people who vote for them and thereafter their political bosses.

To this effect, the ID has, since 14 August 2006, asked the Minister of
Home Affairs twice to report to this House with regard to the process. In
August 2006, the Minister promised, and I quote: “The current government
will take the responsibility to ensure that public engagement takes place
in preparation of the 2009 elections.” She went on to say, and I quote: “I
will then, as the line Minister, present it to Cabinet for further
consideration and will certainly report back to Parliament.”

In following up on the original question of the hon De Lille, I asked the
Minister about a timeframe for this report-back and she replied: “Soon!”
Yesterday we again asked the same question and seven months later we are
impatiently waiting for an answer.

Consequently, we believe that it is of little use for this House to debate
lofty IPU topics against a background of such blatant disregard, and in one
minute on top of it all. I thank you, Madam Chair. [Time expired.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, in the one minute that I have I want to take you
back to the deadlocks that we had when we were negotiating the new South
Africa. A crucial one was related to the new Constitution and the fact that
there was a rigidly controlled minority regime and a majority that was
resisting that.

The question arose: why were the negotiators not elected? There is also the
whole idea of bringing these two diverse positions together. Let us not
forget that the impasse was resolved by compromise with the newly-elected
national legislature then doubling then as a constitution-making body; and
that is the issue that we are discussing today - how to promote diversity
and equal rights for all three universal democratic and electoral
standards.

We were able to do that and we should never forget it; that we were able to
bridge that historical divide that threatened to engulf our country and
that we were able to unite in our diversity. So, we fully support this
motion and the urgent need to promote diversity and equal rights and we
trust that these views will be passed on to the Inter- Parliamentary Union
debate. Thank you very much.

Mrs B M NTULI: Deputy Chairperson, Deputy Minister, colleagues and friends,
for promoting diversity and equal rights for all through universal
democratic and electoral standards there are several democratic models in
the world. After the removal of apartheid South Africa was based on a
constitutional democracy with a Bill of Rights playing a central role in
shaping the values adopted by the country.

Elections cannot be regarded as the main or the only base of a working
democracy. As a result it was imperative that the country considered
adopting a Constitution that would act as another tier of ensuring
democracy.

The country’s citizens had to agree to this Constitution. We also needed to
become involved in peace-building efforts beyond our borders to make sure
that democratic values are adopted as widely as possible.

Diversity, equality and inclusivity are dynamic concepts. They recognise
that no society is composed of people of the same kind and are uniform.
They are not homogeneous. Diversity cuts across cultural, social,
linguistic and economic features of society, just as we have 11 official
languages in South Africa.

Governments are required to promote diversity through legal and
constitutional institutions and make sure that there is inclusivity. The
state must make sure that it does not create divisions in the country and
promote human rights, democracy and equality that cut across the diverse
groups in society to ensure unity and peace.

Equality and diversity are key elements of democracy and can be promoted
through universal democratic election standards that allow for the
promotion of effective ways of combating violence and crime against
humanity. The Human Rights Charter calls on all countries to embrace human
rights, equality and ensure that democracy is internationalised and not
only localised. Protection and promotion of democracy, diversity and
equality is vital.

Throughout the ages people have tried to make sense of their reality and
the society they live in and have tried to understand the meaning of life,
social relations, spiritual entities, moral and ethical framework of law
and of how society should be organised. This in turn impacted on how
society manages its social relations.

Once we claim a universal value for a democracy, it follows that there must
be mutual benefits from sharing the experiences of common problems and
workable solutions across different countries and traditions, assuming that
all are transiting towards the same goal. Of course, there will be
objections to fitting all countries with divergent political cultures and
traditions into the same straitjacket.

There are many types of democracy in the world that countries practise. We
have participatory democracy, single-party democracy, Marxist democracy,
liberal democracy, constitutional democracy and many more. Democracy
without freedom is a contradiction. Individuals must be guaranteed a set of
rights in a constitutionally protected Bill of Rights.

We need to make sure that our democracy involves values, effectiveness and
accountability in the delivery of electoral programmes between equality and
accountability in an electoral system. All rights are entailed in equality
and all rights in principle should guarantee equality. In all human rights
policies there is a strong antidiscrimination clause.

Secondly, it is increasingly insisted on human rights circles that civil
rights and political rights should not be separated from economic and
social rights. The rights belong to individuals. The duty to protect the
rights resides with the states which are signatories to the relevant
international conventions.

States must be effective in protecting the rights to the extent that
communities themselves are prepared to acknowledge the rights of others.
This means respect for the rights of others even if they differ from yours
and readiness to accept the results when others win in a fair competition
for votes. The laws must command our deep respect for public affairs and we
must keep the law.

It is the parliament’s role to act as a voice for the voiceless and to
protect vulnerable persons against the emerging dictatorship of
international capitalism, which creates poverty. Parliamentarians have to
encourage dialogue, the pursuit of truth and common good, listening,
forgiveness and reconciliation. Institutions that help to build democracy
like the Independent Electoral Commission have to be developed, maintained
and protected.

Finally, countries need to become involved in peace-building efforts beyond
their borders to ensure that democratic values are adopted as widely as
possible. There are key international codes and standards relating to
democracy, diversity and equality rectified by South Africa. These codes
include the following: the Charter of the United Nations Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, International Convention on Civil and
Political rights, Forced Labour Convention on Political Rights of Women,
Convention on the Rights of the Child, International Convention on the
Elimination of All forms of Discrimination and many more. If I had time I
would list them all.

The Bill of Rights constitutes the cornerstone of democracy in South
Africa. It enshrines the rights of all South Africans and affirms the
democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom. It binds all
organs of state in one. Everyone is equal before the law.

In terms of the language and cultural rights enshrined in the Constitution
everyone has the right to use the language and to participate in the
cultural life of their choice. Section 31(1) provides that persons
belonging to cultural, religious, and linguistic communities may not be
denied the right to enjoy their culture, practise their religion and use
their language. Within the context of the progressive human rights-oriented
Constitution, South Africa’s social transformation is grounded in a
legislative framework that is supportive of facilitating a positive social
change. While diversity and equality can survive under different political
systems, it is under democracy that they are guaranteed.

Phambili-ke ngentando yeningi. [Forward with democracy.] Discriminatory
laws and practices should be a thing of the past ... ... izinto ezasala
nobandlululo. [... things that were buried with apartheid.]

Countries have individually and collectively recognised that equality and
diversity are a requisite for political stability, predictability,
political legitimacy and allow for efficient allocation of scarce
resources. It is also important for international institutions like the
Inter-Parliamentary Union to begin dialogue across the globe on the
different interpretations of human rights, democracy and liberty.

Asihlalisane ngokuhloniphana sibe munye kule lizwe esilinikwe uNkulunkulu
wethu ukuze izwe lethu libe nokuthula nenqubekela-phambili. Ngiyabonga.
[Let us live together and respect one another. Let us unite in the country
that our God gave us, so that there can be peace and prosperity in our
country. Thank you.]

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Hon Madam Chair, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, you
who are here, hon members, the flowers of our nation, the sons of the soil,
people of integrity, let me remind you in this House about where we come
from as a new nation. Perhaps no country in the world has ever changed as
dramatically as South Africa, with a clash of cultures, interlinked but
powerfully divergent struggles to find a common voice in the globalised
world.

Well, contrast is nothing new in South Africa. For centuries various people
fleeing national conflicts, natural disasters, starvation, continental
wars, etc, came to settle in this country of ours in search of a better
life. Although isolated by extremes of apartheid policies and removed from
the dynamic world of change, the inhabitants of this beautiful country
never managed to assimilate, but have instead remained apart in language,
culture and appearance.

No doubt this country represents a microcosm of global differences in its
own right. But within these diverse communities there is also a vibrant
contrast of artistic expression clearly visible in the cultural field of
music, where kwaito hits thrive side by side with classical, ballet and
Wagner’s Ring.

The county’s diversity reaches its fullest expression in nature as its
glistening beaches embrace magnificent landscapes, such as Cape Town’s
Table Mountain; needless to talk of aquariums, snake parks, etc. Indeed, at
this juncture it seems appropriate to call our country a land of sun and
fun, another shape of Good Hope for our rainbow nation, if not the prize
and pride of Africa as a whole.

The biggest challenge in any democratic society founded on freedom, human
rights and equality has been the promotion of equality and maintenance of
diversity. Likewise, in the case of our society, the rainbow nation that I
have just described as the prize and pride of Africa can only be
sustainable if all the people of South Africa are united their diversity in
accordance with their desires and aspirations as outlined in the Freedom
Charter adopted in 1955 in Kliptown’s people’s historic congress.

In a document known as “Ready to Govern”, the ANC states that a central
place in the Constitution would be occupied by the Bill of Rights, at the
heart of which lies the notion of fundamental equality of all people
irrespective of race, colour or creed.

Centralisation of equality by the ANC was a response to our brutal past
which, as many of us know, was characterised by gross and immoral unequal
treatment of human beings on the basis of race and gender. The
Reconstruction and Development Programme document of the ANC-led government
further committed the government to eliminating or eradicating racism,
gender, inequality and all other forms of inequality wherever they manifest
themselves in our society.

It is therefore the duty of our Parliament, as a public representative
institution, to improve the performance of government by ensuring that the
notion of the above-mentioned documents is monitored and upheld.

Parliament has to uphold the service standards of our government. It must
ensure a continuous channel of communication and consultation with our
masses. Parliament must bring government closer to the masses through
instruments like izimbizo; it must build an atmosphere of safety in our
communities and it must also build a better Africa and the world.

From the latter statement, thus, there are many reasons for promoting
participation of democratic Parliament in multilateral inter-parliamentary
forums and bilateral relations with other Parliaments.  These forums create
opportunities for our Parliament to actively participate in building a
global society founded on democracy, equality, justice, peace and
prosperity.

But furthermore, our participation in such forums as the International
Parliamentary Union ensures some degree of external progressive influence
into otherwise internal, aggressive decision-makers who believe in
unilateralism in solving international problems and conflicts, thus
resulting in the genocide of innocent lives and the instability of our
world.

Furthermore, participation of our Parliament in international forums
maintains and reinforces the fact that legislative institutions everywhere
in the world are representative of the people, defenders of public interest
and also overseers of government actions. In a nutshell, participation
indirectly improves the position of our own democratic Parliament in the
international scene whilst at the same time it enhances our international
reputation within the inter-parliamentary networks.

Such networks surely create possibilities and opportunities for our
Parliament to build a strong progressive international movement which no
doubt advances the interests of the poor and marginalised sections of our
global society that has been hitherto condemned to backwardness, disease
and superstitions by the so-called modern society.

Indeed, the shape of good hope brought about by the 27 April 1994 historic
elections, the long-awaited taste of victory over evil and justice over
unjustifiable injustices of apartheid, must be kept alive and be developed
by this people’s Parliament. Yes, April 27 was a historic day when black
first truly met white, a day when our country once scarred by the tyranny
of apartheid became the laboratory of mankind in the resolution of
political conflicts. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, when we look at our past and our achievements
as a democracy, the desire for democracy to liberate nations all around the
world is born.

But then we also need to realise that there are a variety of political
systems and traditional political systems that countries have successfully
maintained for centuries and have become an order for the people of that
nation with their acceptance.

However, in democracy today we still find present in taboo political
systems imposition on human life and the harsh cruelties that we point a
finger at. But it is a supreme Constitution that swears by a Bill of Rights
that secures human dignity, equality and other rights.

We certainly support universal democratic and electoral standards to be
practiced globally. But we believe that the respect of human life must be
sanctified first before we label democracies. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD believes that democracy is the
foundational prerequisite that enables qualities such as diversity and
equality to function freely. The means and mechanisms must exist to ensure
that these qualities are protected and promoted without favour or
discrimination in a democratic society.

Although these qualities may be entrenched in the Constitution of many
countries who purport to be democracies, the will and obligation to protect
and respect these qualities remain the primary prerogative of those in
authority and in power. A society that is governed by an open and
transparent system provides certain checks and balances to keep that
balance of power in favour of democratic practice.

A heterogeneous or diverse society, enshrined by democratic principles,
promotes inclusiveness whereby everyone has equal access to the
institutional and legislative means within that society.

The FD supports and will promote international treaties such as the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination,
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which are
examples that recognise the importance to protect the democratic principles
of diversity and equality.

South Africa, in the Preamble to its Constitution, states that the country
belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity. The Bill of Rights
in Chapter 2 of our Constitution has a list of provisions on how these will
be enacted.

In conclusion, as far as possible, all states must seek to avoid the
temptation of dominance over the other, within its borders or outside its
borders, and to engage in broadening the field of democratic interpretation
without jeopardising basic human rights, where everyone can live in peace
and joy equally and have no fear of discrimination. I thank you.

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Chairperson, comrades, friends, I have a slight bout
of the flu, so I’m not going to take responsibility for what I say. In
fact, I tried this morning to wriggle out of the debate, but ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon Carrim, will you please
take your seat? I heard you’re ill, so I want you to sit down.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I simply wanted to say to the hon member that if
he’s feeling very ill, we really don’t mind if he doesn’t speak.
[Laughter.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: I was going to offer not to use my full nine minutes,
especially as the opposition members, for once, have been so conciliatory.
I’ve been one who believes that we should have consensus, we should be
conciliatory and that, within the national framework, we should defer, and
so on.

Madam Chairperson, I’m not sure that that is a very happy state of affairs
because, in fact, I was meant to reply to the very controversial things
they usually say. And now that they’ve been so conciliatory and so
harmonious with the majority party, I have so little to say that I’m
pleased to tell you that I shall indeed only take half the nine minutes I
have been allocated. [Interjections.]

May I also add, since I’m being so kind to the opposition, that one would
imagine that they would not heckle me, but now they’re heckling me. Madam
Chairperson, I’m prepared to give you two minutes of my time to explain to
them what exactly it is that I have said, slowly and simply, so that they
understand that I’m complimenting them for once.

May I point out that the topic, mind you, is not an easy topic to
understand. Those who are representing us on the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
IPU, - you, I suggest, and I’ve engaged with some of them – might want to
seek some clarity.

There are two senses in which this topic has to be understood. The first is
that it’s not precisely clear what is meant. For example, it’s not always
clear that diversity has the same weight as equal rights, nor indeed is it
clear what exactly is meant by democratic and electoral standards. Does
this simply mean democracy and elections, or does it mean standards about
democracy or both? If both, what precisely is the significance of the
distinction?

Of course, another interpretation, which is what I think most speakers have
made from what they said, is that the topic is just concerned with
standards of democracy and electoral systems because, of course, in each
country we have different notions of what democracy is and what electoral
systems best suit us.

In any case, I thought it simple, for my purposes at least. The leader of
my delegation in this debate said it’s in fact fine to do so, and
presumably he had the support of the Chief Whip in saying so. However,
that’s a matter between the two of them, outside this meeting. Promoting
diversity fairly, through democracy and elections, is at least, Mike, what
we are speaking on and, I fear, not very illuminatingly.

Well, given globalisation, internal and international migration,
socioeconomic, historical and other factors, most societies are far more
diverse today than in the past. And every democracy has to address issues
of diversity, however defined and in whatever form.

Of course, there is a variety of forms of diversity. These include ethnic,
racial, cultural, religious, linguistic, sexual orientation and others. But
there is also – it must be stressed – the diversity of ideas. A society can
be considerably enriched if it encourages a fair expression of diversity
within the framework of a national consensus that all share.

Finding the right balance between diversity and unity is never easy.
Usually it’s a fine, delicate act. But those countries that get it right
have considerable rewards to reap. Unfortunately, most never do.

For diversity and democracy to be mutually reinforcing, there has to be
clarity about the content and the scope of the diversity. In other words,
where does diversity begin and end? Of course, there cannot be an
unfettered expression of diversity. Basically, it seems to me, the limit
should be two-fold. Firstly, any subgroup or individuals within society can
express their specific identities, provided that these do not intrude on
the rights of any other subgroup or individuals. Secondly, diversity has to
be expressed in a way that doesn’t contradict the basic core values of a
society or undermine its fundamental cohesion.

Flowing from this, it’s possible that in certain societies diversity cannot
be expressed through giving equal rights to all those seeking expression of
diversity. There may well be cases where rights to diversify are reduced or
taken away altogether from some, if the rights of others are infringed or
the society’s cohesion is significantly undermined.

It may well be too that in certain cases there are different levels of
right for the expression of different forms of diversity, where the two
conditions I have just referred to have not been met. But such restrictions
will only apply in exceptional conditions.

As far as possible, diversity and equal rights should go hand in hand, and
where there are restrictions, there must be clear constitutional, legal,
normative and other foundations for them. There must indeed be structures
to decide on this ultimately and in most societies, presumably, it’s the
judicial system.

Of course, flowing from what I’ve said, there are many issues concerning
clarity that need to be addressed. Unfortunately, there isn’t time in this
debate to do so. We may come back to this in future debates, in this House,
in topics that are similar to the one we currently have before us.

It’s certainly clear that free and fair elections are a vital means of
consolidating democracy and providing for diversity. Elections are an
important, though by means no final, barometer of the diversity of a
country.

Of course, the value of elections in this regard depends crucially on the
electoral system and various aspects of elections. Some electoral systems
encourage outcomes that more accurately reflect diversity than others. For
example, generally in proportional representation systems ... I think
somebody has covered this, so I’ll skip the rest of it.

HON MEMBERS: Hear! Hear!

Mr Y I CARRIM: I’m getting worried now. The DA is so complimentary about
me.

I do want to point out that in many ways our country is a remarkable
example. Obviously we are not going to go to the IPU to extol ourselves in
some sort of uncritical way; we have many challenges, and Mr Swart and
others referred to some of them.

But I do think, Madam Chairperson, that our country has phenomenally useful
examples. At the time we were undergoing a transition we opted for a full
PR system so that any party, even the one that got 0,25% of the vote, could
end up in this Parliament. I think that should be reviewed now, 13 years
down the road. I think it’s still possible with the ward and the PR system
to provide for diversity.

I think that if we look at our Constitution, this very Parliament right now
is looking at Chapter 9 institutions and the degree to which they are
performing their roles. However, it is true to say that the Human Rights
Commission, the Gender Commission, the Section 185 Commission, as we call
it, on culture, language and religious rights, the Public Protector, and so
on are wonderful institutions.

So democracy, as an expression of diversity, comes not only through
elections, but through a variety of other means as well. Ultimately, I
think, one of the biggest challenges we have – and I’m running out of time,
I’m amazed to see – is religion, given the complexities around the
fundamentalisms of all sorts. I really think that managing religious
diversity is important. As somebody who is not a religious practitioner, it
surprises me that there is so much tension. Ultimately, I think, all
religions have the same basic core values and it’s regrettable that as
democracies we have not been able to manage that.

Ultimately, I want to say that we don’t have a choice about this; we have
to manage diversity. The issue, simply, is how, at what pace and towards
what goal? But the goal, ultimately, surely, should be some or other form
of recognising that we need not just a national consensus, but a global
one. Ultimately, whatever our religious or ideological background, or
whatever, we belong to the one final human race. I thank you for that.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): Nine minutes to the second, hon
Carrim.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:08.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 6 March 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6)(c), classified the following Bill as a section 77
         Bill:


         (a)     Finance Bill [B 5 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly


    (a)     The following member lost her seat in the National Assembly
        with effect from 6 March 2007:

         Mdaka, M N.

