---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 August 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-08-21
---

TUESDAY, 21 AUGUST 2007

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                            SOUND SYSTEM UPGRADED

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, it is my pleasure, first of all, to welcome you
back and to announce that the sound system has been revamped. [Applause.]
We are assured that we now have a vastly improved sound system which is far
more reliable than the previous one. The interpretation devices have also
been improved. You will notice the new devices on your desks. It is a
wireless system. The floor language is on channel zero and English is on
channel two. Members will be issued with a list indicating the allocation
of channels to the different languages, for your convenience.

                                 NEW MEMBER
The Speaker announced that Ms Z A Ndlazi had been nominated with effect
from 15 August 2007 to fill the vacancy that arose as a result of the
passing away of Mr M Diko.

                                    OATH

Ms Z A Ndlazi, accompanied by Ms N M Mdaka, made and subscribed the oath,
and took her seat.

                             NEW MEMBER AND OATH

The Speaker announced that the vacancy caused by the vacation of a seat in
the National Assembly by Mr P D N Maloyi had been filled by the nomination
of Ms N Hlangwana with effect from 25 June 2007. The member had made and
subscribed the oath in the Speaker’s office.

The SPEAKER: Orde! Is daar enige lid wat kennis wil gee van ’n voorstel?
[Applous.] [Order! Is there any member who wants to give notice of a
motion? [Applause.]]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Agb Speaker, ek kan hierdie mosie nie in
Afrikaans doen nie. Ek is jammer. [Hon Speaker, I cannot move this motion
in Afrikaans. I am sorry.]

Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the following
substantive motion in the light of the following:

  That this House –

  (a) has no confidence in the Minister of Health of the Republic of SA –
       the hon Manto Tshabalala-Msimang. The Minister, while holding the
       position of Medical Superintendent of the Athlone Hospital in
       Botswana, in the period 1973 to 1976, was convicted on a criminal
       charge of theft and was dismissed from her position and declared a
       prohibited immigrant by the Botswana government for a period of ten
       years. The existence of this conviction was never disclosed to the
       South African public, despite the position of trust she was placed in
       as Minister of Health, which made any conduct reflecting on her
       honesty and integrity highly pertinent;


  (b) the medical fraternity in particular and civil society in general have
       lost faith in the Minister’s ability to effectively discharge her
       duties and responsibilities. The Minister’s decision to downplay the
       crisis in Frere Hospital is the latest in a long list of examples of
       poor management of our nation’s health care system. The Minister,
       together with the President, saw fit to have the former Deputy
       Minister of Health dismissed from office for political reasons,
       unrelated to her performance as Deputy Minister;

I will, therefore, move that this House has no confidence in the Minister
of Health and that she should resign forthwith. If she fails to do so, the
President should dismiss her. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I have listened carefully to the Notice of Motion from the hon
Leader of the Opposition. I think there might be some confusion between a
substantive motion or a motion of no confidence. What I am going to do is
rather to take this for further consideration. I will come back to the
House with a ruling.

Mr G R MORGAN: I hereby give notice that I intend to move on behalf of the
DA:

   That this House debates the contents of the Brink Report, as commissioned
   by the National Nuclear Regulator into the radiological risks to the
   public within Wonderfontein Spruit catchment area.

Thank you.

             BIRTHDAY OF FORMER PRESIDENT MANDELA ON THE 18 JULY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N B FIHLA: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House-

     1) notes -

        (a) that 18 July has become an important date on the South African
             calendar as a day when we celebrate former President Nelson
             Rolihlahla Mandela’s birthday; and


        (b) that, as we mark the achievement of this milestone in his life,
             we celebrate together the contribution that he continues to
             make towards the realisation of the goal of a better life for
             all;


     2) recognises that his long years of commitment to the struggle for
        peace and social justice, and his exemplary leadership as the head
        of the Government of National Unity and the Republic of South Africa
        are some important landmarks in the path traversed towards
        democracy; and


     3) wishes Madiba a belated happy birthday.

Motion agreed to.

                      NATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY CELEBRATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs N B GXOWA: I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that 9 August is National Women’s Day;

     2) recalls that we observe this day to salute the millions of heroic
        South African women who engaged in struggle both before and after 9
        August 1956, to whom we owe the freedom we enjoy today, and also
        remembers that on that day the women of South Africa converged on
        the Union Buildings from every corner of our land, thereby creating
        one of the enduring landmarks of our country’s history;

     3) recognises that, as long as women are bound by poverty and as long
        as they are looked down upon, human rights will lack substance and
        as long as outmoded ways of thinking prevent women from making a
        meaningful contribution to society, progress will be slow because
        if a nation refuses to acknowledge the equal role of more than half
        of itself, it is doomed to failure;

     4) further recognises that it is the women who sustain life, who care
        for children and elders, and who do so against all odds and with
        little resources, support and infrastructure while many women in
        our country live in conditions of poverty and poor location in
        rural areas and that the underdevelopment in these areas is
        responsible for the poor conditions under which our people live;

     5) believes that it is incumbent upon each and every one of us to be
        agents of change, to win the battle against sexism and racism and
        to shape the new nation; and

     6) calls on all South Africans to ensure that the agenda for women’s
        emancipation is given the consistent attention and the prominence
        it deserves so that we can move with due speed towards a non sexist
        society.

Motion agreed to.

                  RECENT NATURAL DISASTERS IN SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move without notice:

   That the House –
   (1)      notes that -

        (a)      since 2 July 2007 various parts of our country have
             experienced different kinds of natural disasters: veld fires
             in the provinces of Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and the Free
             State and floods in the Western Cape; and

        (b)      the veld fires have been described as the worst our
             country has experienced since the 1980s;

   (2)      recalls that more than 49 areas in the Western Cape have been
        affected by floods and 38 000 people have been left homeless;

   (3)      remembers that these disasters have resulted in great suffering
        to our people, especially the poor in the affected areas;

   (4)      recognises the significant role played by disaster management
        and Working on Fire teams as well as the civil society
        organisations that came in to lend a hand in an effort to alleviate
        the pain of those affected;

   (5)      calls on communities and municipalities always to take proactive
        steps aimed at preventing the recurrence of such painful
        situations; and


   (6)      conveys its support and solidarity to all the communities who
        have been affected by the disasters and also its condolences to the
        families who lost their loved ones.

Motion agreed to.

                     RATIFICATION OF DECISION OF SPEAKER

                             (Draft Resolution)

THE ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as it stands on the Order Paper:


   That the House ratifies  the  decision  of  the  Speaker  to  extend  the
   deadline for reporting by the Ad Hoc Committee on the Review  of  Chapter
   Nine and Associated Institutions from 31 July 2007 to 21 August 2007.

Motion agreed to.

Ms L B HENDRICKS: On a point of order: I just want to say that the Order
Paper is not coming up on the screen. Can we have that sorted out, please?

  SUNDAY TIMES DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION OF MINISTER OF HEALTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L V J NGCULU (ANC): Hon Speaker, the publishing by the Sunday Times of
the Minister of Health’s confidential medical records is a deplorable act
of insensitivity and a potential crime.

Section 10 of our Constitution guarantees the protection and the respect of
everyone’s human dignity. Section 14 of the Constitution entrenches the
right to privacy, thereby giving legal expression to, among others, the
long-established principle of the confidentiality of personal medical
information. Section 14 of the National Health Act of 2003 stipulates that:

  (1) All information concerning a user, including information relating to
        his or her health status, treatment or stay in a health
        establishment, is confidential.

  (2) ... no person may disclose any information contemplated in subsection
        (1) unless –
        (a) the user consented thereto in writing;

        (b) a court order or any law requires that disclosure; or

        (c) nondisclosure of the information represents a serious threat to
             public health.

The Sunday Times has not only acted in a shameful and barbaric manner, it
has also acted in a manner that clearly militates against the fundamental
values enshrined in our Constitution and the National Health Act. It has
thus undermined the efforts and sacrifices of many of our patriots who
suffered and lost their lives to ensure that these values become a defining
feature of our society.

The continued violation of the Minister of Health, Comrade Manto Tshabalala-
Msimang’s human rights and dignity also undermines our people’s confidence
in the capacity of our constitutional and legal instruments to protect the
country’s citizens. The Sunday Times has abused press freedom and has acted
in an unethical manner that deserves condemnation by all. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                       VIOLENT ATTACK ON ELDERLY WOMAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, on Saturday 4 August 2007 Mrs Roos was
assaulted, robbed and raped in her own home on a hill in the southern
suburbs of Johannesburg, my constituency for 13 years. She is 92 years old.
She is well loved by her neighbours, as well as friends and family. What
makes this particular event such a tragedy is not only Mrs Roos’s age, but
also the fact that the point has been reached where her story does not even
make headline news. How many people outside her circle knew about her?

Every day men, women and children who are not rich or powerful or connected
to the rich and powerful fall victim to violent crime; at work, at school
and at home, and only their immediate circle knows. We are becoming
desensitised by the violence that surrounds us.

Government needs to stand loud, firm and clear on the issue of crime and
criminal justice. Their contradictory and misleading statements made to the
public do more harm than good. A non-negotiable emphasis on performance, as
well as excellent standards of service delivery and professionalism need to
be the defining characteristics of this time; not vagueness, corruption and
political cronyism.

According to a recent survey, World Values Study 2006 by the University of
Stellenbosch, South Africans have more faith and confidence in TV than in
the South African government. This needs to change. [Applause.]

                         SADC ON ECONOMY OF ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, the resolution by the SADC Heads of
State at the Government Summit in Zambia should be viewed as positive and
commendable. This resolution is to urgently put together an economic
recovery plan for Zimbabwe, to be led jointly by the Finance Ministers of
SADC member states. The economy of Zimbabwe is relatively on the periphery
of all other economies of SADC members and communities, and therefore an
indispensable entity in the current process of regional economic
integration and development within SADC.

On 12 May 1789, William Wilberforce remarked in the British Parliament:

  Let us make reparations to Africa, as far as we can, establishing a trade
  upon true commercial principles and we shall soon find a rectitude of our
  conduct rewarded by the benefits of a regular and growing commerce.

Perhaps it is now opportune for Britain to consider leading the European
Union to review the economic sanctions against Zimbabwe and establish, with
SADC, meaningful ways of making the envisaged economic recovery plan a
reality.
It may be an appropriate development strategy at this point in the history
of Zimbabwe and the region for the Finance Ministers, so charged by SADC,
to introduce a participatory economic system, with the people of Zimbabwe
participating, directing and managing their economy at all levels beginning
with the community-based economies to deal directly with the immense
challenges of poverty, unemployment and hardships. This is one important
requisite for fair and free elections. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

                    DOMESTIC ABUSE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A VAN WYK (ANC): Madam Speaker, during Women’s Month we have the
opportunity to take stock of the progress we have made in improving the
lives, not only of women, but also of children in a democratic South
Africa. While we acknowledge that significant progress was made, it is
overshadowed by the continuous violence perpetrated against women and
children.

The Domestic Violence Act was put in place to address the issue of violence
within the family unit and at home, there where the most protected and safe
place for women and children should be. Despite the legislation, many
challenges still remain. Amongst these challenges is the involvement of the
community to curb these abuses. We need to further strengthen the social
status of women and children within society and in the family. Boys need to
be raised respecting their mothers, their sisters and women in general
within the community.

In terms of policing domestic violence, we need to entrench the will and
commitment of members of the South African Police Services to police these
crimes with determination and vigour. In our courts when sentencing
perpetrators of domestic violence, the punishment should reflect the
seriousness with which government and society look at these crimes.

More places of safety for victims of domestic violence and improved support
for NGOs who work in the field are needed. Let us, in Women’s Month,
strengthen this partnership between government, the communities and the
private sector. [Applause.]

                 REPORT BY PRESIDENT MBEKI ON ZIMBABWE TALKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Madam Speaker, this past week, President Mbeki
tabled a report at the SADC Heads of State Summit, which among other things
stated that talks between the Zanu-PF government and the factions of the
Movement for Democratic Change were “progressing smoothly”. The MDC’s
spokesperson disputed the claims. The ACDP is disappointed that the SADC
heads of state, on getting what should have been a progress report, failed
to address issues raised by civil society groups and the opposition, or
even to express their disapproval of the brutal assault of opposition
leaders.

They again chose to ignore the suffering of millions of Zimbabweans, caused
mainly by their colleague and comrade, President Robert Mugabe. Members of
the opposition have been complaining for a long time that they are
operating in a hostile environment with human rights abuses and restrictive
media laws.

We question why the Zimbabwean President was cheered and given a hero’s
welcome when his decisions and policies are causing his people so much
suffering amid predictions that the Zimbabwean economy could collapse
within four months.

It was equally sad to hear the new SADC Chairman, President Levy Mwanawasa,
say that the problems in Zimbabwe have been exaggerated. This can only mean
that these heads of state do not care about their own people. May God help
Africa, and give Africa leaders who care for the poor and suffering, and
who will protect the most vulnerable in society, rather than leaders who
protect their colleagues and the rich and powerful in society. [Applause.]

                             CRISIS IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Speaker, the ID’s national caucus met with
representatives from the MDC today and they were trying to find solutions
to the crisis in Zimbabwe. We will also be meeting with the delegation from
the Zimbabwean government in the next two weeks.

The ID proposed the following steps to ensure that the Zimbabwean elections
in March 2008 are free and fair and are a true representation of the will
of the Zimbabwean people: an immediate end to violence, and a repeal of all
legislation that represents the violation of basic human rights and that
prevents free political activity from taking place.

The Zimbabwean crisis will only be resolved through a negotiated
settlement. The settlement must be completed in time for the March 2008
elections. The ID also believes that President Mbeki should be assisted in
his role as a mediator and it further proposes that SADC invite two former
heads of state, hon Joaquim Chissano and hon Kenneth Kaunda, to assist
President Thabo Mbeki.

In terms of refugees, we agreed that our brothers and sisters from Zimbabwe
must be handled in a humane way and we need to look at ways of getting
assistance from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNHCR,
to deal with the massive influx of refugees.

In trying to find solutions to the problems of Zimbabwe, the process must
be led by Zimbabweans themselves, and any assistance from the international
community must be complementary. I thank you.

                IMPROVEMENT IN HEALTH CONDITIONS OF THE POOR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MADUMISE (ANC): Congratulations to the leader of the ID on becoming
the Head of State of the country.

Dankie, agb Speaker, vir die kans. [Thank you, hon Speaker, for this
opportunity.]

Over the years the ANC has consistently worked to uplift the health status
of our people. The mobilisation of our structures, communities and
institutions in support of affordable medicines and the location of health
workers in poor, rural and urban communities is the cornerstone of our
health provision strategy. Our government is currently implementing, among
others, the HIV and Aids and STI Strategic Plan for South Africa for 2007-
2011 - a product of the collective efforts by government and sectors of
civil society over the past five years.

The recent malicious publications directed at our Minister of Health
undermine our country’s commendable efforts in the fight against HIV and
Aids. [Interjections.] These negative comments ... Listen! ... and
publications are not only aimed at the Minister, but are also an attempt to
undermine the people’s confidence in our country’s policies and the
executive. We wish to reiterate our confidence in the Minister of Health,
Comrade Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, and the executive within which she serves
as well as the health policies our country has developed. Dankie, Mevrou.
[Thank you, Madam] [Applause.]

             FAILURE OF MUNICIPALITIES TO DELIVER BASIC SERVICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M T LIKOTSI (PAC): Madam Speaker, the PAC of Azania wishes to bring to
the attention of this House the causes of violent protests in the country
that have claimed the lives of some councillors and officials due to a lack
of service delivery and a lack of protection. They are as follows.

Firstly, the total disregard for or violation of government policies by the
lower spheres of government, provinces or municipalities. This has been
evident in our oversight visits to provinces, where some municipalities or
provinces are still battling to implement the Public Works Programme and
other programmes. Secondly, the slow reaction of municipalities and
provinces to communities’ concerns on the delivery of basic services,
especially water, electricity and ablution facilities. Some cases in point
here are Mafifing, Ward 127 settlement in Botshabelo in the Free State; the
entire Fetakgomo Municipality in Sekhukhune, Mosepšhane village, and Ward 7
Straightskraal. The latter are all in the Limpopo province.

In the third place there is the racial tension between the whites and
Africans in some farming communities, for instance the recent case of Mr
Ramphethe Mofokeng of Reitz in the Free State who was abducted and almost
beaten to death by two farmers.

Fourthly, there are the unresolved land claims such as in Kgotsong in
Bothaville, where many residents are still waiting to hear from the Land
Claims Commission regarding their claims and appeals. And lastly, the
greediness of councillors of the ruling party, which results in fatal
casualties among community members due to tenders and other opportunities
found in the state.

The government must be supported in appointing the Public Protector to in-
depth make findings about the causes of these violent protests, as they are
destroying our economy. I thank you.

             INDEBTEDNESS OF ZIMBABWE TO SOUTH AFRICAN ENTITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Madam Speaker, if the government is propping up the
despotic regime of President Robert Mugabe at the taxpayer’s expense, the
people of South Africa deserve to know. In response to a recent DA
question, the Minister for Public Enterprises, Alex Erwin, refused to
disclose what Zimbabwe’s total indebtedness was to South African public
utilities such as Eskom and Transnet, citing the supposed commercial
sensitivity of the information.

How commercially sensitive can it be, Speaker? Neither Transnet nor Eskom
has any competitors, and even if there were, it is doubtful whether they
would be beating down the door of Zimbabwe’s earning dictator and its
bankrupt regime for their business. What Minister Erwin calls “commercial
sensitivity” looks all the more like another case of sabotage to the DA -
the sabotaging of proper government in the interests of South Africa and
the rest of the continent by a Minister who is fast running out of
credibility. Minister Erwin needs to tell this House and consequently the
people of South Africa and come clean about the debts owed to our utilities
by Zimbabwe.

Thank you.

                    EFFECT OF FOOD PRICES ON RURAL PEOPLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D M DLALI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the basic food price is creating a very
big problem among the poorest of the poor with the continuous increase in
the price of basic items like milk, maize and meat. The poor are feeling
the pinch. The general consensus is that it is definitely more expensive to
fill up shopping trolleys at the current store prices than it was last
year. Meat has become more of a luxury nowadays. The other problem is that
when people go around shopping, looking for better prices, they still have
to spend more on petrol while looking for such prices.
The basic essentials have skyrocketed by 10,89% in rural areas while people
in urban areas pay only 7,95% more. There is a difference of R5 on a 5kg
bag of maize meal, while a 750ml bottle of cooking oil costs 80c more for
people in the rural areas. It is clear that the rural people are paying
more for everything. They are very poor people and transport costs are also
high for them. The same comparison has been made for sugar, with rural
consumers paying almost R3 more for a 5kg bag of sugar.

This is creating a very big difference and enormous pressure between these
communities. Something has to be done to level the playing field and to
assist the rural people. Thank you.

               FAILURE OF EDUCATION DEPARTMENT’S RECOVERY PLAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP expresses its concern about
the Department of Education’s recovery plan to help learners regain lost
hours. Unfortunately, this plan has collapsed in most provinces as teachers
are not being paid and have stopped attending classes.

Further, the department is deducting money from those teachers who were
engaged in strike action. The IFP therefore calls on the Minister to act so
that learners, especially those in Grade 12, will not suffer the dire
consequences. Thank you.

                      BOTHO CAMPAIGN IN THE FREE STATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B A RADEBE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the MEC for Sport, Arts, Culture,
Science and Technology of the Free State, Mr Sekgobelo Ace Magashule,
initiated the Botho campaign which entails the adoption of orphans and the
provision of financial and material support to vulnerable children.

During the last constituency period, the Phumelela Municipality and the
Thabo Mofutsanyane District Municipality in the Free State distributed more
than 1 000 pairs of school shoes and uniforms to vulnerable farm school
children. The campaign also entailed the distribution of more than 2 000
blankets and broiler chicken starter packs to needy farmworkers. This
ongoing campaign was successful because of the contribution of the
businesspeople of the district.

As the ANC, we would like to make an appeal to other businesspeople to be
in partnership with our municipalities to fight poverty and create a better
life for vulnerable children in the rural areas. Thank you.

          ALLEGATIONS MADE AGAINST DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE (DA): Madam Speaker, if the allegations made against
Malusi Gigaba, the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, are true, then he is
unable to perform his duties in an ethical manner befitting his station.

He is alleged to have been paying for private individuals’ travel expenses
from taxpayers’ money, and these individuals belong to a youth organisation
that operates in his name. However, the organisation is not registered but
is sponsored by other employees of the Department of Home Affairs. An
investigation into this matter must take place immediately.

If Mr Gigaba is found innocent of the allegations, his name must be
cleared. However, if Mr Gigaba is guilty of the accusations, it becomes
imperative for the health of the department to properly discipline him.
Home Affairs is in enough of a poor state without having unethical staff at
its helm. Thank you.

                           FOETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr J SCHIPPERS (ANC): Agb Speaker, die ANC het met kommer kennis geneem
van die verslag van prof Dennis Viljoen oor die voorkoms van fetale
alkoholsindroom in Suid-Afrika in die algemeen, maar in die Wes-Kaap in die
besonder. Prof Viljoen is uitvoerende hoof van die Foundation for Alcohol-
related Research en funksioneer onder artikel 21 van die Wet op
Maatskappye.

Dié organisasie is daartoe verbind om die voorkoms van fetale
alkoholspektrumwanbalanse en ander probleme rakende alkoholmisbruik deur
middel van klinies-diagnostiese dienste, epidemiologiese navorsing,
voorkomende programme, onderwys en opleiding en monitering te bekamp.
Volgens prof Viljoen se verslag is die voorkomssyfer in die Boland baie
hoog en toon dit ’n stygende tendens. Dorpe soos Wellington, Rawsonville en
Villiersdorp vorm deel van die studie.

Faktore wat ’n rol speel, is die oorblyfsels van ’n vernietigende
dopstelsel, ’n kultuur van armoede, onkunde, misbruik van alkohol en ’n
psigologiese toestand wat deur die apartheidsideologie gevestig is. Die ANC
pleit by die relevante staatsdepartemente en private organisasies soos die
FARR om te volhard met hul pogings om die probleem daadwerklik aan te
spreek en uit die weg te ruim. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr J SCHIPPERS (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC noted with concern the report
of Professor Dennis Viljoen on the general prevalence of foetal alcohol
syndrome in South Africa, but in the Western Cape in particular. Professor
Viljoen is the chief executive of the Foundation for Alcohol-related
Research, and functions under clause 21 of the Companies Act.

The organisation is committed to combatting the prevalence of foetal
alcohol spectral imbalances and other problems relating to alcohol abuse,
through clinical diagnostic services, epidemiological research,
preventative programmes, education and training and monitoring. According
to Professor Viljoen’s report, the prevalence rate in the Boland is very
high and indicates an increasing tendency. Towns like Wellington,
Rawsonville and Villiersdorp form part of this study.

Factors that are playing a role include the remnants of a destructive tot
system, a culture of poverty, ignorance, alcohol abuse and a physiological
condition created by the apartheid ideology. The ANC is calling on all
relevant government departments and private organisations such as the
Foundation for Alcohol-related Research, FARR, to persevere with their
vigorous efforts to address and eradicate the problem. I thank you.]

               ATMs TARGETED BY CRIMINALS – SAPS BREAKTHROUGH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv Z L MADASA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC would like to congratulate the
SA Police Service on the recently reported breakthrough in their
investigations and the arrests of the criminals behind the attacks on and
bombings of ATMs in the country.

The ATM attacks were not only acts of criminality, but had put the lives of
the public using these valuable facilities in danger. The ANC calls on the
police to ensure that they get to the bottom of these attacks and arrest
all involved. The ANC wishes to restate its belief that, despite challenges
in reducing crime, the SA Police Service is determined to take the fight to
the criminals and protect the public. Thank you.

                            SITUATION IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, let me deal with statements by four
members relating to the situation in Zimbabwe; statements by members
Skosana, Meshoe, De Lille and Van Dyk respectively. Let me start with the
observations by the hon De Lille. Indeed, we’d like to confirm that the
situation is as she describes, namely that the problems in Zimbabwe must be
solved by Zimbabweans. There can’t be any regime change from anywhere
outside of Zimbabwe! [Interjections.] Sorry, would you protect me, please,
Madam Speaker? We listened intently.
The SPEAKER: You are protected, hon Minister. Hon members, please let’s let
the Minister respond.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: In the history of Zimbabwe it’s important to
recognise that Lancaster House was facilitated by outside agencies.
Zimbabweans have to knuckle down and resolve their own problems. The
position of the government in South Africa has consistently been – and this
is the view of all of SADC – that we must encourage Zimbabweans to solve
their own problems.

That is the most that we can do, because the solutions have to be durable
and sustainable, and the decisions have to be carried by Zimbabweans into
perpetuity - that is the essence of democracy. That is the gist of the
statement that President Mbeki presented to the heads of state in Lusaka
last week.

In dealing with this issue it’s important to recognise that Zimbabweans are
not going to cross the border, come into South Africa illegally and then
register themselves as refugees. They will meld into the South African
community and become like us because they are our neighbours, they are of
our blood, we share the same language with many of them and so they aren’t
going to seek to be set apart from us.

This is the reality; the number of Zimbabweans who arrive at Beit Bridge or
in Musina and register as refugees can be counted on one hand, but that
doesn’t accord with the number of Zimbabweans here.

Our commitment must be to ensure that Zimbabweans will solve their issues,
and that is why all the players in Zimbabwe need to be sitting around the
table. [Interjections.]

Let me turn, then, to what the hon Skosana raised, because indeed it is a
very important issue: How do we get the Zimbabweans to live out the
responsibility of rebuilding an economy that clearly is severely stressed
right now? We have ... [Interjections.] Sorry, man. Like we got rid of you,
you come and cause trouble on the other side of the House, because we
elected you out of office. [Interjections.]

The point about Zimbabwe is that we’ve been working with them for a very
long time, but understanding that decisions about their economic management
have to be taken by Zimbabweans. We can’t sit south of the Limpopo and
decide what kind of economy the Zimbabweans must have.

It must be inclusive; they must understand what the issues are, they must
get the prices to work, they must drive the changes. We can’t commit
financial resources of taxpayers elsewhere. Zimbabweans must take the
decisions and then the deal can be structured, so there is an interlinkage
between what the hon Skosana raised and what the hon De Lille raised. You
need democracy, you need the people of Zimbabwe to take decisions about
their own country.

For those who don’t know, I’m going to ask that President Bush recruit them
and send them to Iraq, then they’ll understand about regime change!
[Laughter.] We’ll send them there. We’ll send the hon Van Dyk and all those
loudmouths there, then they’ll understand what regime change is about!

But if you want democracy, hon Meshoe, you must understand ... I suppose
his God also acts through the voice of the electorate. You see, people
elect the governments they want, and the leaders who obtain in the Southern
African region are the choice of the people. The fact that you and you are
not on this side of the House is a manifestation, perhaps, of God’s will,
but it certainly is a manifestation of the will of the electorate.
[Applause.] Thank you.

                             VIOLENCE CONDEMNED
       TV PROGRAMMES CONTRIBUTE TO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN
                  POLICE SHOULD BE COMMENDED FOR GOOD WORK

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, I would like to
respond to a statement made by the hon Camerer. We also feel sad at the
criminal attack on Mrs Roos. May I state that in this country there is no
way we can allow any form of violence against any person, especially an
elderly person who is 92 years old.

I think that, as this government, one of our responsibilities is to make
sure that we have competent police officers and that at all times we make
sure that the police carry out their duties in a way that meets the needs
of the people of South Africa.

May I also indicate this to the hon member – unfortunately she’s not here -
who said that South Africans are watching TV all the time. The problem we
face in this country is that watching TV is not going to bring about
solutions to our problems. The problems of South Africa need all
communities to come together to fight crime. As you all know, TV programmes
in South Africa have also contributed to the violence we see on a daily
basis.

May I also indicate to hon Van Wyk that our TV programmes also contribute
to the violence we witness against women and children in our country. I
would urge members of this country that we need to continue to engage and
challenge some of the things that we see on TV programmes that are
unpalatable for our children and women to see. [Applause.]

The police will continue to make sure, at all times, that matters regarding
women and children are a priority in our country. I want to say that we are
committed to making sure that at all times the police carry out their
duties in a diligent manner. Those that are not prepared to be part of a
system that works for the eradication of violence of any form have no place
in the police service of this country. We will only keep men and women who
are keen to work for the eradication of violence against women and who are
prepared to go all out to fight the various types of crime that we see in
our society.

In response to hon Madasa, may I also thank him for his words of
encouragement. Men and women like him do good work by always encouraging
the police to do more good work, and not always condemning them even when
they are trying their best to fight crime. We welcome that. We encourage
people like you. Where wrong has happened, you condemn it, but where good
has happened, you praise it. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  BOTTLENECKS IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT POLICIES
         NOT ALL PROTEST ACTION STEMS FROM LACK OF SERVICE DELIVERY
                      CORRUPTION REPORTED TO THE POLICE

                            (Minister’s Response)

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, I
would like to respond to a statement by the hon member from the PAC,
concerning lack of delivery at local government level. We’ve been saying
time and again, in this very House, that we have a successful programme
called Project Consolidate, because we have identified bottlenecks at local
government level. We know exactly what is happening among the
municipalities. I don’t know whether people have not been listening.
[Interjections.] Because you don’t want to acknowledge this!

Concerning lack of delivery, we fully agree with you, hon member, that in
some instances there are bottlenecks, which we have identified. That is why
the DPLG has taken a conscientious step to assist those struggling
municipalities to carry out delivery. So we do acknowledge that there are
shortcomings and we are dealing with them as the DPLG. It is our
responsibility to assist municipalities; we can’t just sit back and not do
anything about their problems. We will continue to assist municipalities.

I now come to the question of the protests, which is also linked to the
struggling municipalities. What I have noticed about these protest actions
is the manner in which they manifest themselves. In this country we have a
constitutional provision that says that in order for you to qualify for a
house, you must be of a certain age. However, you do see children, who are
supposed to be at school, demanding houses and protesting at the lack
thereof. [Interjections.] The ages of those children range from 12 to 14.
They’re supposed to be at school. Where are their parents?

You see what happens, hon member, is that when people see a vacant piece of
land, they occupy it illegally and then demand services. Bavela phi aba
bantu? [Where do they come from?] Sometimes the old residents of that
municipality would say: Asibazi aba bantu [We don’t know where these people
come from]. You see, you’ve got to look carefully at these protests and not
think that every protest action stems from lack of service delivery.

Those are arm-chair politicians that are sitting there. People who care
about this nation, about their country and about the citizens of this
country – retired, skilled individuals - have approached the DPLG and
asked: Where can I assist? I have these skills; where can I make an
intervention? Now, as a result 126 municipalities will benefit from the
skills of those retired individuals. These are not arm-chair politicians
that I’m talking about, but people who do work.

The one last issue that I would like to respond to is the issue of
corruption by councillors around the issuing of tenders. The hon member
specifically put it as “corruption by the councillors of the ruling party”.
What I fail to ... nyeh, nyeh! [Laughter.] This government has put in place
systems in order to try and combat that corruption. We are not a banana
republic.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Deputy Minister, please wrap up.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Yes, I’m wrapping
up, Madam Speaker. You see, when you come across such corruption by any
councillor, report it to the nearest police station. Yiya emapoliseni.
[Interjections.] That’s what you must do when you come across corruption;
you must go to the police. Don’t come and make a noise here. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. [Time expired.]

                   DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION’S RECOVERY PLAN

                            (Minister’s Response)

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, I would like to respond
very briefly to the hon member who stated that the national recovery plan
is not working. I think it is important to avoid making sweeping
generalisations without alerting the members about where the difficulties
are in fact identified.

Madam Speaker, for the benefit of this House I should say to you that the
national recovery plan is aimed at providing opportunities and benefits to
millions of learners. It’s a plan that is designed to run from a month ago
right to the end of October, from Grade R to Grade 12.

The success of the plan, however, depends largely on the commitment of
educators to ensure that they provide extra time and extra hours in
teaching the learners. The responses and reports that we receive are that
the recovery plan is working extremely well in most of the provinces.
Millions of learners are receiving the benefits of study material that we
publish and distribute in different languages to different provinces.

It may well be so that, in certain instances, certain educators are taking
advantage of the situation and trying to negotiate the monies that they
have lost as a result of the industrial action to the stipends that they
would receive from the Department of Education. But on the other hand,
there are thousands of committed educators who spend extra hours, weekends
and part of their vacation to ensure that those learners who have been
disadvantaged directly as a result of the industrial action do make up the
time.

What I am assured about is the commitment and the passion on the part of
learners. Khutsong is a good example where more than 430 learners have gone
to a Taung study camp to receive education notwithstanding the cohesion,
notwithstanding the duress which they are subjected to. This means that
there is a passion for learning amongst our learners where educators are
willing and able to provide that support.

In addition to the support provided by the Department of Education, that
will make the difference. Indeed, we are at a huge disadvantage as a result
of the time that has been lost, but I do believe that we can make up the
time, given the commitment of many of our educators to our learners. Thank
you very much, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

                       TOT SYSTEM OF PAYMENT ON FARMS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, we have noted the
statement on the foetal alcohol spectrum disorder that the hon member made.
It’s quite a troublesome issue which government is basically beginning to
tackle. The provincial government of the Western Cape has gone further to
do that and I think as the national government we will work together as
closely as possible. It might not necessarily be the Western Cape alone; it
might be in other parts of South Africa as well. I thank you, Madam
Speaker.

    CONSIDERATION OF BILL AND OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE OF HEALTH
                                   THEREON
Mr L V J NGCULU: Madam Speaker, as the portfolio committee we would like to
urge this House once again to endorse the amendments of this particular
legislation. These amendments come from the NCOP and they are not
fundamental in terms of changing the context and the nature of the Bill
itself, but were actually meant more to strengthen the legislation. One of
them is basically the section dealing with the question of whether a
student should be part of the definition of a health practitioner. It
allows the student to be part of the definition of the health practitioner,
given the fact that at some point in time the students themselves must
perform certain functions as health practitioners, and, therefore, should
be liable in terms of the rules in the same manner as health practitioners.

The next amendment was the insertion of the definition on public
representatives. This basically was meant to allow the Health Professions
Council to establish an ad hoc committee from time to time in order to deal
with issues affecting it.

The last and the most important one is the question of dealing with the
powers of the council to search and seize documents. It was felt that the
Health Professions Council cannot be given carte blanche here in terms of
search and seizure of documents, but that such a process should actually be
controlled and subject to the courts and the magistrates. In this regard,
therefore, it is meant more to protect the citizenry of our country and
avoid a situation of the abuse of powers in whatever way and it is also
meant to ensure that these powers given to the Health Professions Council
are in line with the Constitution and the rights of the citizenry of the
Republic.

The more mundane one actually sets the date by which the Bill itself should
be in place. We would therefore urge that the amendments from the NCOP be
endorsed by this House.

I am aware that there are some members of our Portfolio Committee on Health
who may have wanted to use the opportunity of this particular amendment to
smuggle in issues not related to this particular substance. Sometimes what
was also distressing was for them to invoke a redebate of legislation that
was debated in this House and also, quite sadly, wanting even to cast
aspersions on their former colleague, who participated in this thing by
saying, with regard to whatever he said at that particular point in time,
that they have no confidence. They want to say other things themselves now,
which undermines and questions the continuation of powers. I think it’s
quite a sad thing that sometimes people can eloquently play their divisions
in the manner in which they were playing. Be that as it may, as the
portfolio committee we think that these amendments should be endorsed.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:
   That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M WATERS (DA): Madam Speaker, hon members, I just like to rectify what
the chairperson of the committee said in his last few seconds where he said
we question the judgments of our previous colleague, hon Mr Morgan. We did
no such thing. We simply had to get a mandate from our caucus on the new
amendments. You shouldn’t try and mix our words, hon Ngculu.

The new amendments to the Health Professions Act emanating from the NCOP
are an improvement on the existing Act, which allows an investigating
officer to investigate a suspected breach of this Act by a medical
professional without having first obtained a search warrant. Investigating
officers will now have to approach a magistrate or a judge to obtain such a
warrant.

The DA strongly believes that doctors must be held accountable for their
actions and that patients’ safety comes first.

It is unfortunate, however, that while these amendments seek to improve
doctors’ ethics, the Act simultaneously stops them from exercising their
democratic right to choose their own representatives on their respective
boards. The warped reasoning used by the ANC and the Ministry is that
elections are too costly. Is the next step the scrapping of elections for
public representatives, because these too are too costly?

It seems, yet again, as if the ANC cannot stomach democracy when they do
not win. They just have to control every sector of our society.

On 10 October 2006, in a debate on this legislation, my colleague the hon
Gareth Morgan, in reaction to the ANC’s usual howl that the professional
boards were not representative enough, provided some figures on the most
recent membership statistics of a few professional boards. For the Medical
and Dental Professionals’ Board, 68% of its members were previously
disadvantaged individuals; for the Board for Psychology the figure was 64%;
for the Board of Environmental Health it was 70%; for the Board of Dental
Therapy it was 67%; for the Board for Physiotherapy it was 72%; and for the
Board for Radiography it was 85%.

The ANC would have you believe that these boards are filled entirely with
angry white males. The fact is that these boards are tremendously diverse,
which we welcome, and more importantly these boards were elected under the
existing legislation through free and democratic elections. What this tells
us, hon members, is that the ANC is not concerned about transformation;
they are obsessed with control, control of every professional board in the
country.

And to add insult to injury these professionals must now wait until the
Minister of Health has applied her sober mind and decreed that she approves
their appointments. It just does not make sense.

This undemocratic and unilateral selection process will strip the
professional boards of all independence as everyone serving on these boards
will know that they are there only at the Minister’s behest. They will be
forced to work as a collective and not express any opposing views. The
sacking of the Deputy Minister is a clear sign of what will happen if you
dare speak your mind. I thank your. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP acknowledges that these largely
technical amendments put forward by the NCOP are actually positive and, of
course, we support measures to ensure the protection of the public and
advance public interests. The existing clauses in the Health Professions
Amendment Bill, however, which give the Ministry of Health increased powers
to control the Health Professions Council of South Africa and its allied
professional boards are unacceptable.

The public should be confident that they can approach an independent
council as opposed to a government-appointed body. The Minister’s
questionable handling of the shocking numbers of babies’ deaths in an
Eastern Cape hospital adds to the many circumstances which highlight
concerns around the council under the Minister’s thumb.
Like the previously amended Nursing Act, the Bill also denies members of
these professions their democratic right to elect board members and
diminishes their right to participate in regulation of their profession.
The ACDP voted against the Health Professions Amendment Bill in 2006 as we
believe it compromises the council’s independence and entrenches government
control. Thank you.
The SPEAKER: I see no other party wishing to make a declaration.

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Madam Speaker, I just want to make it clear to the House
that indeed the declaration that was made by the DA is just a waste of
time; you can take it from the DA person who was here. He said nothing
about the amendments that we were supposed to speak about. And for Dudley
to come and tell us about the babies that died at Frere Hospital, that is
not what we are here for. What a waste of time! Batho ba, ba ya tshwenya.
[These people are troublesome.]

The ANC’s position on the DA’s declaration regarding the Health Professions
Amendment Bill is as follows. The portfolio committee has already dealt
with all the substantive issues relating to the Health Professions
Amendment Bill in accordance with the accepted procedures in processing
legislation before it is referred to the NCOP for deliberations and
processing.

Having dealt with the amendments by the NCOP, it is the view of the ANC
that there are no substantive issues for debate and that this declaration
is merely a political ploy, as you have seen for yourself right here. The
former DA member of the portfolio committee was obliged to fully brief his
replacement, which would include a briefing on this Bill. The ANC agrees
with the amendments by the NCOP, which certainly do not warrant a
declaration. They are as follows. The inclusion of “a student” under the
definition of a health practitioner and the addition of the definition of a
public representative.

The amendment that concerns the DA the most is the insertion of the
subsection relating to the powers accorded the investigating officer. They
make no mention of it as it makes provision for them to enter, search and
seize documents or potential documents with or without a search warrant. It
was clearly explained to the portfolio committee that this would be an
invasion of the privacy rights of professionals and therefore susceptible
to being contested against this background.

The clause was formulated to be in line with the Mokgajane case. It was
also clearly explained that the investigating officers would be permitted
only to investigate in the context of the Act and only in so far as it
concerns a particular profession as registered in terms of the Act.

It is therefore clear to the ANC that no further debate is needed and there
are no further substantive issues ... [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! Hon members. Are
there any objections to the Bill as amended being passed? No objections?
Agreed to. The Bill will be sent to the President for his assent. We will
now take Orders number 2 to 5.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, I said yes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): You should have approached the
mike, Mrs Kalyan.

Mrs S V KALYAN: I am doing that now. Will the objection of the DA please be
noted?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The Bill has already been passed.

Mrs S V KALYAN: I said “yes” from the bench.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I didn’t hear you. We will now
take Orders number 2 to number 5 together. These are reports of the
Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry as they appear on the
Order Paper.
     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AFFAIRS AND
                                  FORESTRY

         PRICE INCREASES OF BULK RESOURCES (WATER) FOR PROVISION OF
  MUNICIPAL SERVICES – SECTION 42 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT MUNICIPAL FINANCE
                        MANAGEMENT ACT NO.56 OF 2003

                    WATER BOARD HEARINGS 19-20 MARCH 2007

  STRATEGIC PLAN AND BUDGET OF 2007/08 FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF WATER AFFAIRS
                        AND FORESTRY: 03-04 MAY 2007

            OVERSIGHT VISIT TO GAUTENG PROVINCE – 06-11 MAY 2007

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, the reports before us today cover the
following: Price increases of bulk resources in respect of water tariffs by
water boards; the report by water boards themselves; the report on the
strategic plan and budget of 2007-08 for the Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry; and the oversight visit to Gauteng province.

With regard to the proposed price increases of bulk resources in respect of
water tariffs by water boards, it would be important to remind the House
exactly why we are putting forward the following findings and why we are
asking the House to adopt the recommendations that the portfolio committee
has put forward.
We are reminded that Section 42 of the Municipal Finance Management Act
stipulates that ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hom members, can we have
your attention please? Will all hon members take their seats? Please
proceed, hon September.

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Thank you again, Chairperson. Section 42 of the Municipal
Finance Management Act tells us that when the price increases of bulk
resources for the provision of municipal services need to be brought to
Parliament, a number of things need to be taken care of in so far as the
Act is concerned. Therein are the findings and the recommendations of the
portfolio committee as to why it is making a recommendation that the
Minister needs to look at. It stipulates to us that a motivation of the
reasons for the proposed amendment needs to be made and it has asked us for
an explanation of how the amendment takes account of all government’s
national inflation targets and other macroeconomic policy objectives. It
also states that it must be motivated by the steps taken by the organ of
the state to improve its competitiveness or its efficiency in order to
reduce cost. And it also states any objectives or targets as outlined in
the corporate or other governance plan applicable to that organ of the
state.

When considering the report of the portfolio committee with regard to the
water tariffs by water boards, it is here that the committee asked the
House to adopt our recommendation that specifically says that in dealing
with the tariff increases, the committee is of the view that 24,3% by the
Botshelo Water Board does not appear to take into account the issues of
Section 43(3) of the Act; and that whilst the committee does not have the
explicit function of either adopting or rejecting the bulk resource
increase, we therefore recommend that the Minister of Water Affairs and
Forestry consider actively engaging with Botshelo Water Board on
responsibly setting price increases in line with the national government’s
inflation targets and that the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, in
consultation with the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, be
requested to consider a review of Section 42 of the Local Government:
Municipal Finance Management Act. This is to provide for a role for
Parliament when price increases in respect of bulk resources are
considered. We ask that this consideration be taken into account by the
House purely on the basis of what the MFMA tells us.

With regard to the Gauteng report that we have here before us, again we ask
the House to adopt the recommendations that we are making and I am not
going to take you through all of that. We want you to take into
consideration in particular as you adopt the report and the recommendation
that on page 1553 you exclude the words “Department of Local Government”
and on page 1576 you exclude the word “non”. There was a mistake in putting
these two words in there. We ask that the report on the Gauteng oversight
visit be adopted.

We are also asking the House to adopt the recommendations of the report on
the water boards as well as asking you to adopt the recommendations on the
report on the strategic plan and budget of the Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry, and in particular the recommendations that the committee is
making with regard to ensuring that the eradication of the bucket system is
realised in December 2007 and all the assistance that we are recommending
that needs to be given in that regard. That takes care of all four reports,
unless the House wants me to say more.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon September, before you leave
the podium, will you please repeat the amendments that you are moving to
the report?

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, on page 1553 of the ACT report the
“Department of Local Government” needs to be taken out; and on page 1576 of
the ATC report the word ``non’’ needs to be excluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): So you are proposing two
amendments, hon September?

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.
Reports accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 15:20.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 22 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bills as section 76 Bills:


         (a)     Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).


         (b)     Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21 –
             2007] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).

    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism also classified the Traditional
         Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] as a Bill falling within
         the ambit of section 18(1)(a) of the Traditional Leadership and
         Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No 41 of 2003).

2.    Translations of Bills submitted

     (1)    The Minister of Health


         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Gesondheidsberoepe [W 10 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Health
         Professions Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
         75), as introduced in Parliament.

         (b)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Beheer van Tabakprodukte [W 24
             – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Tobacco
         Products Control Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2006] (National Assembly –
         sec 75), as introduced in Parliament.

                            MONDAY, 25 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


    a) The Secretary to Parliament has, on 25 June 2007 in accordance with
       section 18(1) of the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework
       Act, 2003 (Act No 41 of 2003), referred the Traditional Health
       Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] (National Council of Provinces (sec
       76 (2)) to the National House of Traditional Leaders, which must,
       within 30 days from the date of this referral, make any comments it
       wishes to make.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Committee on Provincial and Local Government on Budget
   Vote 5: Provincial and Local Government, dated 19 June 2007:

The Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having considered Budget
Vote 5: Provincial and Local Government, report as follows:

A.  INTRODUCTION

   1. The budget review of the Ministry and Department of Provincial and
      Local Government (DPLG) was undertaken on 13 March 2007 and the budget
      review of the statutory bodies accountable to the Portfolio Committee
      was undertaken on 14 and 20 March 2007.

   2. The budget briefings also served to acquaint the Portfolio Committee
      with the plans, programmes and projects of the Ministry and Department
      of Provincial and Local Government.

B.    PARTICIPANTS IN THE BUDGET HEARINGS

   1. Those who appeared before the Committee included a delegation from the
      Department of Provincial and Local Government, Acting Director-General
      Mr E Africa; Deputy Directors-General Ms T Mketi, Ms S Makotoko, Mr D
      Powell, Chief Directors, Mr O Cupido, Mr L Williams, Mr T Fosi, Mr L
      Twaku, Mr C Clerihew, Ms B D Leon, Mr M Sigaba, Prof W Sobahle, Mr Y
      Patel, Mr F Radebe, Ms B Mdaka, Dr P Bouwer, Mr M Sigidi, Mr T Faba,
      Mr C Manyike and Mr K Naidoo.


   2. The South African Local Government Association (SALGA) was represented
      by Mr T O Mlaba and Mr S Wasa. The Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB)
      was represented by Dr V Mlokoti, Mr R Willemse and Mr R Somanje. The
      National House of Traditional Leaders was represented by Khosi Kutama,
      Morena Mopeli, Prince Makaula, Kgosi Suping, Inkosi Mahlalela, Inkosi
      Mzimela, Kgosi Maubane, Hosi Ngove, Inkosi Mavundla, Kgosigadi Moroka,
      Inkosikazi Mhlauli, Mr A Sithole, Mr R Khandhlela, Adv S Maifadi, Adv
      M Tshabalala and Mr M Linda.  The Local Government Sector Education
      and Training Authority (LGSETA) was represented by Mr S Maloka, Mr S
      Mofokeng, Ms J Davies, Mr G Lobela, Mrs W Roberts and Mr E Mnyakeng.
      The Commission for the Protection and Promotion of the Rights of
      Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL Commission) was
      represented by Dr M Guma, Mr B Mgcina, Mr C Smuts and Mrs P Madiba.


C.    STRATEGIC PLAN AND OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET

   1. The Acting Director-General for Department of Provincial and Local
      Government, Mr. Elroy Africa, informed the Committee that the
      strategic focus and priorities of the Department over the medium-term
      period are embedded in the lessons of Project Consolidate and the 5
      Year Local Government Strategic Plan. He indicated that the
      Department will continue to discharge its leadership role in respect
      of the three strategic priorities of the Five Year Local Government
      Strategic Plan, namely:

• Mainstreaming hands-on support to Local Government to improve municipal
  governance, performance and accountability.
• Addressing the structure and governance arrangements of the State in
  order to better strengthen, support and monitor Local Government.
• Refining and strengthening the policy, regulatory and fiscal environment
  for Local Government and giving greater attention to the enforcement
  measures.

   2. The Department will also renew its focus on service delivery to meet
      government’s targets and objectives in the following areas:


            • Bucket Eradication by the year-end 2007
            • Water and sanitation at clinics by 2007
            • Water Supply by 2008
            • Sanitation by 2010
            • Electricity by 2012
            • Solid Waste by 2013
            • Roads infrastructure by 2013
            • Sport and Recreation by 2013
            • Public Facilities by 2013
            • Informal settlements through the housing programme by 2014

   3. Mr. Elroy Africa indicated that over the next three years, the share
      of nationally raised revenue that will be allocated to local
      government will be R121.7 billion. Of this amount, a total of R68.2
      billion will be allocated through the Local Government Equitable
      Share (LGES) in the form of an unconditional grant and R600m through
      the Municipal Systems Improvement Grant (MSIG).


   4. The department will also address challenges in the areas of
      implementing the Municipal Performance Regulations, filling of key
      vacancies, extending the pool of deployees to municipalities,
      improving the quality and credibility of IDPs, building municipal
      financial management systems and establishing an effective
      monitoring, reporting and evaluation system for local government.

   5. Over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) period R24.7
      billion will be allocated to the Municipal Infrastructure Grant
      (MIG), which will focus on broadening access to basic services in the
      areas of water, sanitation, roads and community facilities.

   6. Specific attention will be given to those municipalities who have not
      performed well with their expenditure on the 2006/07 allocations. At
      the end of January 2007, municipalities spent 54.4% of the R6.265
      billion allocated to MIG for the 2006/07 financial year.

   7. Through the relevant provisions of the Division of Revenue Act (2006)
      the Department developed and is presently implementing a MIG Re-
      allocation Strategy. This Strategy is aimed at ensuring compliance
      with the Division of Revenue Act (DORA), whilst at the same time
      providing further incentives to those municipalities who have
      demonstrated the capacity to spend, whilst providing additional
      support to those that are under-spending on MIG.

   8. It was also indicated that a total of R8.4 billion has been set aside
      for stadium development for the 2010 FIFA Soccer World Cup. In this
      regard the Department is also strengthening its own internal
      capability to support and monitor the obligations of host cities.

   9. The Department is responsible for the transfer of funds to six public
      entities and associated institutions. Over the MTEF period R265.5m
      will be transferred to South African Local Government Association
      (SALGA), the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB), the South African
      Cities Network (SACN), the Commission for the Promotion and
      Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic
      Communities, the Commission on Traditional Leadership Disputes and
      Claims, and the National House of Traditional Leaders.


  10. The Committee noted how the spending was affected by lack of capacity
      and noted that DPLG was having problems with staff deployment and
      high turnover in municipalities. The Committee acknowledged the
      Department’s commitment to providing support to municipalities
      through programmes such as Project Consolidate. However, the
      Committee recommended the Department should focus on the recruitment
      of personnel at a local government level.

D.    ADMINISTRATION

   1. The purpose of this branch is to conduct overall management of the
      Department, formulate internal policies, and provide for the
      leadership functions of the Senior Management within the Ministry and
      the Department.

   2. The budget for the Administration branch is expected to grow from R130
      million in 2007/08 to slightly above R141 million in 2009/10. The
      average annual increase in expenditure from 2003/04 to 2006/07 was 10,
      7%, due to a need to adjust the baseline for monitoring and
      evaluation, communication, information systems and general office
      support systems to support the department’s external service delivery
      units. It is estimated that the expenditure of the programme will
      increase on average annual by 5,8% from 2006/07 to 2009/10.

   3. Strategic priorities for 2007/08 include the following:
           • To improve customer services and enhance service delivery.
           • To align HR planning to the strategy and needs of the
             organization.
           • Enhance effective implementation and monitoring of internal
             administrative policies.
           • Apply systems, standards and specifications that enhance the
             quality of services delivered by DPLG service providers.
           • Develop a comprehensive Human Resource Management and
             Development (HRM&D) strategy
           • Implement organizational development interventions that align
             the structure and build employee performance and motivation.
           • Develop and align human resources policies.
           • Enhance customer service and service delivery.
           • Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation System to track
             communications impact.
           • To profile DPLG in respect of key national initiatives.
           • Development of an ICT Governance Framework for DPLG.
           • Enhance customer service and service delivery by developing a
             Service Management Framework.
           • Development of a service orientated and integrated architecture
             framework of DPLG.
           • Development of a Knowledge and Information System for DPLG.
           • Facilitate and strengthen ICT Local Government Forums and
             participate at external ICT fore.

4. The Department has not met the target of 50% for women at management
  level, of which it only managed 35%. However, the Employment Equity Plan
  and strategy has been revised to enable the Department to meet the new
  target of 50%.

5. On 28 February 2006, the profile for People with Disability was 0,5% and
  the Department’s Employment Equity plan and strategy have been revised to
  also address this gap of 1,5%.


6. The Committee raised a concern on the 41 vacant positions that are
  available within the branch, and the negative effect that these vacancies
  have on the output of the branch. The Committee recommended that the
  branch increases its efforts with regard to filling the vacant positions.
E.    GOVERNANCE, POLICY AND REASEARCH

   1. The objective of the Governance, Policy and Research branch is to
      provide policy advice and research support for the development and
      monitoring of intergovernmental relations and the performance of
      provincial government, provincial-municipal relations, integrated
      development planning, local economic development, the institutions of
      traditional leadership, and international and donor relations.

   2. For 2007/08, the branch will focus on improving intergovernmental
      processes, including the planning and implementation of the Integrated
      Development Planning (IDP). The department has developed a framework
      to assess IDPs, and there had been significant improvement in the IDP
      processes since this process was undertaken in the last two years.
      Some provinces had actually established their own IDPs. The Department
      reported that donor funds were being used to recruit technical
      expertise, which would then be deployed out to about 21
      municipalities.


F.    URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT


   1. The objective of the Urban and Rural Development Branch is to manage,
      co-ordinate, monitor and measure the effectiveness of the integrated
      implementation of the urban renewal programme and the integrated
      sustainable rural development programme across all spheres of
      government.


   2. The Department reported that the rapid increase in expenditure from
      2003/04 to 2006/07 was to provide adequate capacity for implementing
      the Urban Renewal Programme (URP) and the Integrated Sustainable Rural
      Development Programme (ISRDP). Expenditure for 2007/08 to 2009/10 is
      set to increase by 4, 8%. Expenditure in 2006/07 was low, because of
      difficulties in filling vacant posts on time. While these funds were
      used in another programme, the baseline has been adjusted in 2007/08
      so that all posts can be filled.

   3. Amongst others, the branch held induction workshops for newly elected
      Councillors and also technical support was given to the rural nodes.
      The branch noted the following achievements for 2006/07:

         • Induction workshops held for new councilors in Galeshewe, Cape
           Town, Umzinyathi, Umkhanyakude, Zululand, Ehlanzeni, Mopani,
           Sisonke, Chris Hani and Umzimkhulu.
         • Guidelines for sector department participation in the nodes
           produced and disseminated.
         • Orientation workshop held for support officials in Ministries
           who are political champions.
         • The URP Implementation Framework completed.
         • A Programme Management Toolkit for the URP nodes produced.
         • Technical support to rural nodes provided through the IDT.
         • Galeshewe Urban Renewal Programme (URP) supported with Local
           economic Development (LED) expertise.
         • Partnership established with the Development Bank of Southern
           Africa (DBSA) to support Monitoring and Evaluation.
         • Partnership with NDA to support the ISRDP nodes.
         • Partnership with Business Trust to support nodal economic
           development: economic development profiles completed for all 21
           nodes and technical support facilities in place in Maruleng and
           Buskbuckridge.
         • Continued partnership with the Independent Development Trust
           (IDT) to support the ISRDP nodes: nodal coordinators in all
           ISRDP nodes.

   4. The branch’s strategic priorities for the 2007/08 financial year
      include the following:

         • Continue the partnership with the Business Trust, aimed at
           strengthening economic development in the nodes: nodal economic
           development indaba, feasibility studies for potential investment
           projects, interventions to strengthen the institutional
           environment and entrepreneurial support programmes for some of
           the nodes.
         • Work with the National Development Agency (NDA) to target
           resources for the rural nodes.
         • Use the URP technical support facility to provide technical
           support to the urban nodes.
         • Complete the ISRDP mid term review and ISRDP lessons learnt.
         • Continue operationalising of the M&E framework: work with
           provinces and nodes.
         • Produce and publish the programme newsletters (Rural Focus and
           Urban News).
         • Continue support for political champion visits to the nodes.

   5. The Committee raised a concern about the support that is available to
      the nodal areas, especially the rural nodes. The Committee recommended
      that the Department should increase its efforts to ensure that other
      departments play their role with regard to providing support to nodal
      areas.

   6. The Committee also raised a concern about the effectiveness and
      capacity of Planning and Implementation Management Support (PIMS)
      centres, in the absence of any monitoring and evaluation process.
G.    SYSTEMS AND CAPACITY BUILDING

   1. The objective of the Systems and Capacity Building branch is to
      develop local government policy frameworks and provides support to
      local government through the building of systems, in particular
      financial management, administrative and institutional systems,
      performance management and capacity building. The branch also provides
      for the management of the National Disaster Management Centre.

   2. For this branch, the average annual growth in expenditure from 2003/04
      to 2006/07 was 18, 7%. The growth rate is expected to fall to 12, 1%
      between 2006/07 and 2009/10. Project Consolidate interventions
      resulted in additional allocations in 2006/07 and 2007/08 and the
      incorporation of the Capacity Building Systems subprogramme allocation
      for the two years of Project Consolidate. Project Consolidate
      interventions are set to stabilise from 2008/09 and the available
      funding will go to the Capacity Building Systems subprogramme.
      Expenditure on the Disaster Management subprogramme grows at an
      average annual rate of 20, 7% from 2006/07 to 2009/10.
3.    The branch has the following strategic priorities for 2007/08:

         • Implement legislative and policy refinements to existing Local
           Government laws arising from lessons on PC.
         • Regulate LG Administrative and HR Systems in line with the
           Systems Act, 2000.
         • Implementation of the Municipal Performance Management System.
         • National monitoring system on performance management fully
           developed.
         • Improve the skills and effectiveness of local Government
           leadership.
         • Rollout the Local Government Anti-Corruption strategy.
         • Local Government Gender Policy developed with focused Training
           and Development on Women in Local Government.
         • Implement the HIV/AIDS Framework, and establish Local Government
           Youth Development Strategy.
         • Support National Treasury on work towards finalising the Local
           Government Fiscal Framework.

H.    FREE BASIC SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE

   1. The objective of the branch is to strengthen the capacity of
      municipalities to deliver sustainable infrastructure and increase
      access to basic services through project management and infrastructure
      planning, including free basic services to the poor, who are
      predominantly found in the under-serviced areas of South Africa.

   2. The introduction of the municipal infrastructure grant and larger
      allocations for coordinating free basic services are the main reasons
      for the large increases in 2004/05 and 2005/06. Between 2006/07 and
      2009/10, average annual growth for the Municipal Infrastructure
      subprogramme is expected to be 7, 7%, and 9, 4% for the Free Basic
      Services Co-ordination subprogramme. Overall, the increase in
      programme expenditure between 2003/04 and 2006/07 was R23. 7 million
      or 38,8%. Over the MTEF period it is expected to be 8, 1%.

   3. The Department reported the following achievements for 2006/07:

        • The allocation for the Municipal Infrastructure Grant  (MIG) for
          the 2005/06 financial year is R 5,436 billion, of this amount
          99,6% (R5,415 billion) was spent on projects
        • The allocation for the MIG for the 2006/07 financial year is R6,
          265 billion, of this amount 54, 4% (R3, 404 billion) was spent on
          projects as at the end of January 2007.
        • Additional Capacity has been deployed to 62 municipalities where
          43 Senior Engineers, 77 students and 31 graduates.
        • 238 Municipalities have been supported to comply with DORA
          requirements, 168 Municipalities have shown a significant
          improvement particularly on reporting and spending. 32 GDS summits
          held in District and Metropolitan Municipalities.
        • Provided support to 39 municipalities on the drafting of contract
          and management of SLA
        • Presidential Izimbizo facilitated in Chris Hani, OR Tambo and
          NMMM.
        • A model for waste developed and ready for implementation.
        • Mobilizing Support from stakeholders to the Izimbizo action plans
          for the EC.
        • Guidelines on Municipal Services Partnerships (MSP) launched,
          distributed and conducting training.


   4. The Committee commended the department on its efforts to deal with the
      weaknesses and challenges faced by local government.


I.    SOUTH AFRICAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION (SALGA)

   1. The South African Local Government Association (SALGA) is mandated to
      represent the interests of organised local government in the
      intergovernmental relations system. In January 1998, SALGA was
      recognised by government as the one national organization representing
      the majority of provincial organisations in terms of section 2 of the
      Organised Local Government Act (1997). The entity is funded through a
      combination of sources, including a national government grant,
      membership fees from provincial and local government associations that
      are voluntary members, and donations from the donor community for
      specific projects.

   2. For 2007/08, SALGA listed the following priorities:

         • Increase SALGA’s effectiveness and efficiency.
         • Facilitate the strengthening of the system of communication in
           local government.
         • Mainstream issues of gender, youth and people with disabilities.
         • Promote a lawful governance system which will enable service
           delivery in a developmental state.
         • Facilitate, promote and encourage municipalities to meaningful
           position themselves for 2010 FIFA Soccer World Cup.
         • Facilitate the development of municipal finance and fiscal
           management capacity towards sustainable service delivery.

   3. The Committee raised a concern with regard to a decrease in donor
      funding for the 2007/08 financial year, and the impact it may have on
      the fulfillment of the strategic plans of the entity.

   4. The committee enquired the level of involvement by SALGA on the
      development and implementation of the Performance Management System in
      municipalities, and urged the entity to strengthen its participation
      in the process.

   5. The Committee also raised concerns about the lack of the monitoring
      and evaluation of the Project Consolidate, and how this problem
      negatively affects the development and adoption of best practices.
J.    MUNICIPAL DEMARCATION BOARD (MDB)

   1. Mr R. Willemse briefed the committee on the Board’s mandate and
      performance during 2006/2007. He reported that a draft work plan for
      the period 2007-2011, to meet the deadlines imposed in key performance
      areas by the upcoming elections in 2009 and 2011, was compiled and
      tabled by the Board. Some of the concerns included the lack of
      interest in demarcation issues by provinces and municipalities, the
      tight consultation timeframes, and the possibility of delay.

   2. Mr Willemse addressed the MDB’s financial management objectives and
      gave an overview of past budget, income and expenditure performance.
      Details were provided about the anticipated income and expenditure up
      to 2011, including budget trends. The Board has received an allocation
      of R20, 6 million, which is approximately 82% of its total budget. The
      Board reported that it was expecting an income of R164 500 from other
      sources. A breakdown of expected expenditure was given as well as the
      proposed acquisition of fixed assets for 2007/08 to 2010-11.

   3. The Board reported that it was experiencing challenges with regard to
      recruiting qualified personnel, and limited budget and inadequate
      infrastructure.


L.    LOCAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING AUTHORITY (LG-SETA)

   1. Mr Lobelo proceeded to give the Committee an update on the
      achievements for 2005/06 and indicated the Board’s resolve to support
      the sector in its sectoral priorities. He mentioned that memoranda of
      understanding were entered into with various departments,
      organisations and other stakeholders. Mr Lobelo also highlighted the
      strategic priority areas that have been approved for funding from the
      Discretionary Fund for 2006 – 2010.

   2. Mr Sidwell Mofokeng, Chief Executive Officer, reported that the all
      SETAs did not receive any allocation from government for 2007/08. The
      question whether the Department of Provincial and Local Government
      (DPLG) should be contributing to the administration was being
      discussed in line with a Cabinet resolution of 2003. The LGSETA's
      total income was derived from levies from municipalities, which amount
      to 1% of the payroll, and donor funding.

   3. The Committee inquired about the training programmes and other
      developmental support that are available to traditional leaders and
      urged the LGSETA to collaborate with SALGA and other stakeholders to
      ensure that there is no duplication of services.

M.    NATIONAL HOUSE OF TRADITIONAL LEADERS (NHTL)

   1. The Chairperson of the NHTL, Mr Sithole, reported on the mandate of
      the NHTL and its role and listed the type of assistance rendered by
      DPLG to the NHTL and the progress in respect of various programmes of
      the NHTL. He concluded with an overview of the visits to Botswana,
      Namibia and Zimbabwe.

   2. Mr Sithole indicated that there was a shortcoming in the Traditional
      Leadership and Governance Act as it did not allow for the NHTL to
      intervene in the local and provincial houses. The Act was being
      followed closely by all provinces but there was a need to look at
      certain aspects of the Act in future.

   3. It was reported that all traditional leaders were included during
      negotiations on remunerations and the NHTL was awaiting the report
      from the Limpopo Provincial House of Traditional Leaders on the issue.



   4. The NHTL reiterated their request for a chamber and two committee
      rooms to be allocated by Parliament. It was also indicated that the
      issue of lack of resources, funding and personnel of the newly
      established structures remained a problem.

   5. The Committee, in its 2nd Term Programme has made provision for a
      meeting with the department to discuss the programme of support for
      traditional leadership and institutions.

   6. The Committee also plans to have a full day workshop with the National
      House of Traditional Leaders to look at some of the challenges they
      are facing and issues they have raised.

N.    COMMISSION FOR THE PROMOTION AND THE PROTECTION OF THE RIGHTS OF
    CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS AND LINGUISTIC COMMUNITIES (CRL COMMISSION)

   1. Dr Mongezi Guma, Chairperson of the Commission, indicated that for the
      last two years the Commission has mainly focusing on setting up the
      architecture of the entity. Most of the programmes had been informed
      by the decisions taken by the National Consultative Conference, which
      was held to test the parameters of the mandate and cope of the
      Commission.
   2. The reported that the Auditor General has previously highlighted that
      there was no separation of functions within the unit as a result of
      lack of staff, as there were too few to allow for separation of
      functions. There were also other concerns with regard to of adequate
      policies and the Commission confirmed that all policies had since been
      developed. After interacting with the DPLG and Treasury, the
      Commission was able to motivate for additional funds to improve the
      capacity, and was allocated an additional R2 million for the next
      three years. The Commission is planning to employ more staff in the
      areas of administration and financial management.

   3. The Budget of the Commission is expected to increase from R15.4
      million in 2007/08 to R20.39 in 2009/10. The budget made allowance for
      the National Consultative Conference, which was a statutory
      requirement every five years, and which would be held in 2008/09.

   4. The Portfolio Committee emphasised that the Commission should
      strengthen its relationship with traditional leaders as some of the
      challenges that have been identified by the Commission are also of
      concern to traditional leaders.

O.    CONCLUSION

   1. The Committee believed that submissions are in part a response to past
      resolutions and mandates.
   2. The Committee further records some of its concerns and directives
      recorded in its Portfolio Committee Report in 2006, as adopted by
      Parliament and, directs the Department and institutions that appeared
      before it to implement the decisions of the Committee that are still
      outstanding.
   3. The Committee further commits itself to strengthening its oversight
      role through visits to Municipalities.
   4. The Committee thanks parties concerned for the progress made so far.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
    on an oversight visit to the Kgalagadi, Alexandra and Maluti-A-Phofung
    Nodal Municipalities, dated 19 June 2007:

The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
undertaken an oversight visit to the Kgalagadi, Alexandra and Maluti-A-
Phofung Nodal Municipalities, reports as follows:

A.    Introduction

      1.    The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
           envisaged undertaking a study visit to various nodal
           municipalities in the 2nd Term of Parliament. This had been on
           the agenda of the Committee for some time and it was resolved
           that the Committee would undertake this visit during the second
           week of May 2007. Through various interactions with the
           Department of Provincial and Local Government and other relevant
           stakeholders, the Committee identified three nodal
           municipalities to visit.


      2.    The delegation from the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and
           Local Government comprised of Mr S L Tsenoli (ANC)
           (Chairperson), Ms M Gumede (ANC), Mr I Mogase (ANC), Mr G
           Phadagi (ANC), Mr S Mshudulu (ANC), Mr M Lekgoro (ANC), Mr W
           Doman (DA), Mr M Swathe (DA), Mr P Smith (IFP), Ms M Mdlalose
           (NADECO), Ms N Sibisi (Committee Assistant), Mr J Nkuna
           (Parliamentary Researcher) and Mr L Brown (Committee Secretary).

B.    Objectives

      The overall objective of the oversight visit was to look into the
      impact assessment of the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
      Programme (ISRDP) and Urban Renewal Programme (URP) in the identified
      areas and receive presentations on the plans to deliver on targets and
      addressing current challenges. The Committee also focused on
      intergovernmental relations and service delivery - to check on the
      progress in putting intergovernmental relations structures in place at
      provincial and district level. To examine the lessons learned in
      respect of intergovernmental relations collaboration. The Committee
      also wanted national, provincial and local government to account for
      how they had been using these structures to drive the achievements of
      the service delivery targets. And, finally, the Committee wanted to
      study what the level of community participation was in this regard.

C.    Nodal Municipalities Visited

     1. The nodal municipalities visited included Kgalagadi Nodal
        Municipality in the Northern Cape, Alexandra Renewal Project in
        Gauteng and the Maluti-A-Phofung Nodal Municipality in Free State.


     2. Meetings involved a range of stakeholders including local
        government councilors, government officials and elected and
        official functionaries.

D. Kgalagadi Municipality – Northern Cape Province

        The Executive Mayor of the Kgalagadi District  Municipality,  Cllr.
        Mrs. B.S. Mereeotlhe, indicated that the district was identified as
        a Rural Development Node by the President and it  is  part  of  the
        Integrated Sustainable Rural  Development  Programme  (ISRDP).  The
        district municipality is characterised by  high  unemployment  rate
        and a high density rural population that has poor access  to  basic
        infrastructure and services.  The majority of people  in  the  area
        are dependent on subsistence agriculture, while the  public  sector
        and the mines are the two biggest sources of employment.
        With regard to service delivery in the  area  the  Executive  Mayor
   reported the
        following:

        Integrated Development Plans

           •  All four  municipalities  within  the  district  municipality
             planned and executed their IDPs since 2001, in accordance with
             appropriate legislation and guidelines.
           • Municipalities were currently in  the  process  of  finalising
             their Draft 2007/2008 IDP programmes.
           • Each municipality identifies its own priority issues for which
             appropriate objectives, strategies and projects are developed.


           • Various structures and forums have been established to  ensure
             effective planning, such as the IDP Representative  Forum  and
             the ISRDP Technical and Political Forum.
           • The district municipality has aligned the planning and  budget
             process in  all  four  municipalities  as  prescribed  by  the
             Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA).


        Institutional Capacity


         •  For  the  last  five  years,  the  district  municipality   has
           prioritised the training of councillors and  officials  -  where
           approximately R6 million was used towards  the  training  of  50
           councillors and 50 officials.
         •  Approximately,  R800  thousand   is   budgeted   for   by   all
           municipalities  to   fund   training   and   capacity   building
           programmes.
         • All municipalities have personnel Skills Development Plans.
         • An estimated R20 million  was  spent  on  the  building  of  new
           municipal  offices  and/or  the  improvement  and  expansion  of
           existing buildings for all four municipalities.
         • Moshaweng Municipality has the least capacity  compared  to  the
           other municipalities but the situation has  improved  from  five
           employees in 2002 to 34 employees in 2007.


        Financial Viability


         • Various  strategies  were  put  in  place  to  increase  revenue
           collection.
         • Gamagara, Ga-Segonyana and the district municipality started  to
           raise minimum taxes from farmers and has installed water  meters
           in areas that were previously not metered.
         • All municipalities implemented strict budget control  mechanisms
           resulting in a dramatic drop of unauthorised expenditure.
         • Gamagara Municipality is considered to be in a  better  position
           in terms of payment  of  services,  however,  the  inclusion  of
           Olifantshoek after the recent elections pose a new challenge  to
           the municipality.
         • In Ga-Segonyana 80% of the population  resides  on  tribal  land
           where  there  are  no  street  names  and  no  individual   land
           ownership.
         • Ga-Segonyana continues to rely on the Equitable Share to  ensure
           financial viability.
         • The financial viability of Moshaweng Municipality is currently a
           challenge, however, measures to improve the situation are  being
           investigated.
         • Moshaweng has developed a valuation roll and is  piloting  water
           meters and accompanied payment of services in Cassel Village.

        Performance Management System

         •  All  four  municipalities  have  developed  annual  Performance
           Reports.
         •   Gamagara   and   Ga-Segonyana   Municipalities    have    both
           organisational and individual performance measurement systems at
           all levels.
         • Kgalagadi has developed an organisational performance system and
           is in the  process  of  finalising  the  individual  performance
           systems - below level one.
         • Moshaweng Municipality was recently identified as a pilot  -  to
           receive intervention from province - however  this  process  has
           not unfolded.
         • The Performance Audit Committee was recently established and  is
           functional.
         • An Internal Audit Unit has been established and serves all  four
           municipalities.



        Housing


         • Kgalagadi District Municipality is currently in the  process  of
           applying for housing accreditation, level 1 and 2.
         • In Ga-Segonyana 546 houses were  developed  over  the  past  two
           years. Another 1100 subsidies were approved for the Ga-Segonyana
           area.
         • In Moshaweng 1100 subsidy houses were approved and  are  in  the
           process of being implemented.
         • In Gamagara 485 subsidy houses  were  constructed.  Due  to  the
           expansion of the mines the Municipality is currently  developing
           an additional 1 986 residential sites to  the  cost  of  R77,  8
           million.
         • The district municipality developed 250 sites in Vanzylsrus  for
           subsidy housing. An application for the subsidies was  submitted
           to the Provincial Department of Housing and Local Government.


        Water

         • Most of the water and sanitation projects are  funded  from  the
           Municipal Infrastructure Grant  (MIG).  The  Project  Management
           Unit  (PMU)  was  established  at  district  level   to   assist
           municipalities with the management and  implementation  of  this
           grant.
         • The funding required, to eradicate the water backlog within  the
           district  municipality  area  of  jurisdiction,  amounts  to   R
           60,027,130.
         •  Adequate  funding  for  the  eradication  of  the  backlogs  in
           Gamagara,  the  Kgalagadi  DMA  and  Gasegonyana   exists,   but
           Moshaweng has a backlog of 8 386 households.
         • Currently the MIG budget allows for an allocation of R28 mil for
           the  provision  of  RDP  standard  water  infrastructure,   thus
           resulting in a R30,014 mil annul shortfall.
         • An estimate of R46 million was spent over the past four years on
           water provision, providing 15 333 households with water.



        Observations and Issues Raised


         •  The  Committee  enquired  about  the   effectiveness   of   the
           performance  management  system  that  has  been  developed  and
           implemented  by  some  of  the  municipalities.  The   Committee
           indicated that the system could be used by other  municipalities
           to develop their own performance management systems.
         • The Committee  raised  a  concern  about  the  participation  by
           Traditional Leaders in the IDP processes,  as  they  represented
           most of the communities in the area.



        Committee Recommendations


        The Committee recommended the following:

         • A detailed report on the municipal performance management system
           be forwarded to the Portfolio Committee, as  such  system  could
           also be helpful to other municipalities.


   E. Alexandra Renewal Project – Gauteng Province


      Mr Julian Baskin, the Director of the ARP, indicated that Alexander is
      located on  prime  and  valuable  land  within  the  principal  growth
      corridor, between key arterial roads to the Oliver Tambo  Airport  and
      the Highway that connects Johannesburg and Pretoria. He reported  that
      approximately 350 000 people resides in 8 500 informal houses, 34  000
      shacks, 3 hostel complexes and 2 500 flats. With an initial budget  of
      R1.4 billion (excluding housing subsidy), the ARP had a  timeframe  of
      seven years, starting from 2002 and ending in 2008, but it  was  later
      extended by three years. For almost two years, the programme  struggle
      to get off the ground,  until  the  2004  ARP  Summit.  The  following
      challenges and obstacles were identified by the 2004 ARP Summit:

       • The escalation of costs as a result of inflated project  structure
         (approximately 50 consultants were involved in multiple projects).


       • Lack of centralised project team,  which  resulted  in  government
         structures working in silos.
       • Too much emphasis on non-construction projects.
       • Confusion over attainable and realistic project objectives.
       • Resistance to relocation out of Alexandra.
       • Focus on unaffordable social housing.
       • Lack of coordination between the  Provincial  Government  and  the
         City of Johannesburg.
       • Little buy-in from Councillors.


      The ARP Director reported on the substantial progress that  has  since
      been made since 2004, including various sub-projects that have already
      been concluded and some that are being implemented. He also noted  the
      following challenges:

       • Development of a  clear  consensus  with  regard  to  the  housing
         allocations.
       • Perceived and real corruption undermines housing allocations.
       • Ensure quality of housing construction.
       • The purchasing of newly identified land in Limbro Park.
       • Increasing the participation and contribution  of  private  sector
         role players in the ARP.
       • The  need  for  a  wider  ministerial  support  and  increase  the
         insufficient ARP budget.
       • Increase the capacity in the Local Economic Development section of
         the ARP.

      Observations and Issues Raised


       • Mr Julian Baskin indicated that  one  of  the  challenges  to  the
         programme was the fact that government department  often  fail  to
         take ownership of completed projects.
       • The compensation  of  landowners  remains  a  challenge  and  this
         affected the implementation  of  various  infrastructure  projects
         such as the construction of roads in Alexandra.
       • It was also noted  that  the  maintenance  of  completed  building
         complexes was a growing concern and  challenge,  as  the  risk  of
         being  dilapidated  increases  without  any  maintenance  of   the
         properties.
       • Affordability and the willingness to  pay  for  rendered  services
         (levies and rates) is one of the key concerns for both  homeowners
         and those that will be renting.
       • Mr Julian Baskin reported that the delay in payment of contractors
         continues to have a negative impact on the cash flow  of  emerging
         small contractors, and thus  prevent  them  from  benefiting  from
         business opportunities that are available.
       • The Committee raised a concern  with  regard  to  the  anticipated
         delays in the proclamation of the remaining townships in Alexandra
         before the 2009 target deadline.


      Committee Recommendations


      The Portfolio Committee recommended that:

       • Communication networks  and  intergovernmental  relations  between
         various  spheres  of  government,  including  the  Office  of  the
         Premier, must  be  strengthened  to  ensure  that  the  identified
         challenges are addressed timeously.
       • The acquisition of land in Limbro Park, which was in dispute, must
         be prioritised and a process  of  thorough  consultation  must  be
         undertaken to ensure that residents of Limbro  Park  are  able  to
         engage and participate fully in the process.




     F. Maluti-A-Phofung Municipality – Free State


      It was reported  that  the  Maluti-A-Phofung  Local  Municipality  has
      developed a performance management system and all managers have signed
      their performance  contracts  for  the  2007/08  financial  year.  The
      following issues were reported:





      Integrated Development Planning


       • The Provincial IDP engagement sessions were held  in  Bloemfontein
         in  May  2006,  where  all  District  Municipalities  and   sector
         departments were in attendance.
       • Subsequent to these sessions on 20 February 2007 the District  and
         Local Municipalities held their IDP review sessions to ensure that
         it is aligned to the Free State Growth and Development plan.

      Project Consolidate


       • Maluti-A-Phofung was put  under  project  consolidate  to  address
         issues of service delivery.
       • The Provincial Department of  Local  Government  and  Housing  has
         allocated R6 million to the Local Municipality for the development
         of the Spatial Development Framework.
       • The Independent Development Trust (IDT) has deployed one  official
         to the node to provide support in monitoring the implementation of
         project consolidate.
       • The IDT,  in  partnership  with  Nestle,  is  also  involved  with
         providing support to local farmers in  collecting  and  delivering
         milk at different points.


      The Golden Gate Declaration


       • The node hosted a seminar with the sector departments, the private
         sector, parastatals, the IDT  and  the  technical  and  provincial
         champions.
       • Sector departments have since aligned their departmental strategic
         plans to address issues on the node.
       • The office of the  Premier  is  fully  represented  in  ISRPD  and
         provides ongoing support to the node.
       • The seminar realised the Golden Gate  Declaration  where  all  the
         stakeholders committed themselves to forge a partnership that will
         ensure smooth implementation and success of the ISRDP.


      Traditional Leadership


       • The role of traditional leadership in the nodal  area  is  visible
         and traditional leaders are intensively involved in ward committee
         structures as ex officio members.


      Basic service delivery and infrastructure development


       • The Project Management Unit (PMU) is fully functional  within  the
         municipality and oversees the smooth  implementation  of  the  MIG
         programme and other infrastructure projects.
       •  The  municipality  has  been   allocated   R188,5   million   for
         infrastructure related projects for 2006/7.

      Challenges


      The following challenges were identified:

       • The local municipality faces challenges regarding the construction
         and maintenance of infrastructure, such as roads and bridges.
       • Lack of commitment from senior managers of the municipality in the
         implementation of the programme.
       • The IGR structure in the municipality is not functional.
       •  Need  to  further  reinforce  integration  and  coordination   of
         financial resources from sector departments to maximize the impact
         in the node.
       • Shortage of social workers to meet the demand for  social  welfare
         services.
       • Recruitment and retention of health  care  practitioners  for  the
         node.
       • Implementation of rural health services due  to  the  shortage  of
         resources.
       • Procurement and replacement of critical medical equipment.
       • Accommodation  of  health  workers  including  community  services
         officers.
       • Insufficient resources in providing water and sanitation in  rural
         schools and clinics.
       • Communication of Free Basic Services to the end users.
       •  Shortage  or  lack  of  technical  capacity  for  monitoring   of
         infrastructure projects.
       • Accessibility  of  roads  in  the  rural  areas  still  remains  a
         challenge.
       • Water,  sanitation  and  electricity  provision  still  remains  a
         challenge in some rural communities.


      Observations and Issues Raised


       • The  Committee  noted  with  disappointment  the  absence  of  the
         delegates from the district municipality from the meeting,  as  no
         apology was rendered.
       • The Committee enquired about the level and  magnitude  of  service
         delivery backlogs in the nodal area, as  these  were  not  clearly
         articulated in the presentation.
       • The Committee raised a concern about  the  ability  of  the  local
         municipality to draft and implement  its  own  IDP  programme  and
         cautioned the local municipality against using  service  providers
         to develop its IDP plans.
       • The Committee raised a concern  about  achievements  and  progress
         that has been made on the implementation of anchor projects in the
         nodal areas, as there was under-reporting in this area.
       • Some Councillors indicated that the  municipality’s  IDP  has  not
         been properly consulted and discussed with the communities.
       •  Political  champions  have  been  appointed  in   the   national,
         provincial and local governments to service the  21  nodes.  Their
         primary mandate is to promote the principles of the programmes  as
         well as to remove  blockages  or  impediments  to  the  successful
         implementation of the programmes. The Committee enquired about the
         role played by political champions in the  nodal  area  to  ensure
         that the intergovernmental problems are addressed.

      Committee Recommendations


      The Portfolio Committee recommended that:

      Intergovernmental relations should be strengthened through the
      enforcement of the Intergovernmental Relations Act to ensure that the
      IDP programme is implemented successfully in the nodal area.


Report to be considered.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert T070625 – insert 2 - PAGES 1379-1391

4.    Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
    Proposals and Special Petitions on the Legislative proposal to amend
    Electoral Act, dated 24 May 2007:

         The Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
         and Special Petitions, having considered the Legislative proposal
         submitted by Mr G. Morgan, and consulted with the Government
         Communications and Information Systems (GCIS) and Independent
         Electoral Commission (IEC), recommends that permission not be given
         to the member to proceed with the proposal.


         However the Committee recommends that the matter be debated in the
         House of National Assembly.


        Report to be considered.

5.    Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
    Proposals and Special Petitions on the Legislative proposal to amend
    Lotteries Act, dated 15 June 2007:

         The Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
         and Special Petitions, having considered the Legislative proposal
         submitted by Mr L Labuschagne, and consulted with the Department of
         Trade and Industry, recommends that the Department of Trade and
         Industry incorporates the proposal into their reviewal process,
         with six-monthly reports to the Committee and the proposing member.


         Report to be considered.

6.    Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
    Proposals and Special Petitions on the Legislative proposal to amend
    South African Schools Act, dated 15 June 2007:
         The Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
         and Special Petitions, having considered the Legislative proposal
         submitted by Mr G Boinamo, and consulted with the Department of
         Education, recommends that permission not be given to the member to
         proceed with the proposal since the education legislative do cover
         the first two portions of the proposal, and some aspects of the
         proposal be referred to the Portfolio Committee on Education for
         further consideration.

         Report to be considered.

                           WEDNESDAY, 27 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill


     (a)    South African Airways Bill [B 35B – 2006] – Act No 5 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 14 June 2007)

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - T070627-insert1 – PAGES 1394-1448

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - T070627-insert2 – PAGES 1449-1453
                            FRIDAY, 29 JUNE 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


           a) Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – proposed sec 74) [Bill published in
              Government Gazette No 29910 of 25 May 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
              Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 29
              June 2007.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.

     (2)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


           a) Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
              Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2007] (National Assembly – proposed
              sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill published in Government
              Gazette No 29992 of 15 June 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 29 June 2007.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      (1)   Report of the Public Protector in terms of section 182(1)(b) of
          the Constitution,1996 and section 8(2)(b) of the Public Protector
          Act, 1994. Report on an investigation into a complaint concerning
          the alleged failure by the National Assembly to comply with the
          Constitution and Parliamentary Procedures: Constitution Twelfth
          Amendment Bill.


      (2)   Written comments received from the public and provincial
          legislatures on the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24
          - 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 74), submitted by the
          Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development in terms of
          section 74(6)(a) of the Constitution, 1996.

         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
          Development.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry price
    increases of bulk resources (water) for provision of Municipal services
    – Section 42 of the Local Government Municipal Finance Management Act
    No. 56 of 2003

           A.    Background


           As required by section 42 of the Local Government Municipal
           Finance Management Act, on 13 March 2007 Parliament received the
           proposed price increases of bulk resources in respect of water
           tariffs by Water Boards.


           B.    Introduction


           The proposed price increases were referred to the Portfolio
           Committee on 13 March 2007. These were considered by the
           committee at a meeting held on 18 May 2007.
           C.    Findings


           Fourteen Water Boards submitted price increases ranging between
           0 – 24,3%. The Botshelo and Namakwa Water Boards have proposed
           tariff increases above national government’s inflation target.
           The Botshelo Water Board proposed a 24,3% increase , the Namakwa
           Water Board proposed a 10% increase.


           In terms of section 42(3) of the Act, submissions in relation to
           price increases of bulk resources for the provision of municipal
           services must be accompanied by:


           a)    a motivation of the reasons for the proposed amendment;
           b)    an explanation of how the amendment account of –


                 i)    the national government’s inflation targets and other
                       macroeconomic policy objectives;
                 ii)   steps taken by the organ of state to improve its
                       competitiveness or efficiency in order to reduce
                       costs;
                 iii)  any objectives or targets as outlined in any
                       corporate or other governance plan applicable to that
                       organ of state;


           c)    any written comments received from the National Treasury,
                 organised local government or any municipalities; and
           d)    any explanation of how such comments have been taken into
      account.

          D.     Conclusions
          The Portfolio Committee in dealing with the tariff increase is of
          the view that the 24,3% increase by the Botshelo Water Board does
          not appear to take into account the issues in section 42 (3) of
          the Act.
          The Act is, however, not explicit on the function of Parliament
          including that of the Portfolio Committee’s obligation to deal
          with the submission. The Act does not empower the Portfolio
          Committee to recommend, adopt or reject the proposed bulk
          resources increases proposed.


          E.     Recommendations
          The Portfolio Committee recommends the following:


          1.     That the Minister for Water Affairs and Forestry consider
                actively engaging with Botshelo Water Board on responsibly
                setting price increases in line with national government’s
                inflation targets.


          2.     The Minister for Water Affairs and Forestry, in
               consultation with the Minister for Provincial and Local
               Government, be requested to consider a review of section 42
               of the Local Government Municipal Finance Management Act to
               provide for a role for parliament when price increases in
               respect of bulk resources are considered


Report to be considered.

2.    Second Report of ad hoc Committee on operational problems in the
      office of the Public Protector, dated 28 June 2007:

      The Committee, having concluded its inquiry, reports as follows:


1.    INTRODUCTION

      (1)   The ad hoc Committee on operational problems in the office of
           the Public Protector was originally appointed on 31 July 2006 at
           the request of the Public Protector, Adv M L Mushwana. Its term
           of reference was to enquire into the operational problems being
           experienced in the office of the Public Protector as reported to
           the Speaker by the Public Protector.

      (2)   The Committee, having engaged with both the Public Protector and
           the Deputy Public Protector, Adv M T Shai, reported to the House
           on 5 September 2006. The Committee identified a range of
           operational problems in the office which impacted negatively on
           its ability to carry out its constitutional responsibilities
           optimally. The Committee accordingly made a number of
           recommendations aimed at strengthening the office and which
           should be implemented as a matter of urgency and included
           confidence-building measures to assist in removing potential
           sources of tension between the Public Protector and his Deputy.

     (3)    The Committee had learned of a serious rift in relations between
           the Public Protector and his Deputy which had developed into a
           public discord, culminating in the Public Protector initiating
           legal action and the Deputy Public Protector instructing her
           attorneys to prepare a counter-claim. The Committee in its
           report expressed the view that it was undesirable that such
           legal action remained in the public domain and unresolved as
           that would unavoidably impede the effective functioning of the
           office for as long as it continued.


     (4)    The Committee’s report was adopted by the House on 7 September
     2006.

2.    RECONVENING OF COMMITTEE

      (1)   Following a recommendation of the Committee, the House
           reconvened the Committee by resolution on 27 March 2007 for it
           to assess progress made with the implementation of the
           recommendations and to determine any further action that may be
           required to ensure that the office of the Public Protector was
           able to fulfill its constitutional and legislative mandate. The
           Committee was instructed to report by 2 July 2007.

      (2)   In advance of engaging further with the Public Protector and his
           Deputy, the Committee invited them to submit written reports or
           comments on progress that had been made. In response the
           Committee received a progress report and a document formally
           delegating powers to the Deputy Public Protector, both co-signed
           by the two office-bearers. Draft amendments to the employment
           policy of the office were also received.

      (3)   The Committee saw it as its main task to establish its
           satisfaction with what had been done in the previous six months
           to implement the recommendations and whether good working
           relations had been restored between the Public Protector and his
           Deputy.

3.    FINDINGS ON PROGRESS

(1)   Implementation of recommendations
      (a)   The Public Protector and Deputy Public Protector jointly
           confirmed that steps had been taken to implement the
           recommendations and to resolve the operational problems that
           existed in the office. These included:

               • The formal acceptance and observance of the overall
                 authority of the Public Protector as head of the
                 institution;


               • The formal observance of the lines of authority and
                 accountability of the office in relation to organs of state
                 as envisaged in the Constitution;
               • The formalisation of the delegation of powers to the Deputy
                 Public Protector;


               • The Public Protector’s direct supervision of
                 responsibilities assigned to the Deputy Public Protector
                 and their direct interaction and co-operation on matters
                 relating to the functioning of the office;


               • The filling of senior posts in the office including those
                 of the chief executive officer, a finance manager, a senior
                 IT manager and a senior communications manager;


               • The preparation of formal procedures for the appointment
                 and transfer of staff;


               • The preparation of a staff retention strategy;


               • The proper application within the office of terms and
                 conditions of service of the Public Protector and the
                 Deputy Public Protector; and


               • The adoption and subsequent review of a strategic plan for
                 the office.

      (b)   The Committee is pleased to report on these developments since
           September 2006 and believes that they establish an adequate
           foundation for the effective functioning of the office.

      (c)   The Committee also notes that as a result of these developments
           cases are now processed more quickly and the majority of cases
           in the office are less than a year old.


(2)   Public Protector’s concern at nature of practical interaction with
      Treasury and Department of Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   The Public Protector in his Progress Report to the Committee
           expressed concern at the role played in practice by Treasury and
           the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development in
           relation to the finances of the office, budgetary matters and
           the determination of the remuneration and terms and conditions
           of service of the Public Protector and his Deputy.

      (b)   Recommendation: The Committee recommends that the Public
           Protector’s concerns regarding the role of Treasury and the
           Department as reflected in the Progress Report be referred to
           the ad hoc Committee on the Review of Chapter 9 and Associated
           Institutions for consideration.
(3)   Formal  delegation of powers to the Deputy Public Protector

      (a)   In submitting to the Committee the formal delegation of powers
           to the Deputy Public Protector in accordance with the
           Committee’s recommendation, the Public Protector indicated that
           the exercise had not been an easy one and he would welcome any
           form of guidance and suggestions.

      (b)   The Committee engaged with the Public Protector and his Deputy
           on the contents of the document and advised that it should be
           reworked, ensuring that the delegated powers referred directly
           to core elements of the work of the office and governance issues
           and that all  administrative functions resorted under  the newly
           appointed Chief Executive Officer. The number of delegated
           powers should also be reduced from 26 and banded into no more
           than 6 or 7.

(4)   Working relations between Public Protector and Deputy Public
      Protector and status of legal action.

      (a)   Both the Public Protector and the Deputy Public Protector
           assured the Committee that with the implementation of the
           recommendations and confidence-building measures, amicable
           working relations between them had been restored and they met
           regularly on operational matters.

      (b)   The Committee notes with concern that the Public Protector and
           his Deputy had not formally met to discuss the Committee report
           after its adoption in September 2006.

      (c)   The Progress Report and document on the delegation of powers had
           been co-signed by them.

      (d)   The Committee learned, however, that the Public Protector’s
           legal action and the Deputy Public Protector’s counter-claim
           were still pending.

      (e)   Furthermore, despite the misgivings expressed in the report
           regarding the inevitable impact on the optimal functioning of
           the office if the legal action were to remain in the public
           domain and unresolved, the Committee notes that no attempt had
           been made by either party to settle their differences.

      (f)   Nevertheless, both assured the Committee that they took the
           concerns expressed in the report and reiterated by the Committee
           very seriously, and would continue to do so. However, they felt
           that the court action related to personal matters and did not
           impact on their working relations which remained professional.

      (g)   At the suggestion of the Committee the Chairperson approached
           them individually in a further attempt to encourage a
           settlement, but regrettably was not successful.

      (h)   The Committee has to accept the assurances of both parties that
           good working relations between them will be maintained, but the
           Committee remains of the view that in the interests of the
           dignity, authority and effective functioning of this important
           office it is undesirable that the legal action should continue
           to be in the public domain and remain unresolved.

4.    CONCLUSION

      (1)   This report concludes the Committee’s work.  Apart from the
          continuing legal action, the Committee is satisfied that there
          has been progress towards resolving the operational problems in
          the office, and advises that no further action is required at
          this time.  However, the Committee reiterates that it is
          inconceivable that the two most senior office-bearers of an
          institution that enjoys constitutional protection and status and
          that is committed to resolving disputes between citizens and
          public authority should persist in their intention to pursue
          legal action against each other.

      (2)   In conducting this inquiry into operational problems in the
          office of the Public Protector, one of the independent
          institutions supporting democracy as established by the
          Constitution, the Committee had to perform a unique task without
          precedent in our Parliament. The inquiry was indeed conducted at
          the behest of the Public Protector in person and the Committee
          sought in its inquiry to remain sensitive to the constitutional
          status of the office and to refrain from inappropriate
          interference.

      (3)   The Committee acknowledges the co-operation of Adv M L Mushwana
          and Adv M T Shai.

      (4)   The Committee expresses its appreciation to Mr Kasper Hahndiek,
          former Secretary to the National Assembly, and to the staff who
          supported the Committee for their assistance.

      Report to be considered
                             MONDAY, 2 JULY 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa on Development Co-operation 1 July
         2004 – 30 June 2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
         of Sweden and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
         Development Co-operation 1 July 2004 – 30 June 2007.

     (c)    Government Notice No R. 478 published in Government Gazette No
         29958 dated 1 June 2007: Rules made by the Minister of Finance
         under section 771 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
         of 1964).

     (d)    Government Notice No R. 484 published in Government Gazette No
         29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1337)
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (e)    Government Notice No R. 485 published in Government Gazette No
         29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/612) in
         terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (f)    Government Notice No R. 486 published in Government Gazette No
         29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/306) in
         terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Malta in respect of Police
         Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


                             FRIDAY, 6 JULY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister for Public Enterprises
          a) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Bill published in Government Gazette No
             29879 of 11 May 2007.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
             Enterprises of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160, on 29 June 2007.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Assent by President in respect of Bill


     (a)    Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment Bill
         [B 1 – 2007] – Act No 4 of 2007 (assented to and signed by
         President on 29 June 2007).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Diamond Export Levy Bill, 2007.

     (b)    Government Notice No R.492 published in Government Gazette No
         29966 dated 15 June 2007: Municipal Regulations on Debt
         Disclosure, in terms of section 168 of the Local Government:
         Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     (c)    Government Notice No R.493 published in Government Gazette No
         29967 dated 15 June 2007: Municipal Regulations on Minimum
         Competency Levels, in terms of section 168 of the Local
         Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
         2003).

2.    The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
         (UTF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 45-2007].

                            FRIDAY, 27 JULY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)     Rental Housing Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister
         of Housing. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing and the
         Select Committee on Public Services.


    (b)     Social Housing Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of
         Housing. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing and the
         Select Committee on Public Services.


    (c)     Local Government Laws Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister for Provincial and Local Government. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government and the
         Select Committee on Local Government and Administration.


    (d)     National Gambling Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Trade and Industry. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs.


2.    Introduction of Bills
     (1)    The Minister of Transport


         (a)     Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27 –
              2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill published in
              Government Gazette No 30115 of 24 July 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


     (2)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


         (a)     Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill published in
              Government Gazette No 30034 of 2 July 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.
     (3)    The Minister of Housing


         (a)     Social Housing Bill [B 29 – 2007] (National Assembly –
              proposed sec 76) [Bill published in Government Gazette No
              30022 of 6 July 2007.]


            Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Housing
            of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
            Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
            Rule 160.


            In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
            of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
            (JTM) within three parliamentary working days.


     (4)    The Minister of Housing


         (a)     Rental Housing Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2007] (National
              Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Bill published in Government
              Gazette No 30022 of 6 July 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Housing of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.
     (5)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         a) National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2007] (National
            Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Bill published in Government
            Gazette No 30124 of 26 July 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


     (6)    The Minister of Correctional Services


         (a)     Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 32 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill published in
              Government Gazette No 29893 of 18 May 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Correctional Services of the National Assembly, as well as
              referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


3.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
        Committees:

        Budget


        Appointed:     Gumede, Mr D M (Alt); September, Ms C (Alt); Sotyu,
                  Ms M (Alt); Tsenoli, Mr S L (Alt); Zita, Mr L (Alt)
        Defence


        Appointed:     Ngwenya, Ms W
        Discharged:    Matsemela, Ms M L

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have been made to the membership of
        Portfolio Committees:


        Arts and Culture
        Appointed: Biyela, Inkosi B P (Alt); Bhengu, Mr M J


        Correctional Services
        Appointed: Chikunga, Ms L S (Alt); Nawa, Ms Z N, Phala, Mr M J
        Discharged: Nyambi, Mr A J


        Foreign Affairs: Sub-committee on African Union
        Appointed: Kalako, Mr M U; Magau, Ms K R; Nkuna, Ms C (Alt);
        Sefularo, Dr M (Alt); Sibande, Mr M P
        Discharged: Khoarai, Mr L P; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, Ms S D; Ntuli,
        Mr R S; Ramgobin, Mr M; Turok, Prof B


        Foreign Affairs: Sub-committee on International Affairs
        Appointed: Khoarai, Mr L P (Alt); Luthuli, Dr A N; Malahlela, Mr M
                  J; Ntuli, Mr R S (Alt)
        Discharged: Kalako, Mr M U; Magau, Ms K R; Nkuna, Ms C; Sefularo,
        Dr M; Sibande, Mr M P


        Health
        Appointed:     Sefularo, Dr M
        Discharged:    Mathibela, Ms N F


        Labour
        Appointed:     Twala, Ms M
        Discharged:    Maduma, Mr L D


        Minerals and Energy
        Discharged:    Mohamed, Prof I


        Public Works
        Appointed: Anthony, Mr T G (Alt); Gogotya, Mr N J; Huang, Mr S
        Discharged: Nwamitwa-Shilubana, Ms T L P


        Safety and Security
        Appointed: Maziya, Mr A M; Ntuli, Ms B M
        Discharged: Kholwane, Mr S E; Nogumla, Mr R Z


        Science and Technology
        Appointed: Twala, Ms M (Alt)


        Transport
        Appointed: Gabanakgosi, Mr P S (Alt)


        Water Affairs and Forestry
        Appointed: Bhengu, Ms P (Alt); Combrink, Mr J J


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)     Repositioning Strategy of the Financial and Fiscal Commission
        (FFC) for 2007-2010.

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
        on the Road Accident Fund for 2005-2006.

    (b)     Government Notice No 503 published in Government Gazette No
        29984 dated 14 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (2/290) in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

3.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     International Convention for the Control and Management of
        Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments – 2004 (Ballast Water Management
        Convention), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.
    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for the
        Control and Management of Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments – 2004
        (Ballast Water Management Convention).

    (c)     Report of the Railway Safety Regulator for 2005-2006 [RP 7-
        2007].

4.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Government Notice No R.451 published in Government Gazette No
        29898 dated 25 May 2007: Notice under section 47A(6) in terms of
        the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act, 1995 (Act
        No 34 of 1995).

    (b)     Government Notice No R.466 published in Government Gazette No
        29914 dated 1 June 2007: Regulations regarding promotion of access
        to information: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the Promotion
        of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).
    (c)     Report of the Railway Safety Regulator for 2005-2006 [RP 7-
        2007].

5.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


    (a)     Accession to the Framework Agreement for the International
        Collaboration on Research and Development of Generation IV Nuclear
        Energy Systems, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Accession to the Framework
        Agreement for the International Collaboration on Research and
        Development of Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert T070727 – insert 1 – PAGES 1474-1512

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert T070727 – insert 2 – PAGES 1513-1524

                            TUESDAY, 31 JULY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


    (a)     Education Laws Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister
         of Education. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Education and
         the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.


    (b)     National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal
         Management Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of Environmental
         Affairs and Tourism. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs.


    (c)     National Environmental Management: Waste Bill, 2007, submitted
         by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. Referred to
         the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism and
         the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.


    (d)     National Environmental Management Laws Amendment Bill, 2007,
         submitted by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
         Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
         Affairs.


       e) National Environmental Management Second Amendment Bill, 2007,
          submitted by the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
          Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
          Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department on the South
         African Reserve Bank for the year ended 31 December 2006.

     (b)    Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
         Deposits for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March
         2007.


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
         on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2005.

2.    The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report of the Railway Safety Regulator on the State of Railway
         Safety in South Africa for 2005-2006 [RP 7-2007].

          Please note: The tabling above replaces item 3(c) under “Tablings”
          on page 1472 of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports
          of 27 July 2007.

     (b)    International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response
         and Co-operation, 1990 (OPRC Convention), tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (c)    Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention on Oil
         Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation, 1990 (OPRC
         Convention).


     (d)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Senegal on Cooperation with
         regard to Civil Aviation Security, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (e)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Senegal on Cooperation with regard to Civil Aviation Security.

                          WEDNESDAY, 1 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


          a) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26 – 2007] (National Assembly – (sec
             75)).


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
     Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill [B 10 –
     2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 20 June 2007:

         The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
         the subject of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development
         Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred
         to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section
         75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B10A – 2007].

                           THURSDAY, 2 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a money Bill:


         (a)     Diamond Export Levy Bill [B 22 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             (sec 77)).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – (sec 75)).

2.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (a)    Immigration Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2007] – Act No 3 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 28 June 2007).

     (b)    Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2007] – Act No 7 of 2007 (assented to
         and signed by President on 24 July 2007).

     (c)    Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] – Act No 9 of
         2007 (assented to and signed by President on 24 July 2007).
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Government Notice No R 621 published in Government Gazette No
         30072 dated 13 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/291) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 56 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


     (b)    Government Notice No R 622 published in Government Gazette No
         30072 dated 13 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/292) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 56 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (c)    Government Notice No R 624 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Correction Notice to Notice No 518 of
         Government Gazette No 29455 dated 15 December 2006, Amendment of
         Schedule No 1 (No 1/1338) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
         No 91 of 1964).

     (d)    Government Notice No R 625 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1339)
         to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 48
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (e)    Government Notice No R 626 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1340)
         to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 48
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (f)    Government Notice No R 627 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1341)
         to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 48
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (g)    Government Notice No R 628 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/614) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 75 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (h)    Government Notice No R 629 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007:  Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/615)
         to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 75
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (i)    Government Notice No R 630 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/616) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 75 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (j)    Government Notice No R 631 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/617) to
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of section 75 of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     (k)    Government Notice No R 632 published in Government Gazette No
         30075 dated 20 July 2007: Correction Notice to Notice No R 105 of
         Government Gazette No 29596 dated 9 February 2007, Amendment of
         Schedule No 5 (No 5/85) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
         No 91 of 1964).

     (l)    Government Notice No R 576 published in Government Gazette No
         30051 dated 13 July 2007: Cancellation of an Authorised Dealer in
         Foreign Exchange in terms of the Exchange Control Regulations,
         1961.

     (m)    Government Notice No R 577 published in Government Gazette No
         30051 dated 13 July 2007: Appointment of an Authorised Dealer in
         Foreign Exchange in terms of the Exchange Control Regulations,
         1961.

     (n)    Government Notice No 647 published in Government Gazette No
         30074 dated 20 July 2007: Listing and delisting of public
         entities, made in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the Public
         Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

                            MONDAY, 6 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

(1)   Mr E W Trent withdrew the following legislative proposal on 22 June
2007:


      a) Legislative Proposal to amend the Public Finance Management Act
         (Mr E W Trent)

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Diamond Export
     Levy Bill [B 22– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 20 June
     2007:
        The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
        of the Diamond Export Levy Bill [B 22 – 2007] (National Assembly –
        sec 77), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
        Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Diamond Export
     Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75),
     dated 31 July 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
        the Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23– 2007]
        (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
        without amendments.

                           TUESDAY, 7 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Finance for consideration and report:

    (a)     Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Swiss Confederation for the Avoidance of Double
        Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Swiss Confederation for the
        Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income.

    (c)     Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Portuguese Republic for the
        Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
        Portuguese Republic for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with
        respect to Taxes on Income.

    (e)     Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the
        Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (f)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom
        of Saudi Arabia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect
        to Taxes on Income.


2.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

    (a)     A letter submitted by the President of the Republic dated 13
        June 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing Members
        of the Assembly of the employment of the South African National
        Defence Force within the Republic of South Africa during the
        National Public Strike.


    (b)     A letter submitted by the President of the Republic dated 13
        June 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing Members
        of the Assembly of the employment of the South African National
        Defence Force in Uganda.

3.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Finance:

    (a)     Proclamation No R.12 published in Government Gazette No 29921
        dated 1 June 2007: Fixing a date on which section 147(1) of the
        Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 45 of 2003), shall come
        into operation.
    (b)     Government Notice No 467 published in Government Gazette No
        29913 dated 1 June 2007: Definition of “Retirement Annuity Fund” in
        section 1 of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (c)     Government Notice No 472 published in Government Gazette No
        29913 dated 1 June 2007: Proviso to paragraph 9(3) of the Fourth
        Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

4.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Justice and Constitutional Development:

    (a)     Proclamation No R.7 published in Government Gazette No 29831
        dated 25 April 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).

    (b)     Proclamation No R.10 published in Government Gazette No 29831
        dated 25 April 2007: Extension of the period of operation of
        sections 51 and 52, in terms of the Criminal Law Amendment Act,
        1997 (Act No 105 of 1997).

TABLINGS

National Assembly


1.    The Speaker

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 20 July 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
        informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South
        African National Defence Force in Zambia:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN LUSAKA,
        ZAMBIA, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE SOUTHERN
        AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT CUMMUNITY BRIGADE LAUNCHING PARADE IN ZAMBIA


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have authorised
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to Zambia, in fulfilment of the international obligations
        of the Republic of South Africa, for participation in the Southern
        African Development Community Brigade launching parade in Lusaka,
        Zambia.
        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of thirty eight (38) members will be employed as from 6
        August to 18 August 2007. The total estimated cost to be borne by
        the government of the Republic of South Africa for the deployment
        of the personnel is R 1, 435, 998.40.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
        the attention of the National Assembly.
        Regards


        signed


        TM MBEKI

                          WEDNESDAY, 8 AUGUST 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Public Enterprises


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Ltd and the Group
        for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 27 July 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South
        African National Defence Force in the Union of Comoros:


              EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
              UNION OF COMOROS, FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE
              INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
              TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION


              This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have
              authorised the employment of the South African National
              Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to the Union of Comoros, in
              fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic
              of South Africa towards the African Union, as part of the
              African Union Electoral and Security Assistance Mission to
              the Comoros. The SANDF members were employed to give support
              to members of the South African Police Services who were
              deployed in the Union of Comoros to ensure a secure
              environment conducive to credible, free and fair elections.


              This employment was authorised in accordance with the
              provisions of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the
              Republic of South Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the
              Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).


              A total of nine (9) members were employed as from 12 June to
              10 July 2007. The total estimated cost to be borne by the
              government of the Republic of South Africa for the deployment
              is R 90, 3680.90.


              I will communicate this report to members of the National
              Council of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint
              Standing Committee on Defence, and wish to request that you
              bring the contents hereof to the attention of the National
              Assembly.
              Regards


              signed


              T M MBEKI

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development on the Extradition Treaty between the Republic of South
    Africa and the Argentine Republic, dated 01 August 2007:


        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
        Extradition Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and
        Argentine Republic referred to it, in terms of section 231(2) of
        the Constitution, recommends that the House approves the said
        Treaty.

        Request to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development on the Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the
    Argentine Republic on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters,
    dated 01 August 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
        having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
        Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the Argentine
        Republic on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters referred to
        it, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, recommends that
        the House approves the said Treaty.

        Request to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 14 AUGUST 2007
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

    Please note: The following item amends the entry “Introduction of Bill”
    (English text), published on page 1465 of the Announcements, Tablings
    and Committee Reports of 6 July 2007:


     (1)    The Minister for Public Enterprises


           a) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26 – 2007] (National Assembly –
              proposed sec 75) [Bill published in Government Gazette No
              29879 of 11 May 2007.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Enterprises of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 6 July 2007.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (a)    Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007] – Act No 8 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 5 August 2007).


    Please note: The following item amends item (a) under the entry “Assent
    by President in respect of Bill”, published on page 1530 of the
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 2 August 2007:


     (b)    Immigration Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2006] – Act No 3 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 28 June 2007).

3.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a Constitution amendment Bill:


         (a)     Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – (sec 74)).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
             Matters Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2007] (National Assembly – (sec
             75)).


    (3)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27 –
             2007] (National Assembly – (sec 75)).


    (4)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     Social Housing Bill [B 29 – 2007] (National Assembly – (sec
             76)).


    (5)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     Rental Housing Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – (sec 76)).


    (6)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 32 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – (sec 75)).

4.    Membership of Committees

(1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
    Committees:
    Budget
    Appointed:   Swart, Mr M; Van Dyk, Dr S M

    Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
    of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons:
    Appointed:   Marais, Mr K; Swathe, Mr M

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development has written
    to the Speaker, withdrawing the following report tabled in Parliament
    on 15 March 2007 in terms of the Magistrates Act (Act No 90 of 1993):


         Report on the confirmation of the provisional suspension of
         Magistrate K Suliman, a magistrate from Durban, in terms of section
         13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act (Act No 90 of 1993).

2.    Membership of Assembly


     (1)    The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly
         with effect from 1 August 2006.
         Lekgoro, M M S;

3.    Membership of Committees

     (1)    The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
         PortfolioCommittees:

         Agriculture and Land Affairs
         Appointed:    Botha, Mr A (Alt)


         Arts and Culture
         Appointed:    Opperman, Mr S E
         Discharged:   Kohler-Barnard, Ms D


         Correctional Services
         Appointed:    Sayedali-Shah, Mr M R
         Discharged:   Loe, Ms S J


         Defence
         Appointed:    Sayedali-Shah, Mr M R
         Discharged:   Botha, Mr A


         Education
         Appointed:    Coetzee, Mr R
         Discharged:   Ellis, Mr M J


         Environmental Affairs and Tourism
         Appointed:    Morgan, Mr G R; Julies, Mr I F
         Discharged:   Sayedali-Shah, Mr M R; Swart, Mr M


         Finance
         Appointed:    Gibson, Mr D H M; Marais, Mr K
         Discharged:   Davidson, Mr I; Van Dyk, Dr S M


         Foreign Affairs
         Appointed:    Leon, Mr A J
         Discharged:   Gibson, Mr D H M


         Foreign Affairs: Sub-committee on African Union
         Appointed:    Leon, Mr A J
         Discharged:   Joubert, Mr L K


         Foreign Affairs: Sub-committee on International Affairs
         Appointed:    Leon, Mr A J; Seremane, Mr W J
         Discharged:   Camerer, Mrs S M; Gibson, Mr D H M; Labuschagne, Mr
         L B


         Health
         Appointed:    Waters, Mr M; Kalyan, Ms S
         Discharged:   Morgan, Mr G R; Coetzee, Mr R


         Home Affairs
         Appointed:    Lowe, Mr M; Labuschagne, Mr L
         Discharged:   Kalyan, Mrs S V; Swart, Mr M


         Justice and Constitutional Development
         Appointed:    Delport, Dr J T
         Discharged:   Camerer, Mrs S M


         Labour
         Appointed:    Dreyer, Ms A M
         Discharged:   Lowe, Mr M


         Minerals and Energy
         Appointed:    Dreyer, Ms A M
         Discharged:   Morgan, Mr G R


         Provincial and Local Government
         Appointed:    Swart, Mr M
         Discharged:   Swathe, Mr M


         Public Enterprises
         Appointed:    Lowe, Mr M
         Discharged:   Stephens, Mr M; Minnie, Mr K


         Science and Technology
         Appointed:    Farrow, Mr S
         Discharged:   Dreyer, Ms A M


         Social Development
         Appointed:    Semple, Ms J
         Discharged:   Waters, Mr M


         Water Affairs and Forestry
         Appointed:    Swathe, Mr M
         Discharged:   Semple, Ms J


(2)   The following changes have been made to the membership of Standing
      Committees:


      Standing Committee on Public Accounts
      Appointed:  Stephens, Mr M
      Discharged: Dreyer, Ms A M


(3)   The following changes have been made to the membership of Ad Hoc
      Committees:
      Review of Chapter 9 and Associated Institutions
      Appointed:  Camerer, Mrs S M
      Discharged: Delport, Dr J T


4.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      (1)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department on the
              South African Reserve Bank for the year ended 31 December
              2006.

         (b)     Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
              Deposits for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
              ended 31 March 2007.


         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
              Board on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2005.


      (2)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration:

         (a)     Report of the Railway Safety Regulator on the State of
              Railway Safety in South Africa for 2005-2006 [RP 7-2007].
      (3)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration and report:


         (a)     International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness,
             Response and Co-operation, 1990 (OPRC Convention), tabled in
             terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention on
             Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation, 1990
             (OPRC Convention).


      (4)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
      Transport:

         (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Senegal on Co-
             operation with regard to Civil Aviation Security, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Senegal on Co-operation with regard to
              Civil Aviation Security.


      (5)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
      Finance:

         (a)     Government Notice No R 621 published in Government Gazette
              No 30072 dated 13 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
              2/291) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
              section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
              1964).


         (b)     Government Notice No R 622 published in Government Gazette
              No 30072 dated 13 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
              2/292) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
              section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
              1964).

         (c)     Government Notice No R 624 published in Government Gazette
              No 30075 dated 20 July 2007:  Correction Notice to Notice No
              518 of Government Gazette No 29455 dated 15 December 2006,
              Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1338) to the Customs and
              Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

         (d)     Government Notice No R 625 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1339) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms
             of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

         (e)     Government Notice No R 626 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1340) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms
             of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

         (f)           Government Notice No R 627 published in Government
             Gazette No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No
             1 (No 1/1/1341) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in
             terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).

         (g)     Government Notice No R 628 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/614) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).

         (h)     Government Notice No R 629 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/615) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).

         (i)     Government Notice No R 630 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/616) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).

         (j)     Government Notice No R 631 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/617) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).

         (k)     Government Notice No R 632 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007:  Correction Notice to Notice No R
             105 of Government Gazette No 29596 dated 9 February 2007,
             Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No 5/85) to the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

         (l)     Government Notice No R 576 published in Government Gazette
             No 30051 dated 13 July 2007: Cancellation of an Authorised
             Dealer in Foreign Exchange in terms of the Exchange Control
             Regulations, 1961.

         (m)     Government Notice No R 577 published in Government Gazette
             No 30051 dated 13 July 2007: Appointment of an Authorised
             Dealer in Foreign Exchange in terms of the Exchange Control
             Regulations, 1961.
          n) Government Notice No 647 published in Government Gazette No
             30074 dated 20 July 2007: Listing and delisting of public
             entities, made in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the Public
             Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1. The Speaker

  Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Financial Misconduct for
  2005-2006 Financial Year [RP 13-2007].


                          WEDNESDAY, 15 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

   (a)      Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill, 2007, submitted
        by the Minister of Sport and Recreation. Referred to the Portfolio
        Committee on Sport and Recreation and the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation.
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Health Professions
    Amendment Bill [B10D - 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 14
    August 2007:

      The Portfolio  Committee  on  Health  having,  considered  the  Health
      Professions Amendment Bill [B10D – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76),
      amended by the National Council  of  Provinces  and  referred  to  the
      Committee, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Convention
    between the Republic of South Africa and the Portuguese Republic for
    the avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
    with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 20 June 2007:

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
      approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Republic of South
      Africa and the Portuguese Republic for the avoidance of Double
      Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
      Income, recommends that the House, in terms of section 231 (2) of the
      Constitution, approve the said Convention.




      Request to be considered.




3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Convention
    between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
    Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the avoidance of Double
    Taxation and the prevention of tax evasion with respect to Taxes on
    Income, dated 20 June 2007:

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
      approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Government of the
      Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi
      Arabia for the avoidance of Double Taxation and the prevention of tax
      evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, recommends that the House, in
      terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the said
      Convention.

      Request to be considered.


4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Convention
    between the Republic of South Africa and the Swiss Confederation for
    the avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income, dated
    20 June 2007:

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
      approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Republic of South
      Africa and the Swiss Confederation for the avoidance of Double
      Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income, recommends that the House,
      in terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the said
      Convention.


      Request to be considered.




5.    PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY  –  OVERSIGHT  VISIT
      TO GAUTENG PROVINCE – 06 MAY – 11 MAY 2007

      1.    Introduction

      Attention to water, sanitation and forestry policies in  South  Africa
      has  turned  to  implementation.  The  new  policies  and   associated
      legislation are not only about ensuring adequate quality and  quantity
      of water for human need; they are also about protecting the  resources
      available  for  current  and  future  use.   Due  to  the  extent  and
      multiplicity of the management functions associated with water quality
      management, it is no longer considered to be the sole obligation of  a
      single authority, but is now increasingly the  responsibility  of  all
      levels of the community, including industry, local government as  well
      as individual water users.


      The  Committee,  as  mandated  by  the  Constitution  and   Rules   of
      Parliament, undertook oversight visit to the Gauteng Province from the
      06-11  May  2007.   This  was  to  gauge  the  manner  in  which   the
      responsibility of water, sanitation  and  forestry  issues  are  being
      addressed by different levels of the  community,  including  industry,
      local government, as well as individual  water  users.  The  Portfolio
      Committee having undertaken an oversight  visit  to  Gauteng  Province
      from 06 May – 11 May 2007 reports as follows:

      1.1.  Background


      The  Gauteng  Regional  Office  is  responsible  for  Water   Resource
      Management in the Upper Vaal Water Management Area  (WMA  8)  and  the
      upper part of the Crocodile West / Marico Water Management  Area  (WMA
      3) and all services regulatory functions in Gauteng Province. Although
      the smallest province in the RSA, Gauteng Province contributes more to
      the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) than  any  of  the  other  provinces.
      Water supply to this economic heartland in a  sustainable  manner,  is
      thus of critical importance.


      1.2   Objectives

      • Monitor and evaluate  the  municipalities  falling  within  Project
        Consolidate. Inspect challenges identified and solutions  that  are
        currently  implemented  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  water,
        sanitation and forestry policies; and progress made  achieving  the
        targets set to eradicate the bucket system.
      • Examine how Catchment Management Agencies (CMAs), tasked  with  the
        management of water resources in the Water  Management  Areas,  are
        working towards the sustainability of the resource base  and  water
        delivery mechanisms.
      • Investigate how CMAs are informed by local-level representation.
      • Investigate the  interlinking  communication  channels  established
        between the  Department  of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  (DWAF),
        Catchment  Management  Agencies,  Water  User  Associations,  Water
        Services Authorities, Water Service Providers and Municipalities.
      • Focus on the human and financial resources set aside  by  DWAF  and
        Municipalities  for  water  quality  protection,   monitoring   and
        evaluation, enforcement and oversight.
      • Obtain detailed information and first hand insight on  the  Working
        for Water Programmes and Working for Fire programmes.
      • Job creation initiatives in  the  water  and  forestry  sectors  in
        Gauteng
      • State of water quality of rivers, mining sector and recent spillage
        at the OR Tambo Airport with reference to steps taken  by  Airports
        Company of South Africa.


      2.    DELEGATION


      Ms C September, (ANC) – Chairperson, Ms M Maine, (ANC), Mr K Moonsamy,
      (ANC), Ms P Bhengu, (ANC), Mr J Arendse, (ANC), Ms A Lishivha,  (ANC),
      Ms M Manana, (ANC), Ms J Semple, (DA),  Mr  H  Cupido,  (ACDP),  Mr  M
      Sibuyana, (IFP), Mr P Ditshetelo, (UCDP)


      3.    OVERVIEW OF GAUTENG PROVINCE

            • Gauteng demographics:
         o Gauteng          =     17 010 km2 (1,4 % of land area in SA)
         o Gauteng Population     =     10 774 690
         o Water consumption      =     3 500 Ml / day
         o Electricity consumption=     60 000 Giga-watt-hours
         o 5 yr population growth rate of 20 %
         o  Housing  3  Metro’s,  3  District   Municipalities,   8   Local
           Municipalities
         o Seven Dams supply water to Gauteng.
     Successes in Gauteng are:
           • The leaks in the system are eliminated. Currently  R2  million
             is saved per month in Emfuleni.
           • Within Gauteng, Project Consolidate is implemented as a  joint
             initiative between the  Department  of  Provincial  and  Local
             Government, Department  of  Local  Government,  South  African
             Institute of Civil Engineers and the relevant  municipalities.
             As at January 2007 the following staff had been placed in  the
             Project consolidate municipalities:
                 o 27 Senior Engineers
                 o 16 Graduates, and
                 o 34 Students
           • Ventilated Improved Pit latrines built  can  be  converted  to
             Water borne sewerage systems
           • Operation and Maintenance within municipalities  is  improving
             under the guidance of the South  African  Institute  of  Civil
             Engineers’ Engineers
           • Key revenue  issues  have  been  investigated  and  additional
             revenue secured in many instances.
           • Buckets
                 o 12 332 Buckets identified
                 o 11 054  completed
                 o 278 left to be completed
                 o Total cost R75 million – Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant
                   R3.1 million
                 o Completion date End 2007


      Water and sanitation supply
|MUNICIPALITY        |POPULATION    |% With      |% With    |
|                    |              |Adequate    |adequate  |
|                    |              |Water       |Sanitation|
|City of Johannesburg|3,790,324     |87%         |77%       |
|City of Tshwane     |2,242,247     |91%         |85%       |
|Ekurhuleni Metro    |2,712,456     |89%         |86%       |
|Emfuleni LM         |560,078       |100%        |91%       |
|Kungwini LM         |292,406       |84%         |73%       |
|Lesedi LM           |271,698       |96%         |96%       |
|Midvaal LM          |226,737       |99%         |99%       |
|Mogale City LM      |291,995       |91%         |81%       |
|Nokeng tsa Taemane  |69,627        |21%         |15%       |
|LM                  |              |            |          |
|Randfontein LM      |143,967       |96%         |88%       |
|Westonaria LM       |167,373       |99.9%       |99.9%     |
|West Rand DMA       |5,782         |100%        |100%      |
|GAUTENG TOTAL       |10,774,690    |90%         |83%       |

    • Challenges that were highlighted in the presentation were:
      o Job creation under the Municipal Infrastructure Grant  and  capital
        projects has not been well addressed.
      o In Kungwini, many rural people who do not have access to Water.
      o In Westonaria- farming is affected due to access to water.
      o Shack fires.
      o Operation and Maintenance costs.
      o The continuous growth and migration  of  people  to  Gauteng  poses
        challenges  to   water   backlogs,   sanitation   backlogs,   water
        reticulation, and  management  of  water  quality,  operations  and
        maintenance.
      o The prevalence of sink-holes in Gauteng province.
      o Integrated Development Plan alignment
      o Integrated planning with other departments
      o Project management unit structure and placement
      o Lack of specifications
      o Procurement Delays
      o Counter funding
      o National and Municipal Financial years
      o Council approval
      o Statistical Information and Government Information Services

 4.   WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT

 The Committee undertook a visit to the Chamber of Mines  and  the  Airports
 Company of South Africa to see progress made to improve the  Water  quality
 in the said industries.


 4.1  Chamber of Mines


 One of the Committee’s objective was to see the impact on water quality  as
 experienced in the mining sector. The National Water Resource policy tabled
 by the Department highlighted that  the  mining  industry  as  one  of  the
 largest polluters of water resources. In  line  with  the  Objectives,  the
 committee undertook to see what the mining  industry  is  doing  about  the
 purification of water pollution as a  result  of  mining.  The  Chamber  of
 Mines’ role between the mines is that  of  a  strategic  co-ordinator.  The
 Committee visited the Chamber  of  Mines’  Western  Basin  Water  treatment
 facility. There are four hydrological basins in Gauteng:
    o East Rand,
    o Central,
    o Western
    o Western Rand.


 The  inter-connectedness  of  the  basins  is  an  area  of  dispute  since
 pollutants in one basin affect other basins. Due to the cross flow of water
 amongst the basins, all mines  undertook  to  discharge  water  in  a  more
 environmentally friendly manner.


 4.1.1      Chamber of Mines: Site  visit  -Western  Basin  Water  treatment
 facility.


    • A pre-treatment plant was set up at the source of  the  Western  Basin
      Decant. A seepage tank was constructed so as to  treat  the  water  as
      close to the source. The pH level of the water when it comes from  the
      ground is 2.
    • The water is further neutralised and oxygenated before it is  used  by
      the mine or discharged of in the adjoining Nature Reserve.
    • A marked improvement has been noticed in the Nature Reserve, re-growth
      of flora and the return of fauna is occurring.
      • Harmony has a rehabilitation liability of R 645 550 000 for the 2006
        financial year.


 4.1.2      Analysis


    • The impact of the mining sector taking responsibility and neutralising
      the water discharges is improving the quality of the water.
    •  Due  to  the  four  water  tables  being  interconnected,  a   marked
      improvement will also be passed on to other areas.
    • Chamber of Mines plans to roll-out water purification plants at  other
      mines, which will have positive spill-over effects  for  the  affected
      communities.


 4.1.3      Challenges


    • Implementation of Chapter 14 of the National Water Act, since remedial
      steps are only taken once a significant amount of pollution damage  is
      incurred. It is difficult attach a monetary value to the environmental
      damage caused by pollution.


 4.2. Airports Company of South Africa


 Currently Airports Company of South Africa and Department of Water  Affairs
 and Forestry are working together to rehabilitate the Blaauwpan surrounding
 area. The aim of visiting ACSA was to see the progress made in cleaning  up
 the spillage from its pump station at OR Tambo  Airport  to  the  Blaauwpan
 Dam, and to see  adherence  to  the  relevant  legislation  and  frameworks
 guaranteeing water quality.


 The three spillages that took place at OR Tambo Airport, the first incident
 was a mistake, a  contractor  hit  a  pipe  while  excavating.  The  second
 instance, a valve was installed. The third instance, the gasket broke.  The
 airport has 46 million litres fuel storage space.  Approximately 40 million
 litres of fuel is pumped per week; therefore the impact of any accidents is
 significant.
 When the gasket broke, the system registered a loss  in  pressure,  and  it
 automatically increased the pressure, which meant that the leak  increased.
 The pressure in the system is 9-12  barrs.  The  actual  size  of  the  gap
 through which the fuel leaked was 1.5 mm. Steps were taken  immediately  to
 stop the leak and contain as much fuel as possible before it spilt into the
 Blaauwpan  dam  nearby.  To  contain   the   Hydrocarbon   pollution   from
 contaminating the dam and jeopardising the  water  quality  of  the  nearby
 residential area surrounding Blaauwpan Dam the following steps were taken:
      • The Blaauwpan dam was cleaned up until it was at an acceptable level
        and left so that the necessary natural  processes  could  clean  the
        area further. There is a wetland on the OR Tambo airport, which is a
        natural water purifying ecosystem.
      • Monitoring systems and contingency plans were put in place
      • The faulty gasket  was  sent  to  the  Department  of  Environmental
        Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) for investigation
      • 1, 2 million litres of fuel was spilled.
      • 1142259 litres of jet fuel was recovered.
      • Rehabilitation of approx 4000 tonnes of  soil  at  the  Rietfontein
        Centre
      • Animals affected by the spill have been  cleaned  at  the  ‘free-me’
        rehabilitation centre and re-introduced into their environment.
      • A wetland was established  at  Brakpan  Dam  in  Ekurhuleni,  which
        purifies the water naturally
      • No contamination of ground water took place, since fuel  floats  on
        water.
      • Airports Company South Africa  has  taken  steps  to  implement  an
        internal monitoring unit that measures the air- and  water  quality
        of the area surrounding the airport.
      • The broken Gasket  was  sent  to  the  Department  of  Environmental
        Affairs and Tourism’s green scorpions and the South  African  Police
        Services for further investigation.


 4.2.1      Site visit: OR Tambo Airport
      • The Committee visited where the naturally occurring  wetland  is  on
        the O. R Tambo airport property, the natural  stream  that  runs  to
        Blaauwpan Dam and the remnants of  the  constructed  retention  pond
        that was put in place to contain the spillage and  pump  the  petrol
        out of the wetland.
      • The Committee was assured that  Airports  Company  South  Africa  is
        compliant with all legislation.


  4.2.2     Analysis


      • The impact of any malfunction/ accident is significant. An  internal
        monitoring system has been put in place, and the  reaction  time  is
        reduced significantly.
      • Rehabilitation and  the  introduction  of  wetlands  assist  in  the
        purification of water naturally.
      • Responsibility taken  by  Airports  Company  South  Africa  for  the
        quality of water and air has significant long term  effects  on  the
        environment and the quality of water.
      • The implementation of legislation needs to occur.

  5.  WATER BOARDS


  Water Boards are strategic institutions in terms of service  delivery.  It
  is important that a high level of accountability is maintained in them. To
  ensure this, business plans, strategic plans, annual reports and financial
  statements are submitted to the Minister. In the Water sector value chain,
  Water Boards treat raw water; in some instances they also  reticulate  the
  water, thus providing water to end users.


  The aim  of  visiting  the  Water  Boards  was  to  see  the  interlinking
  communication  channels  established  between  the  Department,  Catchment
  Management Agencies, Water User Associations, Water  Services  Authorities
  and Municipalities.


  5.1 Rand Water –Vaal Barrage


  Rand water supplies the following areas:
      • City of Johannesburg Metro
      • City of Tswane
      • Dr JS Moroka District Municipality
      • Ekhuruleni Metro
      • Emfuleni
      • Greater Groblersdal
      • Greater Marble Hall
      • Highveld East
      • Kungwini
      • Lesedi
      • Mdala Nature Reserve
      • Merafong City
      • Metsimaholo
      • Midvaal
      • Mogale City
      • Nokeng tsa Taemene
      • Randfontein
      • West Rand
      • Westonaria


  Rand Water is also responsible for  management  of  the  Vaal  Barrage.  A
  barrage is an artificial obstruction, such as a dam in a river designed to
  increase its depth or divert the river’s flow.  The  four  rivers  flowing
  into the Vaal Barrage are Suikerbosrant, Klip River, Taaibos &  Leeu.  87%
  of the Klip  River  flow  is  effluent  discharges.  Grunpunt  prison  and
  Emfuleni Municipality also pollute the river.  Due  to  the  exceptionally
  high nutrient load in the Barrage Reservoir, excessive  algae  blooms  are
  evident for most of  the  year.  This  results  in  several  water  supply
  problems to Rand Water. The cost of cleaning this water will increase Rand
  Water’s costs by (40%, and will require different methods of cleaning.


  Long term trends:
           o A change from mining (salinity)  to  sewage  (bacteriological)
             pollution problems
           o Mines are closing down which results in an uncontrolled rising
             of underground levels
           o Malfunctioning sewage works at Local authorities
           o Impact  on  downstream  users  –  cost  to  treat,  usability,
             relationships, corporate image

  5.1.1     Settlements on Rand Water’s Pipe lines


  Rand water also expressed a concern about habitation occurring on  top  of
  their pipelines.


  5.1.2     Site visit: Rand Water Zuikerbosch Water Treatment Works


  The Committee was shown the water treatment plant of Rand  Water  and  its
  functioning. The security at the plant and in the engine room is  strictly
  adhered to.
  Observations:


        1. Rand Water has  several  feeds  of  electricity  from  different
           areas. There is an agreement in place with Eskom for the  supply
           of electricity. But if a power outage occurs in one  area,  then
           the plant will still operate  since  it  gets  electricity  from
           other areas.
        2. Rand Water conducts security  checks  on  new  staff  recruited,
           these checks that are in line with National Intelligence  Agency
           security standards
        3. If lime used  in  the  purification  process  is  depleted,  the
           alternative chemical that can be used is Poly electrolyte.


  5.2 Magalies Water Board


  Magalies Water’s area of supply is:
    • Bulk Water and Sanitation
    • Retail Water Supply
    • Laboratory Services


  The Operational areas are divided into:
    • The Westonaria
    • The Vaal Kop water supply system
    • The Bospoort water supply
    • The Rustenburg sewage treatment plant
    • The Boitekong sewage treatment system


  5.2.1     Magalies Water Site  visits:  Bronkhorstspruit  Water  treatment
        plant
  The plant is receiving assistance from Rand Water, but the state of  plant
  is in disrepair. There were leaks all over the plant.


  The process of purifying the water  works  differently  from  Rand  Water.
  Floculent is added to raw water, the scum floats to the top of the  water,
  where it gets scooped off. The clean water  is  channelled  out  from  the
  bottom of the  tank.  ‘Operations  and  maintenance’  of  the  plant  were
  severely challenged:
       o Thick layers of sludge were on top of the water.
       o The sludge scoopers were broken, on more than one tank.
       o  The water  that  was  channelled  was  not  purified  or  cleaned
         adequately.
         o The system further down could not cope with the  scum  that  was
           left behind in the water.
         o The Water in the storage tank was not clean and the tank was not
           full. This meant that if any shortages of the  supply  of  water
           occurred, there would be little reserve in place to sustain  the
           communities served by this water treatment plant.
       o The water that was pumped to the areas was not clean.
         o Only three of the five pumps were in operation. The three  pumps
           that were pumping water were leaking.
         o The Plant manager explained that  if  one  of  the  pumps  could
           burst/ break  then  it  would  mean  that  the  Tembisile  area/
           community would be without water.
         o Plant safety has deteriorated,  improper  electrical  wiring  is
           exposed, and there are pools of water all over the plant,  which
           is a safety hazard for the personnel.


  5.2.1.1   Problems highlighted on the site visit:


         • Municipal Infrastructure Grant calculations  does  not  seem  to
           incorporate  costs  of  maintaining  the  plant,  since   monies
           required to fix the plant is more than  what  is  allocated;  R7
           million is allocated, R33 million is required.  R12  million  is
           required to fix the pipes, alone. Securing funding for operation
           and maintenance is challenging.
         •  Problems  experienced   with   maintenance   of   the   plant’s
           infrastructure, the staff are not skilled adequately to  perform
           this function.
         • Problems were identified and reported to  DWAF  timeously.  Rand
           Water is  also  assisting  the  plant  for  twelve  months,  but
           problems experienced are persistent.
         • If funding could be made available, it might take eight to  nine
           months to get plant fully operational.
         • Retention  of  skilled  staff  is  difficult,  this  is  further
           complicated by the fact that  the  plant  is  far  out  and  the
           working conditions are difficult.
         • The Committee asked if the budgets given in the past were  fully
           utilised, since the provincial and  local  authorities  ask  for
           more money but are unable to spend effectively.
         • At the Committee’s public hearings, Rand  Water  indicated  that
           they were responsible for the supply of Water in the Westonarea.


         • Infrastructure- Operations and Maintenance  has  been  neglected
           for a long time.
         • An audit  report  was  given  to  the  Committee  detailing  the
           problems experienced with  the  plant  and  the  status  of  the
           specific  items  highlighted  in  the   Bronkhorstspruit   water
           treatment plant.


  5.3 Findings and Analysis


         • There is a vast difference in the plant  and  machinery  between
           Rand Water and Magalies Water.
         • Magalies indicated that Rand  Water  is  assisting  them  for  a
           period of 12 months, however, Rand Water indicated that they are
           supplying water to Westonaria.
         • Small repairable leaks are not attended to at Magalies Water.
         • Magalies has submitted proposals  to  the  Department  of  Water
           Affairs and Forestry for repairs.
         • If a pump breaks at Magalies plant, a whole  community  will  be
           without water, whereas Rand Water’s plant has excess capacity to
           accommodate maintenance and repairs.
         • The Communication channels between the Department and the  Water
           Boards are established, with both Rand Water and Magalies  Water
           communicating the problems experienced with the Vaal Barrage and
           the Bronkhorstspruit Water treatment plant, but nothing has been
           done yet to resolve the problems experienced.


  6.  MUNICIPALTIES FALLING WITHIN PROJECT CONSOLIDATE


  6.1 Metsweding District Municipality


  Metsweding covers 4070.81 square kilometres. The area is 22.45% of Gauteng
  Province. Estimated population is 170 000. It is situated  on  the  North-
  Eastern side of Gauteng  Province,  bordering  the  Limpopo  Province  and
  Mpumalanga Province. It is also bordered by the  Major  Urban  Centres  of
  Tshwane and Ekurhuleni. The economy is influenced by  Tshwane.  There  are
  four  Small  Economic  Centres:  Bronkhorstspruit,  Cullinan  Rayton   and
  Ekangala.. The area is predominantly rural. The area is  characterised  by
  high levels of poverty and unemployment, pressure is received from Tshwane
  for  residential   development.   Metsweding   consists   of   two   local
  municipalities, i.e. Kungwini and Nokeng tsa Taemane. The total number  of
  wards is twenty:
                   o Kungwini local municipality has fourteen wards
                   o Nokeng TsaTaemane local municipality has six wards
        • Both Local Municipalities are Water Service Authorities.
        • Rand Water is a bulk water supplier for Kungwini west
        • Magalies Water is the bulk supplier for  the  entire  Nokeng  tsa
          Taemane.


  Challenges highlighted are:
      • Ageing infrastructure
      • Insufficient budget available
      • Non-observation of protocols in the disbursements of the  Municipal
        Infrastructure Grants.
  The presentation on Metsweding highlighted the following:
    • It is the poorest and smallest district in the Gauteng Province
    • It does not have good reserve base in place
    • Challenges/ backlogs highlighted:
               o At the Silver Lakes Waste  Water  Treatment  Works,  rising
                 main and pump stations will cost R120 million.
               o At the Bronkhorstspruit/ Zithobeni  Waste  Water  Treatment
                 Works, rising main and pump stations will cost R 53 million
               o At the Ekangala, Ekandustria and Rethabiseng upgrade  Waste
                 Water Treatment Works, rising main and pump  stations  will
                 cost R 48 million
               o At the Doornkloof  Upgrade  Waste  Water  Treatment  Works,
                 rising main and pump stations will cost R40 million
               o The provision of water supply in rural areas will cost R 30
                 million.
  Other issues highlighted by the presentation included:
      • Water backlogs in  and  the  budget  required  for  the  upgrading,
        building   operation   and    maintenance    of    several    water
        infrastructures.
      • The Municipal Infrastructure Grant is inadequate.


  6.2 Site visit: Plot 175 Visit- Kameeldrift.


  A brief background was given of Plot 175: Eviction notices were served  on
  community  by  private  owners.  The  Municipality  bought  plot  175  and
  adjoining plot, 174 from the private owners,  and  formalised  the  houses
  occupied by the community. Currently, the roll-out of sanitation and water
  services is happening in the area. Thus far,  six  communal  taps  ensures
  access to water, forty chemical toilets temporarily ensures that  the  800
  households have access to sanitation, while the provision  of  housing  is
  rolled out.


  Challenges the Local Authorities raised are:
      • Fully fledged  water  treatment  works  for  sewerage  are  fifteen
        kilometres away. An alternative to this is a package  plant,  which
        is five kilometres away.
      • Migration of people to the area, since plans to  improve  the  area
        and provision housing has been revealed.
      • An application was made to the  Department  of  Water  Affairs  and
        Forestry for drought relief, but no feedback was received.
      • No information is available about the area and  thus  an  audit  is
        proposed in order to establish the assets of the municipality.
      • National and Provincial tiers of government do not give inputs into
        Integrated Development Plans (IDPs) of Municipalities.  In  smaller
        municipalities, it creates difficulties since  there  is  no  clear
        mandate for service delivery on national government targets set.


  6.3 Visit to Johannesburg Metro Area


  6.3.1     Presentation by Johannesburg Water – Operation Gcin’Amanzi


  The  Johannesburg  Water,  Water  Demand   Management   develop   targeted
  strategies to promote more efficient usage  of  water.  It  also  aims  to
  reduce non-revenue water by minimizing physical and commercial losses  and
  replaces  deemed   consumption   with   metered   consumption   (Operation
  Gcin’amanzi).


  Johannesburg Water purchases 460 000 mega litres (ML) of water  per  annum
  from Rand Water. An average of 1236 ML are  purchased  daily  and  30%  of
  deemed consumption bulk water  is  purchased  to  supply  Soweto.  90%  of
  Soweto’s volume consumed is not billed. Deemed consumption  is  billed  at
  20KL per month per household,  which  is  the  flat  rate.  Seven  million
  kilolitres is lost monthly that amounts  to  a  monetary  value  of  R20.2
  million per month hence, selection  of  Soweto  was  a  priority  for  the
  project.


  The objectives of the project are to:


      • Reduce unaccounted for water through the  installation  of  prepaid
        meters.
      • Rehabilitate the water network infrastructure in Soweto
      • Change customers from deemed consumption to metered consumption
      • Create awareness on water conservation


  6.4 Presentation on Project Thonifho


  “Thonifho” is derived from Tshivenda which means respect / dignity.
  The purpose of the project is to restore dignity to  informal  settlements
  communities through the provision of basic services  within  the  City  of
  Johannesburg. The project’s scope entails the provision of basic water and
  sanitation services through the installation of water, communal standpipes
  and sanitation, Ventilated Improved  Pit  latrines.  The  current  backlog
  (growing at 4%) is water backlog, for 112,000  households  and  sanitation
  backlog for 206,000 households.


  The objectives of the  project  are  to  eradicate  water  and  sanitation
  backlog, improve quality of life and restore people’s dignity, protect the
  environment from pollution, and create health and hygiene awareness.


  The Johannesburg Water intervention  with  regard  to  sanitation  was  to
  provide ventilated improved pit latrines (VIPs) and  other  types  of  dry
  sanitation. The advantages of these VIPs are that they  use  no  chemicals
  and are owned by individual households. They provide privacy,  can  easily
  be assembled and the system does not use water.


  Johannesburg Water also provides communal standpipes.  The  advantages  of
  these standpipes are that they have a  water  reticulation  system,  which
  provides adequate quality drinking water to communities, has multiple draw-
  off standpipes with six taps, can be placed within 200m of each other, and
  has reasonable maintenance costs and bulk meters to measure consumption.
  The project made the following progress:
      • Serviced (VIPs and Communal Standpipes)
      - 2002/2003 to 2005/2006 – 15,500
      - 2006/2007 to date – 7,900
      • Provided Sector Education Training Authority accredited training
      - 30 health facilitators
      - 9,500 households educated on health and hygiene
      • 630 jobs created in 2006/2007


  6.4.1     Findings and analysis


         • A sense of Ownership engenders the  community  to  maintain  the
           sanitation technology installed.
         • Sector Education Training Authority accredited training improves
           the employability of trained facilitators
         •  Migration  of  people  to   the   area   means   that   despite
           implementation by the municipality, the backlogs  of  sanitation
           is growing at 4%


  6.5 Westonaria Local Municipality-Bucket Eradication Progress


  Westonaria is a local municipality falling within the West  Rand  District
  Municipality. The population in Westonaria is 167 373. There is a total of
  57 communities, of which 17 stay in an urban area. The economy in the area
  depends primarily on mining, manufacturing and agribusiness.  Unemployment
  and illiteracy is high in this area. All bulk water is received from  Rand
  Water.


  Most of the land is dolomatic, and thus unstable,  therefore  the  housing
  that is  provided  to  the  poor  is  spaced  out.  The  Local  Government
  authorities have tried to relocate the people, but the community does  not
  want to move. An overview was also given of the spin-offs of VIPs,  namely
  job creation and owner maintenance. Thus far, 2400 toilets have been built
  at a cost of R4500 per toilet.


  6.5.1     Site Visit: Bekkersdal-Bucket Eradication Progress
       • The area visited was consisted of informal  housing  in  a  formal
         housing environment.  It  was  clear  that  the  Councillors  were
         experiencing reluctance from the community to move.
       • Thirty families in the informal area still have buckets.
       • The families will be relocated as soon as  houses  are  built  for
         them, despite the reluctance to move.
       • Access to water has been provided by a communal tap in place.
       • A single toilet serves for two to three families.


  6.5.2     Findings and Analysis
         •  Community  is  reluctant  to  move,  despite  offers   by   the
           Municipality to relocate  them.  Demands  have  been  made  that
           people be accommodated where they are currently staying
         • The Buckets will be eradicated before the end of December 2007
         • Emptying the Ventilated Improved Pits has  created  jobs  and  a
           central place in the community has  been  identified  where  the
           community can communicate the readiness of the pit for emptying.
         • The Dolomitic condition of the land poses a challenge for  water
           and sanitation infrastructure implementation and housing.


  6.6 Visit to Sebokeng sewage treatment plant


  6.6.1     Presentation by Emfuleni Local Municipality


  Emfuleni Local Municipality is the Water  Services  Authority  (WSA)  with
  Metsi-a-Lekoa the Water Services Provider (WSP). The Water Act requires  a
  WSA to prepare a Water Services Development Plan (WSDP) each year.


  Emfuleni  Local  Municipality  comprises  Sebokeng,  Sharpeville,  Evaton,
  Bophelong, Boipatong, Vereeniging, Vanderbilj Park and  Rural  Areas.  The
  Municipality has a population of one million people. The  Municipality  is
  servicing 213731 stands with a water budget of R400 million, and a capital
  budget of R28 million. Emfuleni  Local  Municipality  provides  water  and
  sanitation through ring-fenced  internal  mechanism,  known  as  ‘Metsi-a-
  Lekoa’


  Statistics for the operation of water and sanitation is as follows:


        • 135 191 serviced formal stands.
        • 77 540 informal stands.
        • 2 215km water pipelines (Internal).
        • 479 km bulk water pipelines.
        • 2084km sewer pipeline (Internal).
        • 454km bulk sanitation pipelines.
        • 9 reservoirs + 5 pressure towers.
        • 126 376 metered connections.
        •  Daily distribution of approximately 200 000 litres of  water  to
          approximately1,3 million residents.
        • 3 waste water treatment plants.
        • 48 sewer pump stations.
        • 1 water purification plant (20 mega litres).
        • staff = 400.
        • bulk water purchase = R180 million.


  The Municipality provides 93% of water to  full  service,  whilst  7%  are
  provided for basic usage (stand pipes). Sanitation  is  divided  into  91%
  full service and 9%  on  Ventilated  Improved  Pits  (VIP’s)  and  buckets
  (backyard shacks in Evaton, Sebokeng, and small farms).


  The figures below reflect the position of the Municipality’s  position  up
  until 2004, in relation to service provision:


        • Unaccounted water = 26%.
        • None billed water = 25 million kl per annum. Maintenance  backlog
          of R110 million.
        • Free basic water supply of 6kl/hh.
        • Legal non-compliance.
        • Poor effluent quality control.
        • Operational budget deficit of R40 million.
        • Spillages cause bad publicity.
        • Rand Water debt of R20 million.
        • Inability to service monthly bulk water account.
        • Payment levels of 48%.


  In  response  to  the  above,  the  municipality  established   turnaround
  interventions that comprised a new vision and mission, applied by National
  Treasury for restructuring Grant Conditions. This entailed the appointment
  of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry as a Government Monitoring
  Agent. The Municipality agreed on a five year Business Plan that  involves
  organisational restructuring, Project Consolidate and the collaboration of
  South African Local Government Association peer review committee.


  Analysis


        • A regional sewer scheme proposal was accepted and DWAF provided a
          preliminary amount of R9.5 million, Gauteng Province R50 million,
          and National Treasury R20 million.  Negotiations with Rand  Water
          with regard to the debt of R20 million are in progress.
        • The progress will cost over R600 million, upon completion in late
          2010.


  Over and above, the major socio-economic benefits, the project will  bring
  to this rapidly developing section of Gauteng, the cash  injection,  which
  will promote numerous job opportunities.


  The first phase of the plan is to  close  over  48  of  the  existing  and
  generally  old  pump  stations  that  present  an  ongoing  potential  for
  operational problems and sewer spillages. This will  be  achieved  by  the
  installation of over 100 kilometres of new gravity sewer  lines  to  bring
  the sewage to a location on  the  north  bank  of  the  Vaal.  The  second
  component is to construct a new single regional treatment  works  at  this
  location.


  The works will  eventually  serve  the  areas  of  Walkerville,  Meyerton,
  Vereeniging and Vanderbijlpark to create a major  drainage  basin  to  the
  south of Johannesburg and Meyerton. This  new  facility  will  enable  the
  three older municipal plants at Meyerton, Leeuwkuil and Rietspruit  to  be
  closed as well as numerous other small privately run plants. By  operating
  a single large works and utilising the latest available  technology,  high
  quality of water  discharged  to  the  Vaal  will  benefit  not  only  the
  residents of Emfuleni, but also downstream users such as Parys.


  Rand Water has agreed to join the team (which also includes the Department
  of Local Government)  and  to  act  as  the  Project  Manager.  The  first
  consultant would have  been  appointed  by  the  end  of  April  2007,  to
  undertake detailed environmental studies and engineering feasibilities.


  Some of the challenges faced by the municipality were:
        • Funding for the Bulk Regional Sanitation Scheme.
        •  Implementation  of  approved  Council  Tariff  for   Water   and
          Sanitation (Tariff Equalisation).
        • Eradication of buckets and VIP toilets by June 2007.
        • Non payment by consumers.
        • Conclusion of agreement with Johannesburg Water.
        • Signing of bulk water supply agreement with Rand Water.
        • Mittal Steel long- term charge for  water  to  be  in  line  with
          industry tariff.
        • Continuous supply of water in Palm Springs –  Low  pressure  from
          Johannesburg feed as a result of developments in  Orange  Farm  –
          possible long term solution by installing new pipeline from  Rand
          Water supply point.
        • Water quality in Vaaloever.
        • WCW’s non compliance to license requirements – still  at  70%  to
          75% compliance for Leeukuil and Rietspruit
        • By-laws for enforcement on Industrial Effluent Discharges.


  6.6.2     Findings and analysis
        • There has been vast  improvements  in  water  savings  and  water
          management since 2004
        • Clearly established communication channels between the Department
          and the Municipality have been developed.
        • The Department’s assistance in providing technical skills to  the
          municipality.
        • Enforcement legislated at a Local Government level on  Industrial
          Effluent Discharges specifically  addresses  industrial  effluent
          discharges at local level. This type of  legislative  enforcement
          addresses  local  level  defaulters.   The   effluent   discharge
          adversely affects the  local  communities,  thus  addressing  the
          defaulters at a local level, addresses the problem locally.


  6.6.3     Visit to Water Demand  Management  Chamber  –  (Evaton  pressure
       control area)


  High pressure is the  principle  cause  of  high  leakage  in  most  water
  distribution systems. If the  pressure  can  be  lowered  during  off-peak
  periods, the level of leakage will  be  reduced.  Pressure  management  is
  often the most cost effective method of leakage  reduction  especially  in
  areas with high internal household leakage. The Sebokeng / Evaton pressure
  management project has led to major savings in  water  by  reducing  water
  pressure received in the area during periods of low demand.


        • A second phase  of  the  project  was  implemented  in  order  to
          increase water conservation even further, the concentration is:
             o Identifying and reducing wastage at a zone level
             o  Further pressure reductions at a zone level
             o  Public awareness and education.


        • A Challenge experienced is that limited technical actions can  be
          taken during periods of peak demand. A  pressure  control  system
          that cost R5 million was constructed. In return, R30  million  in
          water wastage was saved.


  6.6.3.1   Site visit to Bophelong Domestic Leakage repair project


  The Bophelong domestic leakage repair project falls within  the  ambit  of
  the Emfuleni Local Municipality. The purpose of the project is  to  repair
  leaking taps, toilets cisterns in order  to  reduce  water  wastage  as  a
  result of plumbing installations. The  project  attempts  to  repair  1000
  houses in the area.


  The project commenced in May 2006 and is due for completion in  May  2007.
  It is funded by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (R1 million),
  Emfuleni Local Municipality (R500 000) and Rand  Water  (R400  000)  which
  amounts to R1, 900 000 million.


  Two professional staff members were provided to the project.  The  project
  also created 25 temporary employment positions  and  trained  25  plumbers
  with SETA accreditation, which include  nineteen  female  and  six  youth.
  Services  that  are  provided  include:  labour  intensive   construction,
  capacity building and community participation.


  Benefits of the project are:
      • improved water demand management
      •  customer education
      • 15% of unaccounted water is saved.


  6.6.4     Findings and Analysis
         • The intervention in the municipalities has positive spin-offs as
           it also creates jobs.
         • Awareness of water saving techniques is raised.
         • SETA Accreditation for the 25 temporary plumbers.


  6.7.      Bapsfontein- Sinkholes
  The National Water Act of 1998 states that all existing water  users  have
  access to the amounts water users were using at  the  time  of  the  Act’s
  inception. Due to Mining in the area, extensive farming and the overuse of
  borehole water resulted in the rapid decrease in  the  water  table.  This
  resulted in the sharp acceleration of erosion of the dolomite. The erosion
  took place over decades, instead of over thousands of years.


  Development accelerates the erosion of the soil. This results in sink-hole
  depressions occurring overnight in  instances.  The  damage  to  land  and
  property is extensive. Most of the Sink-holes are so vast that  it  cannot
  be established how deep the hole is. Aerial photographs have assisted  the
  studies done on sinkholes.


  Extensive studies have been done on  land  in  several  areas  in  Gauteng
  recently,  to  establish  the  levels  of  Dolomite  in  the  soil.   This
  information assists the  planning  of  settlements  in  the  province.  In
  several cases, informal settlements are built close to,  or  on  dolomitic
  land. Despite reluctance of communities to move to safer land,  an  urgent
  resolution needs to be taken, to prevent the loss of life.


  6.7.1     Site visit: Bapsfontein- Sinkholes


      • There  was  an  informal  settlement  next  to  the  sink  hole  in
        Bapsfontein
      • The Community has been educated of the dangers of sinkholes.
      • The Sink hole has been fenced off to prevent negligent accidents of
        persons falling into the hole.
      • The Committee was informed that due to the recent rains,  the  sink
        hole was filled with water. The consultants found children swimming
        in the sink-hole after the rains.
      • Emergency measures are to be  put  into  place  and  relocation  of
        people is difficult since the  community  supplies  labour  to  the
        surrounding farms and is reluctant to move due to the fear of  loss
        in jobs that might result.


  6.7.2     Findings and analysis


      • Community reluctant to move, despite the awareness of the danger to
        life the sink-hole poses due to job security
      • Monitoring of the sink-hole is  needed,  since  children  had  been
        swimming in it


  6.8 Winterveldt Sanitation Project


  The area is classified as “urban-edge”, it is 99% privately  owned.  There
  are only three  stands  in  the  area  without  sanitation.  A  monitoring
  programme is in place on the programme. Thus far, 1200 Ventilated Improved
  Pit (VIP) toilets have been installed and  2203  Urine  Diversion  systems
  (UDS) have been installed. The  UDS  technology  is  best  suited  to  the
  environment, since the area is classified as  a  water  scarce  area;  the
  maintenance of the UDS technology is low, and cheap. The Brick makers  are
  locally trained and sourced for the bricks. The quality of the bricks made
  is in line with the South African Bureau of Standards. Quality controllers
  are employed to ensure a high standard of quality of the materials sourced
  locally
  6.8.1.     Challenges experienced


       • Sourcing of raw materials is expensive, the programme is  supposed
         to enhance the local economy’ Small- Micro- Medium Enterprises but
         the unavailability of the materials locally  renders  the  project
         unable to source certain materials locally.
       • Teaching the recipients that the old toilets pollute  the  limited
         ground water.
       • The design of the toilets is not considerate of disabled people.
       • After the pit latrines were replaced, the community was  unwilling
         to hand these latrines in. These latrines are  still  in  use  and
         continue to contaminate the ground water.


  The Department’s involvement in the provision of the services:


       • Delivery of the services should be immediate, due to the right  to
         dignity of the recipients of the sanitation services.
       • The technology available has been considered, and the one selected
         in this case was best suited for the region.
       • Due to the fact that the land was privately owned, extensive roll-
         out of services was not in line  with  what  is  outlined  in  the
         Municipal Finance Management Act.


  Concerns the Steering Committee will consider for the following year:


      • An HIV/AIDS programme
      • Design of the toilets to accommodate disabled persons and children.
      • Timeframes for the removal of toilets


  6.8.2     Site visit - Winterveldt Sanitation Project


  BMW had sponsored the School’s gardening project. The School  usually  has
  workshops whereby ploughing and tilling skills are shared with  the  local
  community. To encourage the local economy, the harvesting of Marula  trees
  has also begun. Marula trees are a  protected  species  according  to  the
  National Forestry Act. In terms of Water Roll-out in the area, Rand  Water
  is currently installing a 30 m pipe; the existing pipe had burst  recently
  before the committee’s arrival.


  6.8.3     Findings and analysis


       • 99% of the budget allocated was spent
       • Sanitation technology implemented is well suited to environment
       • Municipality cannot fully roll-out services due to the land  being
         privately owned


  7.  JOB CREATION


  The Committee went to see what job creation initiatives are in  the  Water
  and Forestry sectors in Gauteng.


  7.1        Site Visit to Orange Farm – Centre for Community Development


  7.1.1     Centre for Community Development


  The Centre for Community Development was established in 1983. Since  1986,
  it played an active role to support people reallocated to Orange Farm. The
  centre provides the community with the basic requirements of life such  as
  access to food, skills  training,  clothes,  education,  health,  and  job
  creation, etc. The  Centre  is  also  in  the  process  of  developing  an
  ecological centre, and provides a service toward the Department  of  Water
  Affairs and Forestry’s Greening Project.  It also  intends  to  set-up  an
  Information Technology unit to promote networking with schools abroad.


  7.1.2     Analysis and challenges


      • Ownership of the centre  poses  a  problem  for  the  provision  of
        services towards the Department of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry’s
        greening project.


  7.2. Working for water and working for fire


  The Committee undertook to obtain  detailed  information  and  first  hand
  insight into the working for Water Programmes and  the  Working  for  fire
  programmes


  7.2.1     Working for Water Project: Rietvlei


  An overview was given of the procedure of  how  the  alien  vegetation  is
  removed. Proper health and  safety  measures  were  adhered  to,  that  is
  protective clothing, boots and helmets were worn at all times  by  workers
  when clearing alien vegetation. The Rietvlei  reserve  belongs  to  Tswane
  municipality, the budget allocated is R23 million per annum.  This  budget
  is split into 30% for overheads and  70%  for  salaries.  The  people  are
  recruited from Tembisa, which is the closest township.  With  regrowth  of
  the alien vegetation, follow-up is required. Gum Trees need several follow-
  ups.


  7.2.1.1   Site visit: Rietvlei


  The Committee was briefed by the authorities  of  the  Working  for  Water
  programme. A tender process is established as  the  process  for  awarding
  areas to for clearance of alien vegetation. The size of the area  that  is
  awarded for clearing depends on the density of the alien vegetation.  This
  project is labour intensive and absorbs and skills unemployed persons from
  Thembisa. Weather conditions and sick leave was taken into  account,  when
  calculating the wages of workers. The wages of contracted teams is  broken
  down as follows:
             o Contractor: R154 per day
             o Supervisor: R78 per day
             o Health and Safety representative: R64 per day
             o General Worker: R54 per day


  7.2.1.2   The staff raised the following concerns:


         • The increase in the number of teams employed, without increasing
           either the area to be cleared or the money each team is paid  at
           the end of the contract. Therefore, the  contracted  team  earns
           less.
         • The workers depend on the contractors  to  get  work.  Therefore
           they requested that something be done to ensure that the  budget
           allocated is enough or more.
         • The delay of processing payment after the contract  has  expired
           is a concern that was raised. It was suggested that this process
           be sped up.
         • After work is done, the invoice is signed by the  Area  Manager,
           and submitted to DWAF. There are delays in payments because DWAF
           wants to minimise fraud. The land owner’s signature  has  to  be
           verified. This process takes approximately 22-25 days to receive
           payment.
         • The extent of poverty alleviation accomplished is  questionable,
           due to the fact that workers have to wait  for  approximately  a
           month before they get paid for work completed.
         • Finance at regional level is problematic, since  the  turnaround
           time of invoices was takes a long time.


  7.2.1.3   Proposals made on-site


              o DWAF should process invoicing within a  month  of  when  the
                contract  is  awarded  but  sign  off  paperwork  only  when
                inspection of work is done. This will enable payment  closer
                to the time after the work is done.
              o This system will need to be streamlined.  Workers  will  say
                that payment is late  if  not  informed  of  timeframes  and
                results in a misunderstanding regarding payment time.
              o  An  exit  strategy  was  proposed  whereby   the   training
                contracted  workers  undergo  incorporates  non-job  related
                training, so that the staff can exit the  industry/job  more
                qualified in other areas/skills.
              o An upward mobility programme should be  put  in  place.  The
                scale at which programmes are implemented is not significant
                enough.


  7.3 Working on Fire Group


  Working on Fire is a labour-intensive initiative to develop an  integrated
  capacity to prevent and manage wild  fires  in  South  Africa.  Unemployed
  people are trained to work  as  fire  fighters  in  the  Working  on  Fire
  Programme.
   The main objectives of the Programme are to:


         • Limit the effect of veld fires  on  poor  communities  in  areas
           exposed to such fires.
         •  Create  opportunities  for   labour-intensive   work   in   the
           preparation of fire-protection  measures  in  the  participating
           Fire Protection Associations (FPAs), for example clear  invading
           alien plants, create firebreaks and reduce fuel-load.
         •  Develop  skills,  capacity  and   opportunities   in   affected
           communities.


   The Committee met with the Working on Fire Group. The  group  highlighted
   the following challenges:


      • Staff shortages.
      • Not enough presentation of black management.
      • Insufficient R42.60 per  day  that  is  paid  to  an  ordinary  fire
        fighter.
      • Repairs to equipment.
      • Request government assistance.
      • Integrated statistics programme


  8.  WATER RESOURCES, WATER QUALITY OBSERVATIONS AND FINDINGS


  Site visit to Leeuwkuil Water Care Works and Laboratory – Sebokeng


  The Works operated first in the 1950’s. In the late  80’s,  the  work  was
  extended with a 12MI/d Biological Nutrient Removal (BNR) reactor. In 2005,
  the Bio-filters and the inlet screen upgraded. In 2006,  the  BNR  reactor
  was augmented with  a  new  fixed  bridge  aeration  system.  The  current
  capacity is 32 MI/d and the current inflow  is  25MI/d.  The  municipality
  will spend R20 000 000 in 2007 on the current upgrade program.  The  Works
  is operated by a Plant Manager, 6 operators and 14 general workers


  8.1 Site visit to Pump station No.8


  Pump station No. 8 is just one of 48 pump stations in the  Emfuleni  area,
  many of which are 50 years old. By contrast,  virtually  the  entire  flow
  from Three Rivers and Three River East is pumped by pump station No. 8  to
  the 32 MI/d Leeuwkuil WWTW for treatment. Pump station No.8  was  upgraded
  in 2005, with two T10 Gorman Rubb pumps and two 75Kw motors and  state  of
  the art MCC (Motor Control Centre). The T10 pumps can pump 120I/sec  while
  the motors draw 150 Amps.


  It is apparent that Pump station No. 8 was not originally designed for the
  flow currently received from all the feeder pump stations. This is an  old
  installation, which is extremely difficult  to  upgrade  by  adding  extra
  pumps. It is also not practical to increase the capacity,  as  the  rising
  main effectively limit the flow. Apart from the immediate problem  of  the
  pumps and motors themselves, the brittle condition of the pumping mains is
  of great concern. Frequent bursts occur, and  repairs  are  difficult  and
  time consuming, while sourcing the correct fittings for out of  date  pipe
  sizes and materials is another complicating factor. This pump  station  is
  on a line of 48 pumps. If one of the 48 pumps closes down the  whole  line
  of pumps is inoperative.


  During the last two years, pump station No.8 was vandalised  three  times,
  very often, the electrical cables inside the pump station and  the  supply
  cable to the pump station were stolen. Emfuleni Local Municipality’s first
  priority is to attempt to limit  raw  sewer  spillages  at  all  the  pump
  stations. Emfuleni purchased the 500 and 100KVA diesel  driven  generators
  and two pump sets to keep vandalised pump stations up and running.


  8.2 Presentation on Catchment Management and Water Quality


  The key functions of the Environment Management are to protect  the  river
  ecosystems, water conservation and protection of the  ecological  reserve.
  In  addition,  it  also  coordinates,  integrates  and  mainstreams  water
  resource  issues  through   cooperative   governance   and   institutional
  mechanisms. Environment Management is also responsible for monitoring  and
  compliance of policy and regulation.


  Some of the analysis highlighted by the Environment Department is:


      • The decaying sewage emanating from manholes.
      • Illegal connections, soil and  roots  growth  ingress  into  sewage
        network.
      • Mines and industrial pollution.
      • Illegal occupied housing buildings.
      • Informal settlements that is located within floodlines,  inadequate
        service.
      • Vandalism, for example  missing  manholes  covers  and  behavioural
        problems.
      • Lack of reporting of pollution incidents.
      • Sewage flows for days without reporting.
      • Problems with tracking down the source in hot spot  areas  (Wynberg
        has  complex  stormwater  network,  Alexandra  has  occupation   of
        tributaries and infrastructure.
      • Funding problems in Kaalspruit (cross  boundary  issues)  and  Klip
        River System.
      • Weak  enforcement  by  regulatory  authorities,  for  example  mine
        drainage mainly from defunct mines and is often  reliant  on  other
        regulatory authorities.


  The Water Management Tools used are the Surface Water  Quality  Monitoring
  Program that reflects changing needs and water quality issues. The program
  has 136 sites in the city, which monitor each site at least twice a month.
  Monitoring is undertaken at strategic points depending on the  development
  characteristics of the catchment. This is an important tool,  which  gives
  early  warning  of  problems  areas  and  it   informs   and   facilitates
  intervention measures.


  The monitoring program does the following:
      • Assesses the performance and effectiveness of Waste Water Treatment
        Works facilities.
      • Determines the bacteriological health (e.g. Cholera) of  the  river
        ecosystems.
      • Gives information on the sources and water quality impacts of  non-
        point source pollutants.
      • Assists in tracking the pollution to its original source,  that  is
        identify illegal discharges,  once  off  spills  and  non-compliant
        environmental  behaviours,   particular   those   which   are   not
        immediately apparent (for example, no odour, not visible pollution,
        hidden locations).
      • Documents long-term trends and changes in water quality
      •  Informs  policies,  strategies,   projects   and   programmes   by
        identification of priority intervention areas.


  8.2.1     Findings and Analysis


  The key functions of the Environment Management are to protect  the  river
  ecosystems, water conservation and protection of the  ecological  reserve.
  It has identified several areas of concern and has communication  channels
  set up with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, but no  policing
  of resources takes place. The information gathered  informs  planning  and
  strategies, but does not create an obligation for defaulters of Section 14
  of the National Water Act.


  9   Visit to the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry: head office


  The Committee visited the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry’s  Head
  Office. The focus  of  the  oversight  was  on  the  human  and  financial
  resources set aside  by  the  Department  for  water  quality  protection,
  monitoring and evaluation, enforcement and oversight.


  Mr. T Balzer, the acting Director-General welcomed the Committee  to  Head
  Office. He apologised for the absence  of  Director-General.  It  was  not
  possible to do an extensive walkabout since the Department is spread  over
  five buildings. The context of the walkabout was to enable  the  Committee
  to put into context information the Committee receives quarterly from  the
  department on tackling issues of capacity, systems and  transformation  of
  the department.


  9.1 Registry


  DWAF is following the system put in place by Archives South Africa that is
  the data will be stored alphabetically.  Senior  Management  and  Ministry
  files are stored in a different section. IT software will allow for better
  follow-up systems to be put in place. The names of bursars awarded funding
  for studies should be showcased; currently DWAF sponsors 1128 students for
  studies. Since Bar-coding of the files has been done, the files are better
  controlled. DWAF plans to update the registry in three phases:
       a)   Eradication of the backlog,
       b)   Checking and verification the data in the  files  and  code  the
          information,
       c)   Computerising the information in each file.


  9.2 Finance


  9.2.1     SAP training Centre
  The Committee visited the SAP training centre. There are ten centres  like
  this  established  across  the  country.  DWAF  is  training  people   but
  experiences difficulty  in  retaining  people  since  the  SAP  accounting
  software is also used by the private sector, which pays  higher  salaries.
  The problem DWAF experienced is that the salaries of the public sector are
  regulated and thus the problem of retaining staff persists. This also  has
  a negative impact on the  financial  management  of  the  Department.  The
  Department has looked at the difference in salary that a person  earns  in
  other organisations if working with SAP software, the wage discrepancy  is
  large. The Department’s asset base of R45 billion is significant, and that
  low salaries did not retain highly skilled people that are responsible for
  the management of this  large  asset  base.  DWAF  is  the  only  National
  Department to implement the SAP accounting system.


  9.2.2     Finance
  Under the National Water Act, DWAF employs 2100 employees  that  are  paid
  through the BAS system instead of the PERSAL system, which is  the  system
  through which Department staff get paid. The finance office has few staff.
  There is skeleton staff in the office due to a large number  of  employees
  studying.
  The problem experienced with salary overpayments is that when people leave
  the Department, the Finance office is not informed timeously.  This  leads
  to salaries being paid automatically. Currently the debt owed to DWAF from
  ex-staff  members  totals  R8,5  million.  Some  of  the  debts  owed  the
  department are older than five years. Finance can be linked up to  the  HR
  database, once established. The  Communication  channels  between  HR  and
  management needs to be refined so that this problem can be resolved.


  9.2.3     Procurement
  Procurement  is  short  of  its  targets  set  for  awarding  tenders   to
  Historically disadvantages individuals. An overview of the tender  process
  was given. Two standing committees that were supposed  to  be  established
  were not established, but the functions are being  fulfilled  through  the
  Budget Committee. On Fridays, each week, the budget committee  meets.  The
  Procurement section is divided into two sections: Goods and Services,  and
  consultants. Tenders that were currently under review are the De Hoop Dam:
  Re-alignment of the Road and Rehabilitation of the Dam Structure, and  the
  Gamtoos Dam Wall rehabilitation.


  9.2.4     Staff views on the Department
  The Department is viewed internally as  a  training  institution  and  the
  salaries are low compared to other organisations. There is currently a 15-
  20 % vacancy rate experienced by the Department. The staff indicated  that
  the 12% increase in salaries will be welcomed.


  9.3 Water Services
  Sector Development  and  the  proposed  institutional  reform  and  sector
  support are the services that this Unit offered.  Revision  of  the  Water
  Services Bill was mentioned  as  a  legislative  intervention  that  could
  improve the service  delivery  for  this  unit.  Provision  of  Water  and
  sanitation to residents on private land is an area that could be reviewed.
  Planning and information  services  are  also  in  the  process  of  being
  developed. Planning, monitoring and evaluation of the  municipalities  are
  also in the process of being established. A drought relief team  has  been
  established. Challenges experienced are capacity related.


  9.4 Institutional Oversight


  The section is responsible for:
      • The oversight of the Water Boards and the TCTA.
      • The establishment of Catchment Management Agencies  and  Water  User
        Associations


  DWAF  is  investigating  an   organisational   design   project   and   an
  institutional design project. The  organogram  of  the  Department  should
  support the Department’s strategic objectives and daily operations.  There
  are discussions in the Department around this.


  9.5 Policy and Regulation


  Currently only four people are dealing  with  the  fifteen  Water  Boards.
  Water Demand management also deals with qualitative issues.  Migration  of
  people and the skills required in specific areas is a  challenge  for  the
  section. The South African Institute of Civil Engineers does not recognise
  Public Sector Engineers; also the salary that is  earned  working  in  the
  public sector is far less than what can be earned in the  private  sector.
  The Department has large projects that will require skilled staff to  stay
  with the Department for the successful completion  of  the  projects.  The
  Water Research Council and the Department are  currently  doing  a  Sector
  Capacity Survey to ascertain what skills are available, what is needed and
  how the gap can be bridged.
  The Committee proposed that when DWAF reports quarterly to  the  Committee
  that Policy and regulation also attends the meetings, so that  the  issues
  under review of capacity, under-expenditure and policy are linked so  that
  the Committee can see how the plans/ strategies are implemented.


  The  Committee  highlighted  that  during  the  Oversight  visit,   people
  expressed dissatisfaction with the turnaround time  for  the  approval  of
  licensing. The Unit acknowledged the problem; gaps in the policy have been
  identified. The Unit is currently  formatting  the  policies.  A  tracking
  system is proposed, guidelines and training.  A  problem  that  this  unit
  experiences is the retention of skilled persons. Internally  the  unit  is
  competing with the National Water  Resources  Infrastructure  Agency  that
  will be launched soon.


  9.6 Findings and Analysis


         •  Non-  South  African  Institute  of  Civil  Engineers   (SAICE)
           accreditation of Engineers in the public sector  is  problematic
           since remuneration and accreditation differs from private sector
           engineers.
         • Intensive investment in staff development not resulting in staff
           retention.
         • Some staff still being paid through BAS under the National Water
           Act, instead of PERSAL. This could  prove  problematic  for  the
           Department’s annual audit. Staff  indicated  that  the  salaries
           paid for the skills required are not  on  par  with  what  other
           organisations paid, this led to staff being recruited  by  other
           organisations shortly after being trained by the department.
         • The Department is competing internally for staff with the Agency
           that will be launched soon
         •  Finance  and  Human  resource   communication   channels   were
           highlighted   as   requiring    streamlining    around    salary
           overpayments.
         •  The  financial  resources  set  aside  for  the  water  quality
           protection, monitoring and evaluation, enforcement and oversight
           are satisfactory. What marred this is the  low  level  of  staff
           retention. The low level of skilled staff retention hampered the
           ability of the Department to  meet  its  mandate  of  oversight,
           monitoring and evaluation.
         • The SAP training Centre is an example of the financial resources
           availed for the implementation of the Department’s mandate,  but
           the low level of trained staff retention, due  to  low  salaries
           means that  the  Department  is  training  employees  for  other
           organisations.
         • The financial compensation of staff is  not  determined  by  the
           Department. The Department of Public Service and  Administration
           should be approached by the department on  behalf  of  staff  to
           negotiate higher wages.


  10. CONCLUSION


  The  Portfolio  Committee  and  the  Provincial   Government   legislature
  Portfolio Committee  on  local  government  and  housing  met  with  MECS,
  Councillors,  Mayors,  municipal   management   of   project   consolidate
  municipalities, DWAF regional management, SALGA,  working  for  water  and
  working for fire officials, recipients of service roll-out,  students  and
  recipients of training, Airports Company South Africa management,  Chamber
  of Mines, Rand Water and Magalies Water  and  Forestry.  The  aim  of  the
  committee to meet with all the key stakeholders in the provision of  water
  services to the people of Gauteng was achieved.


  The Committee achieved the objectives of its oversight visit.
  11. RECOMMENDATIONS


  It is against the above information that the following is recommended:
  11.1      Chamber of Mines


  The Committee applauds efforts made by Harmony to improve the  quality  of
  water  discharged  from  its  plant.  However  the  Committee  urges   the
  Department of Water Affairs and  Forestry  to  engage  the  entire  mining
  industry in Gauteng on water quality management, as mandated in Chapter 14
  of the National Water Act (Act 36 of 1998) and report progress thereof  to
  the Committee.


  11.2      Airports Company of South Africa


  The Committee notes that after three cases  of  water  pollution  Airports
  Company South Africa started  to  attend  to  water  quality  issues.  The
  Committee requests to be provided with a report by the Department of Water
  Affairs and Forestry detailing the steps taken to enforce the  obligations
  that arises out of acquiring a water licence.


  11.3      Settlements on pipelines


  The Committee  recommends  that  the  Department  should  review  relevant
  legislation with regard to settlements  on  pipeline  and  report  to  the
  Committee on challenges experienced in this regard.


  11.4      Rand Water Zuikerbosch Water Treatment Works


  Various financial options should be explored by the  department  of  Water
  Affairs and Forestry to finance the refurbishment of Zuikerbosch plant.
  A  vigorous  campaign  by  the  Department  around  vandalism   of   water
  infrastructure should be undertaken.


  11.5      Magalies Water - Bronkhorstspruit Water treatment plant


  Various financial options should be explored by the  Department  of  Water
  Affairs and  Forestry  to  refurbish  the  entire  Bronkhorstspruit  Water
  treatment plant.


  The Department should report back to the Committee  on  progress  made  in
  alleviating the problems encountered  with  both  water  boards,  Magalies
  Water Board and Rand Water Board.


  11.6      Metsweding Area


  The Department should investigate the technical and financial support that
  should to be given to the Municipality, with regard to  refurbishment  for
  the severely aged infrastructure.


  11.7      Plot 175 Visit- Kameeldrift


  The Department should report back to the Committee on  the  delay  in  the
  application by Department of Water Affairs and Forestry  head  office  for
  drought relief.


  11.8      Johannesburg Water – Operation Gcin’Amanzi & Project Thonifho


  The Department together with the entities should place  more  emphasis  on
  the Expanded Public Works Programme as it creates more jobs.
  To  improve  the  water  conservation,  the  Department   should   empower
  communities to conserve water.


  11.9      Visit to Water Demand  Management  Chamber  –  (Evaton  pressure
        control area)


  The Department  should  investigate  the  possibility  of  installing  and
  financing pressure control systems  as  seen  in  Evaton,  throughout  the
  country where feasible.
  11.10     Bapsfontein- Sinkholes


  The  Department  should  provide  a  map  indicating  Dolomitic  land   to
  municipalities to assist in planning for water services roll-out.


  11.11     Winterveldt Sanitation Project


  The Department should investigate the possibility of reviewing legislation
  concerning private land to ensure roll-out of services.


  11.12     Working for Water Project: Rietvlei and Working for Fire


  The Department should review the need for  integrated  skills  development
  programme, as well as how  it  relates  to  the  exit  strategies  of  the
  project.


                           FRIDAY, 17 AUGUST 2007
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill


     (a)    South African Red Cross Society and Legal Protection of Certain
         Emblems Bill [B 25 – 2006] – Act No 10 of 2007 (assented to and
         signed by President on 9 August 2007).


2.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – (sec 76)).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly

    (1)     Mr Y S Bhamjee has resigned as a Member of the National Assembly
         with effect from 10 August 2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


    (a)     Government Notice No 505 published in the Government Gazette No
         29996 dated 19 June 2007: Establishment of the new Mokala National
         Park, made in terms of section 20(1)(a)(i) of the National
         Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of
         2003).

    (b)     Government Notice No 514 published in the Government Gazette No
         29999 dated 21 June 2007: Constitution of the National
         Environmental Advisory Forum, made in terms of Chapter 2, section
         6(1)(a)(i) of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act
         107 of 1998).

    (c)     Government Notice No 830 published in the Government Gazette No
         30057 dated 206 July 2007: Notice of intention to establish the
         National Framework , made in terms of section 7 of the National
         Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
         2004).

                           MONDAY, 20 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

(a)   Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
     Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister for Justice and
     Constitutional Development. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
     Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on
     Security and Constitutional Affairs.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Education


         (a)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2007] (National
              Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Bill published in Government
              Gazette No 30107 of 20 July 2007.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Education
         of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
              Certain Laws Amendment Bill Education Laws Amendment Bill [B
              34 – 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill
              published in Government Gazette No 30172 of 13 August 2007.]
         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


    On 8 March 2007 it was announced that Ms N M Mdaka had lost her seat in
    the National Assembly with effect from 6 March 2007.


    The High Court ruled on 3 August 2007 that the decision by the
    purported national executive committee of the UIF to expel Ms Mdaka
    from the UIF is of no force or effect. Ms Mdaka therefore never ceased
    to be a member of the UIF. Consequently Ms Mdaka never lost her seat in
    the National Assembly.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    Please note: The following item amends item (c) under the entry
    “Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism” published on page 1581
    of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 17 August 2007:

    (a)     Government Notice No 830 published in the Government Gazette No
         30057 dated 6 July 2007: Notice of intention to establish the
         National Framework, made in terms of section 7 of the National
         Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
         2004).

                           TUESDAY, 21 AUGUST 2007

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the ad hoc Committee on the Review of Chapter 9 and
      Associated Institutions, dated 21 August 2007:

        The ad hoc Committee on the Review of Chapter 9 and Associated
        Institutions, having concluded its review of the 11 identified
        institutions, presents its report to the National Assembly.

      Report to be considered.
      (An electronic copy of the report is obtainable from
www.parliament.gov.za).


