---
title: 'National Assembly - 29 August 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-08-29
---

WEDNESDAY, 29 AUGUST 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Acting Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                      OPENING OF FLOOR-CROSSING PERIOD

                               (Announcement)

The ACTING SPEAKER: Hon members, I have to announce that the window period
for members to change party membership or parties to change their status in
terms of the Constitution commences on 1 September 2007 and ends at
midnight on 15 September 2007. Members [Interjections.] ... Hon Holomisa,
you are out of order! [Laughter.] You have to wait for me for any action.
Let me finish dealing with the announcement.

Members or parties who wish to use this window period to change their
status should only do so within the window period, and may do so only once.
A member or members may only change membership of a party without losing
their seats in the National Assembly if he, she or they constitute at least
10% of the total number of seats held by the party that nominated them to
the National Assembly. The 10% is calculated at the time immediately prior
to the commencement of the floor-crossing period.

Any member or party wishing to make any change during this period should
complete a special form which has been prepared for this purpose. These
forms are the only valid forms and will be available from the offices of
the Secretary to the National Assembly. Members should note that for
purposes of informing the Speaker of any intended changes, they should
personally submit the completed form to either Mr M K Mansura, room EG 33,
National Assembly Wing, or Mr M Xaso, room SG 18, Link Building, whom the
Speaker has authorised as the only officials to receive such forms. The
form includes covering notes containing details which members and parties
will need to comply with in order for the change to be valid. I thank you.

Makube nokuthula Mnumzane Holomisa. Ngabe lokhona ilungu elifisa ukwenza
isaziso sesiphakamiso? Ngabe zikhona iziphakamiso ngaphandle kwesaziso?
[Order, Hon Holomisa. Is there a member who wishes to give a notice of
motion? Are there any motions without notice?]
              BEST WISHES TO PARLIAMENTARY RUGBY WORLD CUP TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move without notice:


   That the House –

      1) notes that members of Parliament and staff of the parliamentary
         support services have left for France to participate in the
         Parliamentary Rugby World Cup;

      2) notes that the Parliamentary Rugby World Cup will take place from 1
         to 10 September 2007; and

      3) wishes the South African Parliamentary Rugby World Cup team well in
         their efforts.

Motion agreed to.

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the House I shall move:


   That this House resolves to debate the effect of the restrictions on
   Chinese clothing and textile imports on the local clothing and textile
   manufacturing industries.

Thank you.

The ACTING SPEAKER: I don’t know whether the interpretation might have been
slow or what, because we dealt with the notices.

Dr P J RABIE: The interpretation was wrong, and we thought it was time for
the reading of notices.

The ACTING SPEAKER: I didn’t hear what the hon member is saying. Ms Kalyan,
do you want to say something?

Mrs S V KALYAN: We missed your call because we weren’t quick enough to
catch the interpretation when you called for notices of motion. May I ask
you to please reconsider?

The ACTING SPEAKER: I don’t mind really, but we have already passed that
and there is no harm in the member giving us the notice. Do you have a
problem? No.

We have made an announcement, which I think was two weeks or three weeks
ago in the programming committee, that we are going to use all 11 languages
and, therefore, in the same way in which a person would say they missed the
English because they don’t understand it, it will be unacceptable. I think
we need to respect all the languages. [Applause.]
As you come into the Chamber, just make sure you are ready. We did announce
which languages we are going to use but maybe we will send reminders for
people because the main thing is that we need everybody to participate. Hon
member, I think there is a lot of motivation, even from myself, that you
can take this opportunity and give us your notice.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: While I accept completely your ruling, what we have to ensure in
that context is that the translation is effective and efficient. I have
raised this in the Parliamentary Oversight Authority, or POA, and it is
apparently being seen to. There are problems there, and one accepts the
problems, but likewise, I think you need to have a little bit of leniency
and latitude as far as that is concerned.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Hon Chief Whip of the DA, thank you for addressing me
but that is not a point of order at all because if you raise problems about
the languages, everybody did raise those at some point. If anyone can say
that since we started using other languages, there are still problems, I
would rather entertain that because I know for a fact that there are no
problems at all. [Interjections.] I know that it was raised in the POA but
it does not mean that it is still like that. There is a resolution. Just
take your earphones now and tell me if you can’t get the right language
that you want of the 11 languages that we have.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: But Madam Deputy Speaker, if I can
address you on this ...

The ACTING SPEAKER: Will you please take your seat, sir?

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I at the next
sitting of the House I shall move:

   That this House resolves to debate the  effect  of  the  restrictions  on
   Chinese clothing and textile imports on the local  clothing  and  textile
   manufacturing industry.

I thank you.

The ACTING SPEAKER: We dealt with notices and we also dealt with motions.

Mr D H M GIBSON: There are further notices; mine is one of them, if I may.
May I proceed?

The ACTING SPEAKER: Go ahead.

Mr D H M GIBSON: I hereby give notice that I shall move:
   That this House resolves to debate strategies to increase  investment  in
   greenfield manufacturing concerns.

The ACTING SPEAKER: There was an afternoon when you had 29, you know, Mr
Gibson. [Interjections.] I said there was an afternoon when we had 29 such
notices some time last year. So I just wanted to say that I do have the
energy for as many notices as possible.

Mr D H M GIBSON: I am sure the new Chief Whip will exceed that and do 30
one of these afternoons! [Laughter.]

Mr G G BOINAMO: I hereby give notice that I shall move:

   That this House resolves to debate the negative effects  of  the  massive
   disruptions to many schools across the country during the Public  Service
   strike earlier this year, and ongoing disruption to schools  in  Khutsong
   on the upcoming end-of-year exams, and possible solutions to resolve this
   current crisis.

Thank you.

Mr T D LEE: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

   That this House resolves to debate substance abuse in  South  Africa  and
   our national response to this crisis.
I thank you.

  APPOINTMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO FILL VACANCY ON COMMISSION FOR GENDER
                                  EQUALITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move the motion as
it stands on the Order Paper:

   That the House appoints an Ad Hoc Committee to nominate a person to fill
   the vacancy on the Commission for Gender Equality that will arise when
   the term of office of the chairperson expires on 30 September 2007, the
   Committee to –

      1) consist of the following members, in terms of Rule 215:

         ANC
         Ms P Tshwete,
         Ms J Chalmers,
         Ms M R Morutoa,
         Ms B N Gxowa,
         Mr L P M Nzimande,
         Mr P M Mathebe,
         Mr T J Louw,
         Ms L N Moss,

         DA

         Ms J A Semple,
         Dr J T Delport,



         IFP

         Mr E Lucas,



        Smaller Parties

         Ms S Rajbally;


      2) consider the nominations when they are submitted to the Assembly;


      3) exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying
         out its task; and

      4) report to the House by no later than 30 October 2007.

Motion agreed to.
                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move the motion as
it stands on the Order Paper:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Prohibition
   or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill [B 7B – 2007]
   (National Assembly – sec 75) today.

Motion agreed to.

                               HERITAGE MONTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P TSHWETE (ANC): Acting Speaker, the ANC would like to thank the South
African government for ensuring that the month of September is set aside as
a month to celebrate our heritage, and also for ensuring that all diverse
cultures take part in the whole initiative.

The ANC will be joining hands, together with the Department of Arts and
Culture and other stakeholders, in highlighting heritage month in
September. The launch will take place in Kwalanga, in the Eastern Cape, on
8 September. National Heritage Day will be held on 24 September in
Mangaung, in the Free State province.

This year the focus theme will be on celebrating South African poetry, with
a special emphasis on indigenous languages. As the ANC we acknowledge the
importance of heritage in this democratic South Africa, because heritage is
what we receive from the past, and it shapes our present identity, and
provides insight into our future.

It is for this reason that the present government supports efforts to
encourage the promotion and support of all cultural activities that
celebrate the rich and diverse cultural heritage of all South Africans.
South Africa is proud to have poets like Mazisi Kunene, Lebo Mashile, Prof
Willie Kgotsitsile, Don Matera and others.

Our indigenous languages are crucial for this democracy. They should be
regarded as our heritage since they are a resource to the nation, and carry
the notion of instrumental use of languages. Thank you. [Applause.]

                  NEED FOR CLARITY ON RENAMING OF PRETORIA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mev D VAN DER WALT (DA): Agb Adjunkspeaker, die Minister van Kuns en
Kultuur moet sonder verdere ontduiking duidelikheid gee en ophou om
verkleurmannetjie te speel oor die naam van die stad Pretoria.

Meer as twee jaar het reeds verloop nadat die stadsraad die aansoek vir ’n
naamsverandering na die Minister gebring het. Die Wet op die Raad vir Suid-
Afrikaanse Geografiese Name bepaal in artikel 10(1) dat slegs die Minister
die bevoegdheid het om die naam van ’n stad goed te keur of af te keur
nadat ’n aanbeveling van die raad ontvang is.

Die Premier van Gauteng se stelling dat Pretoria se naam reeds verander is,
is dus ongegrond en onwaar. Nie die Premier of ’n LUR het die mag om
Pretoria se naam te verander nie, en die Staatskoerant van 4 Desember 2000
is duidelik dat die naam Tshwane slegs na die metropolitaanse
munisipaliteit verwys. Slegs die Minister kan nou uitsluitsel gee oor of
daar in der waarheid steeds ’n aansoek op sy tafel is of nie, en hoekom hy
nie in die afgelope twee jaar aan die Suid-Afrikaanse publiek ’n antwoord
kon gee oor Pretoria se naam nie. Hy moet dit dringend doen.

Die DA glo dat die naam van die stad Pretoria binne die groter metrogebied
van Tshwane behoue moet bly. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)
[Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Arts and
Culture must, without any further evasion, stop playing the chameleon and
give clarity on the name of the city of Pretoria.

More than two years have already passed since the city council brought the
application before the Minister for a change of name. The South African
Geographical Names Council Act, section 10(1) stipulates that only the
Minister has the power to approve or not approve the name of a town after a
recommendation has been received from the council.

The Premier of Gauteng’s statement that Pretoria’s name has already changed
is therefore unfounded and untrue. Neither the Premier nor an MEC has the
power to change Pretoria’s name, and the Government Gazette of 4 December
2000 is clear that the name Tshwane only refers to the metropolitan
municipality. Only the Minister can now give a decisive answer on if there
is in truth still an application on his desk or not, and why he has not
been able to give an answer to the South African public on the name of
Pretoria in the past two years. He has to do this as a matter of urgency.

The DA believes that the name of the city of Pretoria should be retained
within the greater metropolitan area of Tshwane. Thank you.]

    CONCERNS ABOUT MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES’ COMMENTS RELATING TO
                    ESKOM’S CAPITAL EXPENDITURE PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): The IFP has noted with some concern comments
attributed to the Minister for Public Enterprises to the effect that
electricity prices should be increased by about 18% to fund Eskom’s capital
expenditure programme that would secure more supply in the future.

The IFP has two major concerns with the Minister’s statement. First, it
appears that he has forgotten that the National Energy Regulator is an
independent regulator, created by law with the mandate, amongst others, of
setting annual electricity tariff increases for Eskom. Is the Minister
therefore proposing to interfere in the independence of the regulator?

Secondly, the IFP is opposed to electricity consumers funding Eskom’s
massive expansion plans by way of tariffs that are increased by such large
amounts as proposed. Ideally, annual increases should remain within the
government’s inflation target range. Eskom is a very large company with a
healthy balance sheet, and it should therefore have no problems with
raising the necessary funding on the foreign and domestic capital markets,
especially not if government were to issue the required guarantees to
lenders.
Any shortfalls in funding requirements would have to be met from public
funds, as government is Eskom’s sole shareholder. The consumer cannot be
expected to fund a parastatal’s expansion plans, even if they are in the
national interest. Thank you.

                          MUSIC CONCERTS IN QWAQWA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mong L J MODISENYANE (ANC): Mme Motlatsa-Spikara, ANC e motlotlo ka
dihlopha tse ileng tsa nka karolo ditlhodisanong tsa mmino tse neng di
tshwaretswe Yunivesithing ya Foreistata, lekaleng la Qwaqwa ka la 12 Phato,
monongwaha. Re thoholetsa haholo sehlopha sa mmino sa Dolce Piacevole
Choristers, se tswang Maokeng, tlasa tsamaiso ya Mofumahadi Malerole
Rabaloi. Sehlopha sena, se ile sa itlhoma maemong a pele hara dihlopha tse
19 tsa Foreistata. Hona ke bopaki ba hore bomme ba na le bokgoni, ha se ka
bomo hore ebe kgwedi ena ya Phato e hlwahilwe e le kgwedi ya bomme.

Jwale Dolce e tla qothisana lehlokwa le dihlopha tse itlhommeng pele ho ya
ka diprofensi ka ho fapana ha tsona mane Thekong-Durban ka la 8 le 9
Tshitwe 2007. Tang-tang e tla kgangwa ke lerole, ya se nang sekaja mmae a
tele. Re ya le wena Dolce. Kgutlang le sekola sa naha, le bontshe hore le
tswa Maokeng ha bo mmino. (Translation of Sesotho member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr L J MODISENYANE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC is proud of all the
choirs that took part in the choral competitions that were held at the
University of the Free State in the Qwaqwa Municipality on 12 August this
year. We particularly applaud the choral group, Dolce Piacevole Choristers,
from Maokeng, under the leadership of Mrs Malerole Rabaloi. This group
earned first position among 19 groups from the Free State. This is proof
that women do have the capability, and it is no coincidence that the month
of August has been earmarked as women’s month.

Dolce will now be competing against other leading groups from different
provinces in Durban on 8 and 9 December 2007. The competition will be very
tough, and may the best choir win. We will be supporting you all the way,
Dolce, bring back the national championship, and show them that you are
from Maokeng – home of choral music.]

                    FIGHT AGAINST DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz S N SIGCAU (UDM): Sekela-Somlomo, singumbutho we-UDM siyithathele
ingqalelo sikhathazekile ingxelo ye-Central Drug Authority yonyaka ka-2005-
06 njengoko sihlala sifumanisa ukuba ukusetyenziswa gwenxa kweziyobisi
notywala kungunobangela wezixholoxholo, ubugebenga neengozi zeendlela.
I-CDA isilumkisa ngelithi kufuneka utyalo-mali olukhulu ekucutshweni
nasekugonyweni kokuxhomekeka kwabantu kwiziyobisi. Ngokucacileyo, kufuneka
kuqwalaselwe umthetho oza kujongana nale nyewe.

Kuqikelelwa ukuba eli lizwe lilahlekelwa zizigidi-gidi zeerandi ngenxa
yokusetyenziswa kweenyembezi zikaVitoliya. Ngoko ke, kubalulekile ukuba
urhulumente ayinike ingqalelo le nyewe njengenye yemiba efuna ingqwalasela
ekhawulezileyo. Oku kuya kusinceda sikwazi ukunqanda imivuka yalo mkhuba
unegalelo elikhulu ekutshabalaliseni ikamva loMzantsi Afrika. Ndiyabulela,
Sekela-Somlomo. (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the UDM takes the report of the
Central Drug Authority of 2005-06 very seriously, as it states clearly that
drug and alcohol abuse are the causes of violence, crime and road
accidents.

To alleviate drug dependency, the CDA advises us to invest more money in
the fight against substance abuse. It is estimated that this country loses
millions of rand because of alcohol abuse. Clearly, there must be a law
which is going to deal with this problem.

Government must take this problem seriously and act against it. This could
help us prevent the consequences of this bad behaviour which threatens to
destroy the future of South Africa. I thank you, Deputy Speaker.]

                SRC ELECTION RESULTS AT FREE STATE UNIVERSITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die VF Plus wens die
studente van die Universiteit van die Vrystaat geluk met die uitslag van
die pas afgelope studenteraadsverkiesing. Die studenteraadsverkiesing is op
’n politieke grondslag gehou, met partye soos Sasco, die DA en die VF Plus
wat daaraan deelgeneem het.

Stemdag is voorafgegaan deur ’n intensiewe plakaat- en propagandaveldtog.
Van die nege portefeuljesetels waarvoor gestem is, het die VF Plus al nege
gewen. Die ander nege setels word proporsioneel verdeel. Die finale uitslag
was dat die VF Plus van die agtien studenteraadsetels veertien setels gewen
het. Sasco het drie setels gewen en die DA het een setel gewen.

Hierdie oorweldigende uitslag ten gunste van die VF Plus stuur ’n baie
sterk boodskap aan die rektor van die universiteit en bevestig die tendens
die afgelope tyd, waarvolgens die VF Plus byvoorbeeld die afgelope nege
jaar die studenteraadsverkiesing by die Universiteit van Pretoria gewen
het. Die jeug, en spesifiek die Afrikanerjeug, is moeg dat daar teen hulle
op rassegrondslag in Suid-Afrika gediskrimineer word en reageer op hierdie
wyse. Hierdie Huis moet ernstig hiervan kennis neem. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Madam Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus congratulates
the students of the University of the Free State on the results of the
recent students’ representative council election. The students’
representative council election was held on a political basis, with parties
such as Sasco, the DA and the FF Plus participating in it.

Voting day was preceded by an intensive poster and propaganda campaign. Of
the nine portfolio seats that were voted for, the FF Plus won all nine. The
other nine seats are divided proportionately. The final result was that the
FF Plus won 14 seats of the 18 students’ representative council seats.
Sasco won three seats and the DA one seat.

This overwhelming result in favour of the FF Plus sends a very strong
message to the rector of the university and confirms the recent trend,
according to which, for example, the FF Plus have won the students’
representative council elections at Pretoria University for the past nine
years. The youth, and in particular the Afrikaner youth, are tired of being
discriminated against on the basis of race in South Africa and respond in
this manner. This House should seriously take this into consideration. I
thank you.]
                MORE TEACHERS TO BE EMPLOYED IN WESTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu M R SONTO (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, urhulumente kaKhongolose ebambisene
nabemi beli lizwe, uxakekile eqinisekisa ukumiliselwa kwesindululo
esamkelwa ngabantu baseMzantsi Afrika kwiminyaka engama-30 eyadlulayo.
Abantu beli batsho ngazwinye ukuba imfundo eya kuthi inikwe abantwana babo
kuMzantsi Afrika okhululekileyo kuya kufuneka iqinisekise ukuba ulutsha
lufundiswa ukuxabisa isizwe, ukuzingca ngenkcubeko, ukuxabisa ubuntu,
inkululeko kunye noxolo.

Ukukhawulelana nalo mbono, isebe lezemfundo eNtshona Koloni liza kuqesha
abafundisi-ntsapho abangaphaya kwe-1 300. Aba bafundisi-ntsapho baza
kutyalwa kulo lonke eli le Ntshona Koloni. Ezona zikolo ziza kuxhamla
zezikwiindawo zabantu abahlelelekileyo. Eli nyathelo liza kukhokelela
ekuncitshisweni kwamanani abantwana emagumbini okufundela.

Lo mbono ubonakalisa ukuzinikela nokuzimisela kukarhulumente ophetheyo
ekwakhweni nasekuziseni ubomi obungcono kubantu bakuthi. Ndiyabulela.
(Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M R SONTO (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government, together with
the people of this country, is trying to make sure that the resolution
adopted by the people of South Africa 30 years ago is implemented. The
people of South Africa agreed with one voice that the type of education
that would be given to their children in a free South Africa should teach
the youth to respect the nation, to be proud of their culture and respect
the values of ubuntu, freedom and peace.

In order to support this idea, the Department of Education in the Western
Cape will employ more than 1 300 teachers. These teachers will work all
over the Western Cape. Underprivileged schools will benefit from this. This
step will help to reduce the number of learners in a classroom.

This decision shows the seriousness of the government of the day about
improving the lives of our people. I thank you.]

                         STUDY TIME LOST BY STUDENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Acting Speaker, we believe that all reasonable
people realise that students lost much time for study during the Public
Service strike. The Department of Education has come up with measures to
catch up for the time lost, yet it is unfortunate that there are instances
of disapproval, even from some teachers’ organisations.

The proverbial caveat to the general is demonstrated by some students in
whose interests these arrangements are made. Instead of taking advantage of
the recovery plans, the Congress of South African Students displays a
defeatist attitude. They already feel that they will not do well in the
examinations.

This student organisation wants the department to disclose the contents of
the final matriculation examinations to the prospective candidates. The
demand is ludicrous, to say the least. Students have to learn that quality
education and qualifications are obtained through hard work. No amount of
disclosing question papers will make them men and women of substance.

The UCDP calls on all teachers to take pride in their teaching and demand
excellence through hard work from their students. Similarly, students
should brace themselves to achieve better results and not look forward to
being ascribed the status of having passed when in fact they have not.

Those threatening to use their brawn to disrupt examinations should rather
use their brains in tackling books and refrain from blackmailing the
department. I thank you.

                 NEED TO INTENSIFY CAMPAIGN AGAINST HIV/AIDS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Madam Acting Speaker, it is horrific to learn that Aids
victims are being buried alive in Papua New Guinea by relatives who cannot
look after them and who fear becoming infected. It has been estimated by
Sapa that HIV diagnosis has increased by about 30% a year since 1997,
leaving an estimated 60 000 people in the area living with the disease in
2005.

South African statistics are just as horrendous. While statistics indicate
that infection has increased, they also show that people are having
themselves tested. We need to realise the possibility that people in many
rural areas of South Africa might be just as ignorant as the people in
Papua New Guinea.

The Aids campaign needs to be universal. We need to be factual about this
disease and take as much information as possible back to the people. Good
food is not a substitute for ARVs. This is the finding of an exhaustive
study undertaken by top South African scientists on the links between
improved nutrition and the treatment for HIV/Aids and TB. However, a
balanced, healthy diet is important for optimum health.

We want to intensify education on the disease and steer victims away from
the fallacy that they may omit ARV treatment in favour of beetroot and
garlic. Thank you very much.

                   SCHOOL ATTENDANCE IN KHUTSONG DISRUPTED
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Ke a leboga Motlatsa-Sebui [Thank you, Deputy
Speaker].

Intimidation, coercion and the complete disruption of schooling has been a
fact of life for learners in Khutsong since December 2005. This means that,
for almost two years, schooling for learners in the area has been virtually
nonexistent. Despite this dire situation, Cosas continues to intimidate
learners into staying away from schools. The SA Democratic Teachers’ Union,
Sadtu, continues to refuse to co-operate with the recovery plan.

Moreover, it must be recognised that the schooling problem in Khutsong
cannot be solved by unilateral decisions by the Department of Education, or
by using the police to beat the people of Khutsong into submission.

The opportunity that all South African children should have to lift
themselves out of poverty through their education is being denied to the
children of Khutsong because of the narrow, partisan, selfish interests of
a few individuals. The DA calls on the parties involved in creating and
perpetuating these disruptions to devote themselves to restoring order and
commit themselves to devolving a culture of learning and teaching as the
most important priority for Khutsong. Thank you.
                     RAILWAY LINE REOPENED AT ALICEDALE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkskz B N DAMBUZA (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, urhulumente osezintanjeni
okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, uya kuthi gqolo ukhuthaza
intsebenziswano phakathi kukarhulumente, amashishini abucala kunye noluntu
ngokubanzi.

Kwidolophana eyaziwa ngokuba yiQhorha, okanye i-Alicedale, kwathi ngonyaka
ka-1996 kwavalwa umzila kaloliwe owawudibanisa iQhorha, iRhini kunye
neBhayi. Ukuvalwa kwalo mzila kwabangela intlupheko engathethekiyo kuluntu
lwale dolophu, yaza intswela-ngqesho yaya kuma kumyinge wama-95 ekhulwini.

Kwiminyaka emine edlulileyo urhulumente, ebambisene namashishini abucala,
weza nezicwangciso zokuvuselela lo mmandla. Sithetha nje, ezo zicwangciso
zizele amathokazi ngoba ingqesho iya inyuka. Ngoku imi kumyinge wama-60
ekhulwini.

Phakathi kwabantu abathi batyelela le dolophana yaba nguMomgameli, uQabane
uThabo Mbeki, owathumela kule dolophana iqumrhu elicebisa uMongameli
ngotyalo-mali, elaziwa ngesilungu ngokuba yi-International Investors
Council. Le mpumelelo izuzwe yile dolophu ikudandalazisa ngokuphandle
ukubaluleka kwentsebenziswano phakathi koluntu jikelele. Umanyano
ngamandla! Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms B N DAMBUZA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government will make
sure that there is a healthy working relationship between government,
private businesses and the people in general.

In 1996 in a small town called Qhorha or Alicedale, a railway line
connecting Alicedale, Grahamstown and Port Elizabeth was shut down. The
closure of this railway line affected the people of this town negatively
and the unemployment rate went up to 95%.

In the last four years, government and private businesses came up with some
proposals to rejuvenate this area. As we speak, those proposals are
starting to bear fruit because jobs are being created. And this has reduced
the unemployment rate by 60%.

The hon President, Comrade Thabo Mbeki was one of the people who visited
this small town and also sent the council that advises the Presidency on
economic issues, known as the International Investors Council. This
resounding success in this small town shows the importance of co-operation.
Unity is strength! I thank you. [Applause.]]

                         IMPACT OF DIET ON HIV/AIDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Deputy Speaker, in view of the report released under
the auspices of the National Academy of Scientists, stating that there is
as yet no convincing research to indicate that nutrition affects the course
of Aids or offers an alternative to treatment with antiretrovirals, the IFP
calls for a new phase in the government’s approach to HIV.

It should include the following elements: one, unequivocal clarity from the
Minister about the fact that HIV causes Aids and that antiretrovirals are
the best route to treat the condition; two, there should be increased
commitment of government finances to the SA Institute for Medical Research,
SAIMR, the Medicines Control Council, MCC and, in partnership with
universities, to do nutritional research and to find out the impact of
foods, vitamins, minerals, nutriceuticals and traditional medicines on HIV.

Thirdly, there should be urgent publication of regulations dealing with
traditional medicines and complementary alternative health products; and
fourthly, there should be measures introduced to ensure that the public has
access to research results from research that has been undertaken either in
South Africa or in partnership with overseas universities, on herbs such as
Hoodia and Sutherlandia or food such as garlic and the African potato.
Thank you.

                     SAFETY OF WORKERS AT ANGLO AMERICAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J L FUBBS (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the statements by
the recently appointed Chief Executive Officer of Anglo American, Ms
Cynthia Carroll that all companies within that group will, with immediate
effect, put the safety of miners before profits.

We support all companies that make the safety of their workers a
fundamental part of their operations, and are thus heartened by the
statement of the CEO of Anglo that effective management of safety will be a
requirement for those management members who wish to make progress in that
company.

The ANC recognises that this is the first time that a large mining
conglomerate has directly linked its fortunes to the transformation of
reality in our country, South Africa.

The mining industry, as we all know, is a particularly hazardous and
gruelling industry and there have been many and notable instances where
greater adherence to safety standards could have saved hundreds of lives.
Fatal and other accidents continue to occur on the mines, despite the fact
that the ANC has sought to improve conditions of employment through
rigorous health and safety legislation and other measures. Thank you, hon
Deputy Speaker.

                  COLLAPSE OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM IN LANGKLOOF

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr J T DELPORT (DA): Agb Adjunkspeaker, die Langkloof voer jaarliks meer as
R400 miljoen se vrugte na Europa uit. Dié uitvoere onderhou sowat 1 500
werkers. Die Koukamma-munisipaliteit in die gebied het funksioneel en
finansieel in duie gestort, en daarmee saam onder andere die instandhouding
van die rioolstelsels in die gebied.

Ek was gister daar. Rou riool loop langs huise verby, loop in strate af en
vorm poele waar kinders speel. Die riool syfer nou af na die boere se
besproeiingsdamme en sal uiteindelik ook die Nelson Mandela-metropool se
waterbronne besmet.

Die boere kan hulle uitvoersertifisering, die GATT, na Europa verloor. As
dit gebeur, stort die hele ekonomie in die Langkloof in duie.

Tot dusver reageer die Oos-Kaapse regering net eenvoudig nie, ook nie die
Kantoor van die Premier, met wie ek direk geskakel het nie. Die Minister
vir Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering gooi ’n dowe oor en die Minister van
Omgewingsake en Toerisme was, lyk dit my, sy hande in onskuld. Ek moedig
nou die gemeenskap aan om regstappe teen die regering te doen.

Agb lede, help red hierdie mense in die Langkloof van ondergang, want u
regering doen dit nié. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Dr J T DELPORT (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, the Langkloof annually exports
fruit to the value of more than R400 million to Europe. The Koukamma
Municipality in the area has collapsed functionally and financially,
bringing about, amongst other things, the breakdown of the maintenance of
the sewerage systems in the area.

I was there yesterday. Untreated sewerage runs past houses, runs down into
the streets and forms pools where children play. The sewerage is now
trickling down to the farmers’ irrigation dams and will eventually also
pollute the water reservoirs of the Nelson Mandela Metropole.

The farmers can lose their export certification, the GATT, to Europe. If
that happens, the entire Langkloof economy will collapse.

Up to now the Eastern Cape government has simply not responded, and neither
has the Office of the Premier, whom I have contacted directly. The Minister
for Provincial and Local Government turns a deaf ear and, it seems to me,
the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism washes his hands of the
matter. I am now encouraging the community to institute legal proceedings
against the government.

Hon members, help to save these people of the Langkloof from ruin, because
your government is not doing it. [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon members, please lower
your voices. Order!

      COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT CONCLUDED IN AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms O R KASIENYANE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC welcomes the collective
bargaining agreement concluded between employers and workers in the
automotive industry. This agreement includes a multiyear wage agreement for
the next three years, as well as improved pension, maternity and severance
benefits.

It also makes provision for the establishment of an industry policy forum
which will consider the issue of black economic empowerment and benefits to
members. The policy forum will also consider the issues of HIV and Aids, a
social plan to deal with issues of retrenchment and closures, and the
establishment of the bargaining council. We congratulate all parties that
were involved in the negotiations on this seminal agreement, which will
make a difference in the lives of workers.

Further, the ANC urges all employers and workers to develop wage demands
and offers with broader regard to the prevailing objective socioeconomic
circumstances. In this way it is hoped that earlier positive experiences of
worker-employer social compacts can be sustained. I thank you.

    CONCERNS ABOUT MINISTERS FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES’ COMMENTS RELATING TO
                    ESKOM’S CAPITAL EXPENDITURE PROGRAMME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I would like to respond to the issues
raised by the hon Bekker in relation to electricity prices. I’m not quite
sure how he thinks Eskom will be able to raise the money. To say that it
will use the balance sheet is a trite statement. Having used the balance
sheet to borrow, somebody has got to pay to amortise what has been
borrowed, and the only way to deal with that is actually to ensure that the
pricing of energy costs in this country would be more reflective both of
that as well as a consciousness about the CO2 emissions that arise from
energy consumption and therefore act as a break on the overuse of
electricity. [Interjections.]

Sorry, Chair, I ask for protection. I listened carefully when the hon
Bekker was speaking. Eskom has to do it over its balance sheet and that is
the bottom line. We will not raise taxes in order to finance this in order
to then provide a hidden subsidy to industry. There will be price changes;
this signal has been communicated and has emanated from a big business
working group. There is an acceptance across the South African economy that
there will be new realities in respect of the pricing. In one of the
newspapers today there is a very detailed comment by Prof Anton Eberhard
supporting this and he does it from the perspective of energy
sustainability, so I think the hon Bekker is way out of line with his
submission here today. Thank you.

           FF PLUS WINNING SRC ELECTIONS AT UNIVERSITY OF PRETORIA
                           EDUCATION RECOVERY PLAN
                   SCHOOL ATTENDANCE IN KHUTSONG DISRUPTED

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I hope you will allow that I could
respond to more than one of the matters raised. I’ll try to be brief with
respect to them. Perhaps to begin one would say that ...

... re dumelana le Rre Modisenyane gore bomme ba na le bokgoni. Ke ne ke sa
itse gore fa a bua a o amogela bokgoni ba setlhopha sa mmino sa Dolce
kgotsa bokgoni ba mmaMoloi, mme re dumelana le ena gore bomme ba na le
bokgoni tota.

Fa re tla mo go tsa thuto ke a utlwa gore FF Plus e dumela thata fa e bona
FF Plus ya baša e tsaya ditlhopho mo Yunibesithing ya Foreisitata. Se re se
tshephang le se re se batlang ke gore FF Plus e dire gore bana ba rona ba
ba mo unibesiting eo, ba tsamaisane e le bana ba Aforika Borwa botlhe. Re
seka ra bua gore bana ba basweu ba tshaba se, ba bantsho ba tshaba sele.
Rona re le baeteledipele a re leke gore yunibesithi eo, e nne ya Aforika
Borwa e seng ya ngwana wa mmala o, kgotsa wa mmala ole. [Legofi.]

Fa re tla mo puong ya UCDP ke batla gore, go fa ngwana pampiri ya
ditlhatlhobo pele ga tlhatlhobo ga go mo molaong. Ke dumalana le wena gore
ke selo se re ka keng ra se dira. A re kopeng bana ba rona go ithuta. A re
kopeng barutabana go ruta bana ba rona.

Re dumetse gore re tlile go fa barutabana madi fa ba ruta ka malatsi a
boikhutso a kgwedi ya Lwetse. Diporofense tse dingwe di setse di dira
sentle ka tsamaiso ya tsona ya go ruta bana go oketsa nako ya go ithuta. Re
itumelela selo seo. Go fa bana pampiri ya ditlhatlhobo go tota go se mo
molaong. Ga se selo se re ka se dirang. Ga nkitla ke dumelela seo go
diragala.

Kwa bofelong, ke batla go bua ka Khutsong. Ga ke itse gore ke re ke dumela
gore ke Cosas le Sadtu di dirang gore bana ba seka ba tsena sekolo. Ga ke
na kitso eo. Ke ne ke ka rata gore Rre Boinamo a mphe dilo tse a di boneng
tse di supang gore ke batho bao ba dirang dilo tseo. Nna se ke se boneng ke
batho ba le bantsi; ga ba mo mokgatlhong o kgotsa ole.

Ke itumelela tiro e Mokhuduthamaga wa Thuto, Rre Tselapedi, a e dirileng go
leka go thusa bana ba ba iponang ba le mo matshwenyegong a go ithuta kwa
Khutsong. Se nka se dirang ke go kopa batsadi ba bana ba rona kwa Khutsong
gore ba rotloetse bana go boela sekolong.  Re le batsadi ga re a tshwanela
go letla bana go nna kwa ntle ga sekolo.

Fa re buisa dikuranta, di re bana ga ba tsene sekolo, re se ka ra tsaya
gore ke dikolo tsotlhe tse di sa direng. Tse dingwe di a dira, di tsamaya
sentle. Mo re bonang go na le sekolo se se sa tseneng, ke le moeteledipele
jaaka wena, ke ile kwa sekolong seo ka bona gore bana ga bayo mo go sona.
Re kopa gore le re bolelele, re tla ya mo sekolong seo, gore re thuse bana
ba rona. Ke a leboga, Modulasetilo. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofi.] (Translation
of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[... we agree with hon Modisenyane that women have talent. When he spoke I
was not sure whether he was acknowledging the talent shown by the Dolce
music choir or Mrs Moloi’s talent, but we agree with him that indeed women
have talent.

With regard to education, I learned that the FF Plus bought into the idea
when they noticed that their youth wing had won the student elections at
the University of the Free State. What we expect and hope for from the FF
Plus is for them to make it a point that all our students in that
university work together as South African students. We, as leaders, should
try to make that university a proudly South African institution and not a
racially divided one that doesn’t belong to all students. [Applause].

With regard to the UCDP speech I would like to pronounce that it is illegal
to give a learner an examination paper before examinations start. I would
like to assure you that it is something that we would not do. We should
encourage learners to study and remind educators to teach our learners.

We have agreed to remunerate the educators for teaching during the
September holidays. Other provinces are already doing well in their
education recovery plan in order to catch up. We really appreciate that.
Indeed, giving the learners an examination paper beforehand is illegal. It
is something that we will not do and I won’t allow that to happen.

Lastly, I would like to talk about Khutsong. I don’t know whether it is
true to say that Cosas and Sadtu are the ones that influence the learners
not to attend school. I don’t have substantive evidence to support that
view. I would appreciate it if Mr Boinamo could give me that evidence to
prove that they are the ones responsible. What I saw was a group of people
that I could not associate with a particular party.

I appreciate what the MEC for Education Mr Tselapedi has done in helping
those affected learners in Khutsong who have shown a keen interest in
learning. What I can do is to request the parents of these learners to
encourage their children to go back to school.

When we read in newspaper reports that there is no schooling, we should not
regard all schools as being dysfunctional because some schools are doing
very well. When we discovered that there was no schooling, as a leader like
you, I visited the school and discovered that there were no learners. We
therefore make a request to you to inform us, so that we can visit such
schools to help our learners. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

             FF PLUS WINNING ELECTIONS AT UNIVERSITY OF PRETORIA
                         IMPACT OF DIET ON HIV/AIDS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, a suggestion to the FF Plus,
the elections are only in 2009, so don’t peak too early, otherwise you will
find that by the time you come to 2009 you’ve lost what you gained today.
[Laughter.]
With respect to Ms Rabinowitz, let me say that I think all of us can agree
that whatever experiments research has done with regard to any medical or
health issue, should always be made public. We shouldn’t allow people to
experiment on our people in secret or in private. I think that is an
important area.

The second point is that if you actually look at the comprehensive HIV and
Aids plan of this government, which, incidentally, the Secretary of Health
from the United States of America has publicly said in a press conference
he thinks is a tremendous plan, most people regard it as one of the most
comprehensive and best plans to deal with the issues of HIV and Aids. The
issues you have raised are addressed in this comprehensive plan that we
have. Let me assure you that this government is absolutely determined and
committed to implementing that plan together with all of our partners who
constitute Sanac. Thank you.

                  COLLAPSE OR SEWERAGE SYSTEM IN LANGKLOOF

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I’m rising
in respect of the matter which was raised by the hon Delport about the
problems in Port Elizabeth. I want to thank him very much for bringing this
particular problem to my attention and for again drawing to my attention
the fact that he has raised this matter with local government and the
province.

I am perplexed by the allegation that the Department of Provincial and
Local Government is playing deaf, suggesting that there has been no
responsiveness, presumably to an approach that was made. I’m not aware of
such an approach having been made. However ...

...ngeletshedzo ine nda nga vha fha yone ndi ya uri vha songo ḓi ita
mmboneni nga tshutshedzo dza u ya khothe ngauri a hu na zwine dza ḓo vha
thusa ngazwo. Arali vha tshi khou ṱoḓa thuso vha kwama nne na Muhasho wa
Muvhuso wa Madzingu na Mivhusoyapo. Vha ḓo wana vha tshi thusalea.
(Translation of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[...the advice that I can give you is that you must not make a show of
yourself by making legal action threats because that is not going to help
you. If you need help, you contact me and the Department of Provincial and
Local Government. In that way you will surely get help.]

And please leave the theatrics out of this. Thank you.

                    FIGHT AGAINST DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE


                            (Minister’s Response)
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I want to thank the
member who raised the issue about the need to support the Central Drug
Authority. The National Drug Master Plan was passed last year by Cabinet
for the period 2006-2011. This National Drug Master Plan is at present
being implemented by the Central Drug Authority, CDA, and is supported by
the Minister of Social Development.

The administrative wing of the Central Drug Authority resides within the
Department of Social Development and in terms of the implementation thereof
provincial drug forums have been established in every province, and at the
moment local drug action committees are being established in every
municipality.

So far, 182 municipalities have established local drug action committees.
These local drug action committees are a co-ordinating mechanism for all
stakeholders at local level, which includes government and the other
stakeholders.

The Western Cape is the front runner in this regard in implementing the
National Drug Master Plan, and I want to commend the Premier’s Office and
the Department of Social Development in the Western Cape and all the
organisations in the community who are active in the struggle to achieve a
drug-free South Africa. Thank you.

                 NEED TO INTENSIFY CAMPAIGN AGAINST HIV/AIDS
                         IMPACT OF DIET ON HIV/AIDS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I’d like to
respond to two statements: The one made by the hon Rajbally and the one by
hon Rabinowitz – but I think that was partly covered by the Minister in the
Presidency as well.

Firstly, at no point did this government say that nutrition is the
substitute for antiretroviral treatment. I think as any good doctor – and
there are some good doctors here in the House with us – would tell us, even
if you take a Panado for a headache, you must have something in your
stomach. That is all the government is saying: You need good nutrition if
you want to go on ARVs. It’s a very potent drug and the medical doctors
here will tell us that it is a potent drug, and you cannot have it on an
empty stomach. We’ve been emphasising the importance of good nutrition for
antiretroviral treatment as well.

Secondly, we also support the hon member Rajbally and would like to
encourage all South Africans to know their status by having themselves
tested because only if government has accurate statistics will we be able
to respond appropriately.

REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS AND PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION-
                     RELATED INFORMATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson and hon members, allow me to commence by taking you for a short
walk down memory lane. The Act being amended by the Bill was put on the
Statute Book as a measure to combat serious crime - that was as far back as
2002. The aim of this legislation was, and still is to regulate, once and
for all, the interception and monitoring of all forms of communication in a
single statute – something that was lacking in our law. When I say all
forms of communication I refer, for instance, to communications facilitated
by advances in communication technologies such as cellphones and other
electronic forms of communication, which were not covered by the existing
and rather outdated legislation in this regard, namely the Interception and
Monitoring Prohibition Act of 1992.

The aim of this 2002 Act is twofold: Firstly, it is on the Statute Book to
ensure that the interception and monitoring of communications takes place
in accordance with very strict criteria after a judge has considered an
application placed before him or her by any of our law-enforcement agencies
for such an interception order. The interception of communications is only
permissible where a serious crime has been or is likely to be committed. In
other words, the interception of communications is directed at the criminal
element.

Secondly, this Act is there to protect our law-abiding citizens. It
prohibits the interception and the monitoring of their private
communications. Any attempt to do so is illegal and indeed punishable. This
Act therefore regulates very carefully the manner in which private
communications of persons may be intercepted and monitored. It does so in a
way which does not offend the Constitution in any manner. The infringement
of a person’s right to privacy, which this Act permits in very limited and
circumscribed conditions, is justified on the grounds, among others, that
the interception and monitoring of communications is necessary in order to
detect, prevent and investigate serious crime.

The Bill before us relates only to the interception of cellular phone
calls. It was promoted at the instigation of the three mobile cellular
operators jointly – that is Vodacom, MTN and Cell C. These service
providers approached government when the implementation of the principal
Act was receiving attention. They requested government not to implement
sections 40 and 62(6) of the Act. These sections require persons who sell
SIM cards and cellphones to record and store certain information of their
clients as well as the particulars of the SIM cards and the cellphones
themselves.

These provisions, as they read at present, call for a paper-based
registration process – section 40 dealing with the registration of clients
after the commencement of that section, and section 62(6) dealing with the
registration of persons who are clients at the time this provision is
implemented.

The service providers proposed that this paper-based process be replaced by
an electronic solution. That in essence is what the Bill is about. It
provides for the electronic capturing of certain information to ensure that
the principal Act is fully effective and to ensure the achievement of its
objects. I know that the Bill has been the subject of lengthy deliberations
in and outside Parliament. It has been adapted by the committee in numerous
respects. I do not intend to deal with all aspects of the Bill but would
rather make a few general observations.

Hon members, since the Bill is aimed mainly at the registration and the
verification of certain particulars of owners of cellular phones and SIM
cards - addresses and identity numbers for instance - such persons who fail
to verify such particulars will not be able to gain access to cellular
phone services. Some of the proposed new definitions in clause 1 indicate
the portfolio committee’s endeavour to ensure that the objective of
universal access to electronic communication services, including cellular
services, is not compromised – particularly that of the poor who live in
outlying areas and who rely very heavily on cellphone communication. It is
clear to me that every effort has been made to ensure that the distribution
and the availability of cellphone services are not affected negatively.

I am aware that there are still a number of aspects in the Bill with regard
to which the service providers have reservations: the requirement of
whether to register the handset number and the IMEI number or not; the
implications that the Bill will have on visitors to the country who wish to
roam on our networks; and the timeframes within which the registration of
the existing cellphone clients must be finalised. These are some of the
issues that have been raised by the service providers.

I must, however, make my view known, namely that there can be no room for
any gaps in this legislation. As I see it, the information that is
specified in the Bill and required to be captured is essential – not only
for investigation purposes, but also as evidence in our courts.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Minister, I regret having to
interrupt you, but the noise levels in the House are unacceptable. I can
actually hear your conversations from the Chair. I want to appeal to the
Whips to exercise some management over this particular issue. We have to
raise it several times from the Chair. This transmission is broadcast – I
don’t know whether you want that to be broadcast to the nation. If the
Whips can certainly assist in trying to bring some order in the House.
Thank you, Minister.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, let me then
continue by saying that we have had long deliberations around this Bill and
the issues involved. I appeal that we now concentrate on how to implement.
We must put emphasis on implementation. I am convinced that solutions can
be found. I do agree with the approach adopted by the Justice portfolio
committee regarding these matters, namely that the registration of
cellphone handsets and the requirement for visitors to the country to
provide verified personal particulars to our local service providers before
they can roam on our networks are essential. Without these requirements,
there would be loopholes in the legislation, which criminals could and
would exploit, making the legislation meaningless.

Before concluding, I need to emphasise that the Bill, as adapted by the
portfolio committee to date, has not deviated from the principles contained
in the Bill as approved by the Cabinet and introduced to Parliament. The
original principles have in essence all been retained – most notably the
registration and the capturing of vital information such as the cellphone
handset number, the MSISDN number of the SIM card and an address of the
customer.

The implications of the Bill in relation to roaming have also remained
unchanged during the parliamentary process. I was heartened to hear that
the provisions of the adapted Bill were not opposed by any of the members
of the portfolio committee. That is obviously an indication of a pragmatic
approach to ensure that this legislation goes forward. I trust that the
attitude will prevail when we vote on the Bill shortly.

The adaptations that have been made by the committee, after hearing the
views of stakeholders during the public hearings, are positive changes that
I think will enhance the application of these provisions. I refer for
instance to the new definitions which, as I have already indicated, are
intended to ensure that as many people as possible are able to comply with
the registration requirements and are not denied the enormous benefits of
cellular services.

Mention should also be made of the fact that the introduced Bill required
the residential, business and postal addresses of customers to be
registered. After hearing the views of stakeholders, the committee changed
the Bill to require only one address and the change indicated willingness.
I am sure members of the portfolio committee will talk to this.

I would want to conclude by really thanking the officials in my department
who have been working with this Bill since 1992. I am here also referring
to the principal Bill. I would like to say thank you to Adv Bassett, in
particular, and Adv Roberts. I wish to express my appreciation also to
Comrade Fatima Chohan-Khota and her portfolio committee members for their
inputs and for their unanimous support of the Bill. It is clear that they
have spared no effort in trying to ensure that the final product does not
detract from the objectives of the principal Act – with as little
disruption as possible to the service providers on the one hand and the
users of mobile cellular services on the other. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, hon members, the Bill before us will entail
some inconveniences to most of us but it is an important crime-fighting and
regulatory measure.

In terms of the regulation of interception of communications Act of 2002,
interception of communications is prohibited except under the following
circumstances: interception of communications by a party to that
communication and interception made in terms of an interception order
granted by a designated judge in terms of this legislation, and in
instances where there is imminent harm to the lives of persons involved.

Any interception of any communication in any other manner or form is
illegal. I want to repeat that. Any interception of any communication in
any other manner or form is illegal. This is an important principle to bear
in mind when considering the Bill before us. The amendment Bill before us
pertains to sections 40 and 62(6) of the regulation of interception of
communications Act of 2002, which, as the Minister has said, relates to the
requirements pertaining to mobile cellular service operators, or cellular
phones as we call them.

The Minister has indicated the history of this and the involvement of the
mobile cellular operators in calling for the amendment in question, and I
won’t be going into that in any detail at the moment.

The Bill, as introduced, requires the registration and verification of
certain particulars of customers of mobile cellular services – the
addresses and identity numbers of potential customers are required to be
recorded, failing which such persons will not be able to gain access to
mobile cellular services.

The committee, having been seized with the question of these requirements
and having the unintended consequence of restricting the access of mobile
telephones into certain sectors, has been at pains to ensure that an
adequate balance is found between the matter of access without compromising
the overall objective of this legislation by ensuring that there is
adequate data on record for the purposes of crime prevention, detection
and, more importantly, prosecution.

The definitions of “address”, “identity number” and “identity document”
were therefore broadened from their usual meaning so that addresses, for
example, would include a residential or business address in the normal
sense but would also include an address in an informal settlement.

Identity documents, as defined, would include your normal green identity
book but also a temporary identity certificate, the proposed new-style
identity card, passports, as well as an identity document issued in terms
of the Refugees Act of 1998.

It should also be borne in mind that any person may transfer ownership to a
family member without the requirement of registering the details of the
transferee with the mobile cellular operator.

Conversely, it must be borne in mind that anyone who owns a cellular phone
and a SIM card that is activated and who wishes to transfer ownership to
somebody other than a family member, as defined, is under obligation to
present himself or herself together with the transferee to the relevant
service provider to register the details of the new owner prior to handing
over the phone to the new user.

In terms of the Act, the mobile cellular operators are obliged to inform
customers of their rights and obligations under this legislation, and the
various sources of information that have to be captured – and the Minister
has dealt with much of that – and ultimately these details will have to be
recorded against a natural person, as well as a juristic person.

Cellular phone rental companies are also under similar obligations as
mobile cellular operators regarding registration and verification of
customers. Section 62 deals essentially with the matter of existing
customers of mobile cellular operators and requires the registration of
personal and phone details of existing customers within a specified period
of 12 months from implementation. Initially, the mobile cellular operators
approached the committee to extend this period to four years. The committee
responded by requesting a motivation and the provision of accurate data
around the number of subscribers that are required to be registered,
bearing in mind that all contract customer details had already been
captured.

The committee further requested the three mobile cellular operators to
provide details of the number of registration points, which would put the
committee in a position to rationally ascertain how long the mobile
cellular phone operators would require for the completion of this process.
They unfortunately declined to offer this information but suggested a
period of 36 months. In effect, as we had been poised to pass this
legislation already in June 2006, we have, in terms of this law,
effectively afforded an extra 12 months to them, and depending on the
implementation of the relevant section into law, we are convinced that
sufficient time has been afforded the mobile cellular operators in this
respect, particularly when considering the experiences of other countries
in this regard. Should a customer not register his or her details within
the contemplated period such service will be terminated.

The Bill has two very important consequences. The first of these means that
both the handset and the SIM card must be recorded prior to a customer
getting access to a network. Cellular phones not registered on a network
will not be able to work on that network. We are of the view that the
registration of phone handsets is necessary in order to put the identity of
the owner of the phone beyond doubt. This will assist in proving ownership
of cellular phone handsets in certain investigations and, more
particularly, enable the preferment of prima facie evidence as opposed to
circumstantial evidence in subsequent court proceedings.

Secondly, a foreigner who comes to our shores will be required to register
his or her personal details before they are able to roam. The law therefore
doesn’t prohibit roaming but will require registration by foreigners prior
to roaming. It has been argued, inter alia, that this is an unnecessarily
heavy-handed provision designed to inconvenience foreign visitors to our
shores. The mobile cellular operators suggest that the current method of
obtaining foreign customer information through the co-operation of foreign
mobile cellular operators is a viable and workable method of securing
information for crime fighting.
It has been a matter of intense deliberation, and the problems identified
with the so-called solution are that, firstly, it has not been indicated to
what extent these co-operation agreements with foreign mobile cellular
operators are legal in the foreign countries concerned, given the extensive
privacy laws that exist in many jurisdictions. Accordingly, their
admissibility in court in this country is questionable.

Secondly, there are inherent limitations in the data stored by certain
countries that do regulate the storage of customer information, as many
jurisdictions do not require the registration of pre-paid SIM cards. This
creates a potential loophole in the legislative framework we are spending
millions and millions to implement.

Lastly, not all countries even require this minimal storage of data as many
countries do not have legislation in this regard at all.

I wish to remind members at this stage that criminals, particularly
organised syndicates, use increasingly sophisticated methods to stay a step
ahead of law-enforcement agencies. And yes, there is the potential of
enormous inconvenience to all of us who own cellular phones.

I would like to quote an extract from the Sunday Times of 1 September 2002
– at that time I still read that paper. That quotation I find particularly
apt in this context, and it goes as follows:

  South Africans are notorious for loving strong-arm tactics to fight
  crime, but they are frequently unwilling to be inconvenienced by the
  actions that are required of them in this fight. This attitude must
  change if we are rolling back this scourge.

This, members, is a matter for some contemplation on our part.

Lastly, let me please thank the members of the portfolio committee firstly;
secondly, Mr Sarel Roberts, Ms Ina Botha and Mr Lawrence Bassett for their
invaluable and very, very hard work in this regard. They provided expertise
and direction that was enormously valuable to us, and we do thank them very
much. Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Sihlalo ngibingelela iNdlu. [Chairperson, I greet the
House].

This is the fourth time that we amend Act 70 of 2002 even though the whole
Act has not yet come into force.

We supported the principal Act in 2002 as well as all three later
amendments and we will also support this amendment today. You are not
surprised. You know why? Because you know the DA will always support crime
fighting.

However, it is not without reservation that we give our support to this
amendment. In the first place, we are concerned about the effect that these
amendments may have on bona fide foreign visitors to our country. We
definitely do not want a situation where visitors to this country have to
fall into a queue to have their cellphones activated whereas roaming is
automatic in other countries.

In the second place, we are also concerned about the effective
implementation of the amendments. The cellphone market is one of the
fastest growing markets in the country and the additional administrational
load of service providers will be tremendous. Will they be able to cope? I
have serious doubts.

In die derde plek ontstaan die vraag of ons ons prioriteite reg het. Ons
het hier te doen met uiters gesofistikeerde programme om misdaad te beveg,
waarvan die koste baie hoog is, maar die basiese dinge, soos byvoorbeeld om
gewone misdaad alledaags te bekamp – plaasaanvalle, huisbrake,
voertuigdiefstal, roof, ensovoorts – bly agterweë.

In die vierde plek, reeds met die aanvaarding van die hoofwet in 2002, het
dr Delport daarop gewys dat dit nie billik is om die koste van
staatsveiligheid deur diensverskaffers te laat betaal nie.
Hierdie wysiging gaan vir seker nog addisionele koste vir
selfoonmaatskappye teweeg bring en uiteraard gaan die selfoonverbruiker
hiervoor betaal. Dit beteken dat Suid-Afrika se reeds buitensporige hoë
selfoonkoste nog hoër gaan word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[In the third place the question arises whether we have our priorities
straight. We are dealing here with extremely sophisticated crime-fighting
programmes, of which the costs are very high, but the basics, like, for
example, combating ordinary crime daily – farm attacks, housebreakings,
vehicle thefts, robberies, etc – remain neglected.

In the fourth place, already with the acceptance of the principal Act in
2002, Dr Delport pointed out that it is not reasonable to have service
providers pay the cost of state security.

This amendment will most certainly cause further additional costs for
cellphone companies and naturally the cellphone user will have to pay for
it. This means that South Africa’s already excessively high cellphone costs
will become even higher.]

This is a very short piece of legislation. It consists of only seven
sections, but the committee nevertheless spent many hours deliberating and
the final product is very different from the first reading draft.
From the opposition’s side I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee
for all her efforts in this regard. It is very much her Bill, although some
members of the committee refer to it as the Bassett Bill. However,
Chairperson, allow me a prediction. This is not the last amendment to Act
70 of 2002. I thank you.

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, Minister and honourable guests, I am reading
this speech on behalf of my colleague, hon Suzanne Vos.

The IFP was unfortunately unable to attend to this Bill in the Justice
committee. We must, nevertheless, place on record various concerns. The
state’s intention with the Bill is the national quest to combat crime and I
support it.

It would, therefore, help if various provisions of this Bill could be
implemented which, at present, cannot be implemented. The IFP, however,
questions the authority and the constitutionality of attempting to employ
the Minister to revoke licences. We can only hope that the President will
apply his mind to these issues before appending his signature to this Bill.

Other matters relating to the deactivation of handsets prior to
registration and international roaming are hugely problematical. The fact
that this Bill allows for its own provisions to be suspended for a maximum
of three months clearly, with the World Cup 2010 period in mind, is proof
enough that various injunctions are neither practical nor viable. The IFP
asks that its objection to this Bill be noted. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, this Bill seeks to amend the Racketeer
Influenced Corrupt Organisations Act which, members will recall, was
enacted to provide a further weapon in the fight against serious crime.

Many of the amendments are of a technical nature and are to be supported. A
new section was introduced to cater for the 2010 World Cup where there will
be an influx of foreigners with cellphones into the country. In this regard
the ACDP appreciates the concern surrounding restrictions on the use of
roaming facilities by foreigners visiting South Africa.

However, the global reach of international syndicates outweighs the
inconvenience of foreigners having to register their cellphones on arrival.
We can possibly consider technology that exists in other countries, which
we can make use of to ease registration requirements; mindful, however, of
what the portfolio chairperson said in this regard. We cannot allow
loopholes that will compromise the laudable objectives of this Act in
fighting crime.

The ACDP will consequently support this Amendment Bill. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, die doel van die wetsontwerp mag baie
edel klink, want ek glo nie daar is een politieke party of enige individu
in Suid-Afrika wat nie wil sê dat ons misdaad moet beveg en bekamp nie.

Die problem, Voorsitter, is egter dat ons wel die tegnologie het. Ons kan
sekere dinge doen om misdaad te bekamp, maar die vraag bly altyd: wie doen
dit? Ons kan maar ook sê watter maatreëls daar is. So mag byvoorbeeld net
’n regter toestemming gee dat daar meeluistering mag wees, maar die feit
van die saak is: die publiek het nie vertroue in die regering en die
amptenare van vandag om te sê dat hulle privaatheid nie geskend gaan word
nie.

’n Mens moet te veel verneem van amptenare wat die wet verbreek, wat
verkeerdelik optree. In die intelligensiedienste is dit reeds bewys, waar
amptenare misbruik gemaak het hiervan en daar nie opgetree is nie. As die
agb Minister vertroue wil skep, sal hy moet optree teen daardie lede.
Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, the purpose of the Bill might sound
very noble, because I don’t believe there is one political party or any
individual in South Africa who does not want to say that we should fight
and combat crime.

However, the problem, Chairperson, is that we do have the technology. We
are able to do certain things to combat crime, but the question always
remains: Who does it? We might as well say what measures exist. In this
way, for example, only a judge may give permission for telephone tapping,
but the fact of the matter is: The public does not have confidence in the
government and the officials of today to say that their privacy will not be
violated.

One has to learn too often of officials who break the law, who act
improperly. In the intelligence services this has been proven already,
where officials have made use of this and no action was taken. If the hon
Minister wants to create trust, he will have to act against those members.
Thank you.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, criminals have such intricate and intelligent
methods to commit crime. We only need to observe the horrific statistics of
crime in South Africa to realise that we have a duty incumbent upon
ourselves to venture all means to securing a safe South Africa.

In view of the cellphone communications of criminals, the MF finds this
Bill extremely favourable in tracing crime and assisting the South African
Police Service in having a handle on criminals.

With regard to a person needing to inform the service provider when he or
she sells his or her Subscriber Information Module - or SIM - a question
remains as to the efficiency of this actually being carried out.
Also, in view of tourists and the big Fifa games to be hosted in 2010, how
will government and the service providers manage this? We do believe that
this is a brilliant idea of having a database of users. However, the MF
feels that a registry body needs to be put in place that will manage the
entire use.

We also feel that clarity needs to be provided as to what communications
qualify as electronic communications. The MF will support the Bill.

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, throughout the world where citizens of
democratic societies, such as ours, are faced with threats to life, public
order and their property, and where the security of the state is under
threat, the interception of communications remains an important tool to be
used by law-enforcement agencies so that they can effectively protect those
rights. This is done under strict conditions that are set out in the law.

The regulation of interception of communications Act, that is the principal
Act, was signed into law by our President in 2002. We are now in 2007,
debating the amendments contained in the Bill that serve before this House.
Yet, there are many provisions of the principal Act which have yet to be
implemented.

What this means is that our law-enforcement agencies are still intercepting
communications in terms of Act 127 of 1992 – that is, the Interception and
Monitoring Prohibition Act. Indeed, the directing judge who is responsible
for considering applications for directives to intercept communications was
appointed in terms of Act 127. This is made possible by section 62 of the
principal Act, which provides for transitional arrangements.

The point being made here is that, in my view, too much time has lapsed
between the signing into law of the Act and the implementation of its
various sections.

One of the important measures contained in the principal Act is the
creation of the office of interception centres. This office was only
established in June/July 2006. Yet, it has taken these past 12 months to
get this office up and running efficiently and effectively and in a manner
that gains the confidence of our law-enforcement agencies.

As a member of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence I have been
privileged to be able to interact with all the role-players that deal with
the interception of communications. My experiences lead me to one
conclusion, Chairperson: The sooner all the provisions of the principal Act
are implemented, including the repeal of Act 127 of 1992, the better it
will be for all of us, except, of course, for the criminals. Delays may
also, heaven forbid, encourage our law-enforcement agencies to abuse the
system.

The amendments before this House go a long way towards helping to speed up
the implementation of the principal Act and hopefully will bring about
legal and operational certainty.

Very briefly, Chairperson, let me respond to some of the issues raised by
previous speakers. I want to agree wholeheartedly with the hon Minister
when she says the emphasis must now be placed on implementation. The hon
Chohan, in her speech, made note of the fact that we were poised to pass
this legislation in June 2006 and that we are now in August 2007.

The point raised by the hon Joubert bears consideration, that is that the
transfer of costs by the state to the cellphone service providers is
perhaps unfair and should not be followed by the state. We want to say that
this method is not unique to South Africa. All countries with similar
legislative provisions as ours have followed the same route.

With regard to the hon Groenewald: His pessimism with regard to this Bill
and this Act is regrettable. We take note of his concerns. It is all about
crime prevention, crime investigation and the protection of the properties
and rights of the citizens of this wonderful country.

Chairperson, a significant feature of our committee’s consideration of this
Bill has been the presence of a battery of lobbyists or employees
representing the cellphone service providers. Lobbyists are a natural and
welcome development within our democratic state; some would say a very
necessary development.

In this case, the lobbyists representing cellphone service providers have
proved to be a formidable and powerful group of individuals. Of course they
participated in the process in order to protect and promote the interests
of their respective companies and their shareholders.

However, given our experiences with these lobbyists, it is important to
sound a note of warning. Whilst the existence of lobbyists within the
parliamentary process is an important part of our democracy, such lobbyists
should not be allowed to control that process or to impose their will upon
it to such a degree that the process is abused and manipulated for the
benefit of the wealthy few or to the detriment of Parliament’s democratic
process or to the detriment of the public order and the security of the
state. Before this happens serious consideration would need to be given to
regulating the activities of such lobbyists in this honourable House. I
thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, firstly I want to thank all the parties that have supported
the Bill and all the hard work you put into this Bill, once again. It’s
really important because the hon Groenewald and others pointed it out. This
Bill is not a simple Bill; it is about allowing people to intercept our
communications.

This is a serious matter. A matter like this you cannot deal with
politically. What you have to do is a necessary evil, even what we need in
our society, and this party here, the ANC, knows that better than anyone.
We were the ones who suffered under the previous regime by people tapping
our phone calls and so on.

So, we fully understand the difficulties and the invasion in one’s life and
one’s privacy. And therefore, this Bill, driven by the ANC, must never
become a vehicle similarly to use for political undermining of any person
or meddling in their private life and so on.

So, it is very important with legislation like this that we get the right
balance, that we get the right checks and balances. Therefore, to those
people who worry about this legislation, I take you very seriously because
I take myself seriously on this piece of legislation.

This is not a Bill that we just want to have lying around and falling into
the wrong hands and being utilised by the wrong people.

I also think that the hon Landers has really covered the issue of the
length of time that it has taken for us to pass this Bill. You know that
this Bill was started at the end of the 1990s. We then started consulting
on this Bill. It went to the SA Law Reform Commission.

The Bill reached us for the first time in 2002. We took a whole year to
pass the original Act. It took another three years before we implemented
the legislation. It then took another intervention from the mobile cellular
operators to stop us for nearly another year to implement this amendment.

I really think that we must take the issues raised by Mr Landers very
seriously. With regard to the issue of lobbying, we cannot become like the
United States of America. You cannot have people in this House on both
sides being the direct spokespersons and the mouthpieces of lobbyists on
these issues. [Applause.] The effect of that is that we take almost a year
to pass a piece of legislation like this.

We must be careful: This legislation does not just allow us to intercept,
it also protects us. The first part of this legislation says that we
totally prohibit any form of interception which is not approved in this
legislation. So, all these private investigators, you talk about, hon
Groenewald, are acting illegally. They have no authority at all to tap or
intercept anyone’s communications.

In terms of this Act - I want the public out there to listen - if these
private investigators or anyone else intercepts your information and uses
it to pressurise you in negotiations or in business, lay a charge against
them. It is illegal, they have committed a crime.

Should any law-enforcement agency – and Mr Groenewald has mentioned some of
those examples – in this country say they have intercepted information,
where they never went to a judge to get an order to intercept that
information, you must go and lay a charge against them. They are acting
illegally and this law protects you.

This law has the balance – on the one hand it says to you that you are
protected from being intercepted. Any law-abiding citizen hasn’t got a
problem. Anyone else who wants to intercept must go to the judge and
convince the judge. A law-enforcement agency must convince the judge that
there is a proper case to have an order issued against them. Now, some of
the amendments today are exactly to make that law work properly.

If someone wants to get an order from the judge they can’t just go to the
judge and say, well, whatever communications Ms Mentor makes we want to
intercept it. They must give specifics to the judge, and that explains why
we need a registration process.

During the registration process you need to activate these phones. Now, the
principal Act we passed originally contained a registration process, but it
was a paper-based registration process and quite rightly, on this issue the
mobile cellular operators wanted to correct it by arguing that it is too
cumbersome; that’s the only issue they have been correcting.

On this issue they came to us as government and said that they wanted to
create an electronic solution and therefore the issue of cost, hon Joubert,
doesn’t come into it because it is their suggestion to do that, it is not
ours. They came to government and asked us to change this paper-based
system.

If we want to make sure that the law-enforcement agencies can do their
work, then every person, when they go and buy a SIM card, must go to one of
the outlets of MTN, Vodacom or Cell C and activate it. You activate it by
giving them your ID number, the number of your phone, the number of your
SIM card and your address. It takes one or two minutes.

They just punch the information into it. It is a little gadget like when
you activate your credit card. You put the information in and it takes you
one or two minutes. I don’t know about the suggestion of long queues. It
will depend on how many gadgets MTN and Vodacom have. If they have hundreds
of them all over the place, everyone will just go and activate.
That is why, of course, you need to allow people to register their phones
when coming into the country. Otherwise foreigners will not have to
register their phones but citizens will have to register their phones. All
I do is to drive across the border to Lesotho or Swaziland and go and buy a
SIM card and come back, and the police can never catch me. They can never
intercept my calls because I can go everywhere in or outside the country
and buy the SIM card and I will be free from the registration system.

All we say is that when you are at a port of entry, there will be cubicles
and all you have to do is to go and register just like we South Africans do
to register our phones. Give your ID or your passport, put in the number
and from there on you are registered.

If you don’t do that at the airport you can go to any cubicle and do it
there. It is such a simple thing. But if you don’t do it, then we can scrap
the Bill. We can scrap the Bill because all the big criminals will just go
outside the country and get the SIM card and come in from outside and evade
the registration system. We will never be able to intercept any of their
calls. So, who will ever pass a law like that? No country that has some
common sense could pass a law like that.

We have got a bit more than half a brain, as is the case with the IFP and
that is why we passed the Bill. You, the IFP, you guys are making
yourselves meaningless. You can’t come to Parliament at this podium and say
we have got a whole lot of members in the committee and we have never
attended the committee meetings and therefore we are going to oppose the
Bill.

Why are the taxpayers paying you? Why do you come to work? This Bill is so
important that you wanted to reject it and not use it as a tool against
crime. Why do you not attend these meetings? Why do you come to Parliament
to reject the Bill?

At least I can take the hon Joubert’s criticism about the Bill and deal
with it now because he was part of the committee. He knows what he is
talking about. I don’t have to agree with him, but at least I am arguing
with someone who knows something. But, guys, you come here and you have got
the temerity to tell us: “We didn’t attend the meetings, yet we are not
going to deal with this, we are going to reject the Bill.” What kind of
craziness is that? You will become completely meaningless in the next
election. You will only get 1% of the vote, even less than you are getting
now. I don’t want to take the last money that you have; save that for when
you haven’t got jobs.

I think we also have to look at the other issues that have been raised.
With regard to the 12 months that we have given for people to register
their phones, once this Act kicks in and people start registering, you and
I register when we buy new phones, we register and we activate them. But
now, people who have already got the SIM cards haven’t been registered and
we have to register them. The longer period we give for people to register
their old cards, the longer the system becomes meaningless because I just
use the old card if I am a criminal. I don’t buy a new card.

So if you start extending this period to 18 months and 36 months, it means
for the next three years this Bill will be useless and you won’t be able to
use the Bill.

So, that is why we have given a one-year period. Obviously, these mobile
cellular operators want to make money so they are going to make sure that
everybody who wants to use their phones is going to come and register their
SIM cards.

I don’t know what the fear is or what the problem is. They are going to put
up enough kiosks because otherwise they won’t make money. They like making
money, like any other business. They are going to put up the kiosks and
people are going to register. A 12-month period is more than enough time
for doing so.

This means that for 12 months there is a loophole in this Act. For 12
months criminals can use the old SIM card. I am telling them now, and they
know it. Sometimes the people that are talking on their behalf not to
register their SIM cards are actually the only ones making suggestions
advantageous to the criminals. The problem is that we will have problems
for 12 months, even when we get the system going.

I thank all who supported this legislation. As I said, we try and get that
delicate balance in trying to intercept criminals’ calls. They are the
people who are not doing the right things. But then, the Act protects all
the citizens who are good, law-abiding citizens.

We must remember this. When I saw the newspaper article written about this,
they never wrote about the part where the Act is protecting us. For the
first time in the history of this country it creates that protection for
people’s communications not to be intercepted arbitrarily. So, once again,
thanks to everyone who played a role in preparing this Bill and I
unconditionally support it on behalf of the ANC.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you hon, Deputy Minister.
That concludes the debate.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Inkatha Freedom Party dissenting).

       PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTION OF CERTAIN CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, Members of Parliament, South
Africa’s quest for peace and stability in the region and on the continent,
to a large extent, drives the agenda of the Department of Defence. An
important part of the quest is our adherence to international humanitarian
law, particularly the law on armed conflict.

Whilst we are committed to resolving armed conflict through peaceful means,
we must also be realistic and recognise that sometimes armed interaction
might take place. That being the case, it becomes necessary to regulate the
use of weapons so that human suffering would be limited as far as possible.

The Bill on the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects must be seen in this context.

We live in a world where, unfortunately, we have to use our technological
and scientific knowledge to create weapons that maximise human suffering
over and above anything that could be deemed necessary to defeat the force
opposing us. We therefore have to place a limit on what human beings can
use to fight one another. In war or armed conflict it is always the case
that innocent civilians get caught in the crossfire. The innocent civilians
I am referring to are, more often than not, women and children, the
disabled and the elderly.

The civilian population affected by hostilities thus must be protected as
far as humanly possible. We must therefore regulate the use of weapons that
cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering. The Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to be eExcessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects seeks to implement the international humanitarian law principle
that the right of parties to an armed conflict does not extend to them
having an unlimited choice of methods or means of warfare.

South Africa has signed and ratified this convention. The convention
identifies specific categories of conventional weapons and places
prohibitions or restrictions on their use. The convention further provides
that each state party should take all appropriate steps, including
legislative and other measures, to prevent and suppress violations of this
convention on any territory under its jurisdiction or control. South Africa
is therefore obliged to promulgate enabling legislation.

The main object of this Bill is to place the necessary restrictions or
prohibitions on specific categories of conventional weapons, thus
fulfilling South Africa’s obligation under the convention.
The convention requires that the restrictions or prohibitions be placed on
specifically identified categories of conventional weapons. The Bill
ensures that a distinction is drawn between categories of conventional
weapons that are prohibited and those that are restricted.

The following conventional weapons are prohibited: nondetectable fragments
and blinding laser weapons.

Use of the following weapons is restricted: mines, booby-traps and devices,
as well as incendiary weapons.

The Bill includes penal sanctions to discourage violations of the
convention. Any contravention of the Bill will be punishable by either a
fine or imprisonment, or both. So, chaps waiting there are ready for that
because they keep prisoners.

The Bill also seeks to address transgressions by South Africans acting
outside the borders of our country. South African citizens who contravene
the provisions of the Bill outside our borders will be deemed to have acted
on South African territory. The Bill was drawn up after consultation with
both the Department of Foreign Affairs and the SA Police Service. The
International Committee of the Red Cross was also consulted.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs will report annually to the Secretary-
General of the UN on South Africa’s compliance with the obligations of the
convention. I place this Bill before this House for you to consider and
approve. I thank you, Chairperson.

Ms T V TOBIAS: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, and hon members, the passing
of the Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill, the
CCW, by Parliament today confirms that South Africa as a state party
adheres to the international humanitarian laws and it also confirms that
the ANC is indeed an organisation with an international outlook.

In the same vein, the agenda of our government to have a peaceful country,
continent and world, is slowly coming into being and South Africa is a
force to be reckoned with as a progressive pace setter, by being an example
in taking decisions that other countries, especially the G77 countries are
hesitant to take. Therefore, we hereby salute our country for its bravery
and consistency in maintaining world peace and stability.

Hon members, today we are legislating on a convention which came into being
in 1980 and South Africa, through a democratic ANC–led government, became a
state party in 1995. The CCW seeks to limit the effects of armed conflicts
on both combatants and noncombatants.  Therefore, this legislation today
will give full effect to the convention as per the requirements of Article
14 of Protocol 2.
The portfolio committee underwent a trying time during the discussion of
this Bill. It had to consider the research and development that the country
acquired over time. We also had to consider the views of South African
defence-related industries and all stakeholders. In general we are maturing
and the impact of this legislation on these industries will be seen over
time.

The committee also did extensive research to look at how many state parties
that are signatories to the convention have legislated on this convention.
We discovered that South Africa is the first to legislate and the majority
of G77 countries had made both reservations and declarations to empower
their defence industries to remain in the economic nest.

Countries of the north continue to participate in activities that seek to
undermine world peace; an example is that of the role of America in Iraq.
Saddam Hussein is no more, but we are still looking forward to the
discovery of weapons of mass destruction, because all we observe at this
juncture is the flexing of muscles and a display by the American fleet of
their defence material in Iraq.

In my view, this suggests that America avoids participating in exercises
with other countries in case they learn their defence strategies, and
rather engage in violence and bullying of the weaker nations who do not toe
the American line in the United Nations Security Council.
If I may ask: At which point are we as citizens of the world going to
respect countries’ sovereignty? What lessons have we learnt from the Cold
War? Israel, for instance, used cluster bombs, cluster munitions and
phosphorus on Palestinian civilians who were not necessarily a military
objective and was against rules of engagement in a war situation where
civilian vicinities were not respected. One expects us to respect civilian
vicinities and not use cluster and explosive ordnance in an engagement of
war.

Much as we want to protect civilians and civilian objects, we also need to
protect our military objectives from grievous bodily harm. Therefore, we
need to protect our soldiers deployed in the Comoros, Darfur, Sudan and
elsewhere in peacekeeping missions so that they are not in any way hit by
these incendiary weapons, because they are holding the peace flag high and
help the destitute.

We also welcome deployment of the Nato warship to participate in Exercise
Amazolo with the South African Navy to maintain peace in the African
continent and in our waters in particular, to show that nations of the
world are indeed serious about keeping peace.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank colleagues in the defence
portfolio committee for displaying maturity and unity when dealing with
this legislation. This is a collective of individuals who are responsible
for national security. Our colleagues on the other side of the floor also
showed maturity. I really appreciate their participation.

Thanks to those members who sacrificed other responsibilities and sat in
all meetings that carefully crafted this piece of legislation, and also to
those officials who provided legal advice.

I therefore ensure that the ANC at all times supports Bills of this nature.
The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, it is not uncommon to see the
barbaric use of certain types of conventional weapons exacerbating
conflicts, causing so-called collateral civilian deaths.

Furthermore, some types of conventional weapons which are often left behind
long after the conflicts have been resolved continue to be of great harm to
the communities, causing them pain and injury. Places like Afghanistan and
others closer to home like Angola and Mozambique are typical examples of
such cases.

The Bill before the House, the Prohibition or Restriction of Certain
Conventional Weapons Bill, is designed to prevent the use and/or abuse of
such weapons. As a signatory to the UN Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons, referred to as CCW, South Africa is, in terms of Article 14 of
Protocol 2 of this Convention, obliged to enact enabling legislation in
order to give full effect to this convention.

Moreover, this Bill is in line with our Constitution, which seeks the
protection of life, property and the dignity of each person. The
parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Defence conducted public hearings on
the Bill on 7 and 8 August.

Various stakeholders, including the International Red Cross, the AMD, which
is the Aerospace, Maritime and Defence Industries Association – which
protects the interests of our local defence industry – the ceasefire
campaign, the South African Catholic Bishops’ Conference and the Institute
for Security Studies, as well as state organs such as the Department of
Foreign Affairs and SA Police Service, amongst others, made submissions and
inputs. They all supported the Bill in principle. However, some of them had
certain reservations in terms of some of the definitions, whilst others had
objections to some clauses or certain clauses which they felt might
negatively impact on their activities. For example, the AMD felt that some
aspects of the legislated prohibition and restriction of certain
conventional weapons would unduly limit their research and development
capacity and the scope of some of South Africa’s defence industries,
especially work done on dual use technologies.

The International Committee of the Red Cross commented that although the
regulation of harmful conventional weapons was important, the non-
compliance of state parties to the convention was a cause for concern and
argued for the need for both a domestic and an international body to ensure
the implementation of legislation.

The Institute of Security Studies, while supporting the Bill, raised some
very key issues, such as the lack of a proper definition of what exactly a
blinding laser weapons system was. They also felt that the Bill was not so
clear on how South African citizens serving in foreign militaries that are
participating in giant peacekeeping operations with elements of the armed
forces of other non-signatory states may be affected by this Bill.

So, the members of the committee took serious note of the impact that the
extraterritorial implications of the Bill would have on the protection of
intellectual rights, as well as the rights of foreign nationals who may be
involved with such prohibited conventional weapons and who may enter the
jurisdiction of South Africa in terms of air, sea and land and whose
respective countries are not signatories to this convention.

Time does not permit me to provide in detail the various issues that were
raised by various stakeholders in relation to the Bill – they are too many.
However, I assure the House that the committee took into account all the
concerns of the relevant stakeholders and, to the best of our ability,
effected necessary and possible legal changes or amendments to the Bill.
That was done, I must add, at very short notice.

I would like to thank the Department of Defence, especially the people from
the legal services department, and the legal services of Parliament and the
research unit for their expertise, the various institutions which made
submissions during the public hearings as well as the chairperson of our
committee and my colleagues – members of the committee – for their
diligence and their co-operation. This is a good piece of legislation.
Therefore, the DA will support the Bill. [Applause.] Thank you.

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, I will gladly speak on behalf of the hon
Sibuyana and we have duly notified you thereof. Nevertheless, the core
objective of this Bill is to incorporate the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects into domestic
law, as our country signed and ratified the convention.

Passing this Bill will therefore mean that we have executed our obligations
in terms of the convention. Conventional weapons of war have in recent
years developed to the point where they are more destructive and lethal
than in the past.

Furthermore, despite sophisticated targeting systems conventional weapons
still take a disproportionate toll on noncombatants such as civilians,
especially when deployed indiscriminately. In terms of this law and in
terms of international humanitarian law, it is therefore appropriate that
the use of certain conventional weapons should be prohibited or restricted.


When the Bill was first tabled, the IFP was concerned about two major
issues. The first was the effects the original Bill would have on South
African forces which were deployed in international peacekeeping forces
that included foreign forces that had not signed the convention and had all
of the relevant weapons in their arsenals. We asked whether this meant that
our force could not be deployed with such foreign forces or whether it
meant that we would be breaking our own laws if they were so deployed.

Civil society has also raised this practical problem, and we are satisfied
that during the consideration of this Bill the portfolio committee and the
department took our concern seriously and decided that the UN or AU mandate
for any peacekeeping mission would take into account the convention and the
prohibitions or restrictions on certain weapons. We need therefore not fear
that our forces will break our own laws.

The second concern was the extraterritorial application of the Act and
jurisdiction. The IFP felt that domestic law should apply to South Africans
but that it would be very difficult practically to claim jurisdiction over
foreigners who committed offences in terms of the Act outside the territory
of the Republic. In the end, a compromise was reached, to our satisfaction,
that such persons would be tried if the offence could be tied to an
intention to affect a public body, business or any other person inside
South Africa.

Finally, the IFP would like to thank the chairperson and the portfolio
committee, the department and civil society for continuing to contribute to
a more polished and practical final Bill. The IFP will support the Bill.
Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP notes that the Portfolio Committee on
Defence initially expressed concerns about the impact of the Bill on the
ability of SANDF members to protect themselves in conflict situations. We
appreciate, however, that the department itself motivated the Bill to
comply with our international obligations and that the public submissions
were broadly supportive of the Bill.

Antipersonnel mines have a devastating impact on civilian populations, so
one must support provisions that prohibit the use of such mines. The
problem, however, arises in the fact that enemy forces will, in all
likelihood, not adhere to these international obligations, particularly
rebel forces in countries where the SANDF is carrying out peacekeeping
roles. The security of our SANDF members could then be compromised.

Nevertheless, when balancing that with the good that will come in
restricting the use of such weapons, one cannot but support the Bill. The
ACDP trusts that member states will follow the South African example in
enacting similar legislation. We will support this Bill. I thank you.

Rre M S MOATSHE: Modulasetilo le Ntlo e e tlotlegang, go tswa mo lekokong
la ANC le le eteletseng puso e pele, re dira boikuelo mo Ntlong e, gore e
amogele Molaotlhomo o wa Kiletso le Kganelo ya Tiriso ya Ditlhabano,
Marumo, Dithuthupi le dingwe tse di ka dirang gore motho a foufale, le fa e
ka nna go golafala, mme e se lesole e bile a sa amege ka gope mo dintweng.

Maikaelelo a Molaotlhomo o, ke go sireletsa ka kakaretso batho botlhe
kgatlhanong le ditlamorago tsa ntwa, e bile re le Repaboliki ya Aforika
Borwa, ka re dirisana mmogo le mafatshe a boditšhaba, re pateletsega go
tlotla melawana ya boditšhaba e e saenetsweng. (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M S MOATSHE: Chairperson and august House, as government led by the
ANC, we appeal to this House to adopt the Prohibition or Restriction of
Certain Conventional Weapons Bill, and prohibit other explosives and
weapons which can cause blindness or disability of a person even though
that person has not been a soldier or was not involved in any war
activities.

The aim of this Bill is to protect all people in general against the
consequences of war, and as the Republic of South Africa we have to live up
to our diplomatic obligation as international relations laws dictate.]

The Republic is committed to accede to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Weapons Which May Be Deemed to be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.

The South African citizens who may be found to have committed an offence in
terms of this Act may be tried by a court of the Republic of South Africa.
Again, a person who is a permanent resident, as contemplated in the
Immigration Act of 2002, may be tried by a court of the Republic.

Motho mang kapa mang yo a nang le kgolagano e bile a ikwadisitse jaaka
moagi wa Aforika Borwa o tla otlhaiwa ke kgotlatshekelo ya Aforika Borwa fa
a ka fitlhelwa a dirisitse gongwe a tshotse dithuthupi tse di kailweng di
le kotsi go batho ba e seng masole, go sa kgatheletsege gore o dirisa
dibetsa tse a le kwa mafatsheng a kwa ntle ka go ithaopa le fa e le ka
ditaelo tsa mafatshe ao.

Re lemoga gore go mafatshe mangwe a dibetsa tse re buang ka tsona tse di sa
ilediwang, e bile di bonwa jaaka tse di se nang kgoreletso kgotsa molato –
mafatshe ao e bile a sena kgolagano epe le Repaboliki ya Aforika Borwa –
fela fa o le moagi wa Aforika Borwa o fitlhelwa o tshwere dibetsa tseo kwa
mafatsheng ao, ga o kitla o falola. O tla di gama o sa di tlhapela.

Fa moagi wa kwa ntle ga Aforika Borwa a ka fitlhelwa a tshotse ditlhabano
tse di ileditsweng, e ka nna kwa mawatleng, boemafofane gongwe mo gare ga
naga ya Aforika Borwa, kgotlatshekelo ya Repaboliki e tla tsaya kgato
kgatlhanonong le motho o o ntseng jalo.

Fela fa motho wa kwa ntle ga Aforika Borwa a ka etela Repaboliki a
dirisitse dithuthupi gongwe dibetsa tse di ileditsweng ke Repaboliki kwa
nageng ya gaabo, mme lefatshe la gaabo le sena kamano le Aforika Borwa
gongwe e se karolo ya maikano a go fedisa ditlhabano tse di ntseng jalo,
gona Repaboliki e tla tshwanelwa ke go busetsa motho yo o kwa nageng ya
gaabo.

Re bone ka 28 Phatwe 2007 dithuthupi tse di setlhogo tseo, di gaila baagi
ba ba se nang molato kwa Hyderabad, borwa jwa India. Go kailwe fa go
dirisitswe sediriswa sa khemikhale se se bidiwang neogel. Ke dingwe tsa
dilo tse re buang ka tsona. Go tlhokafetse batho ba e seng masole ba le 40,
mme ba le 80 ba tswa dikgobalo tse di siisang mmele. Ke ka fao ANC e
itirelang boikuelo gore go amogelwe Molaotlhomo o, gore go nne le kagiso mo
lefatsheng ka bophara. ANC e amogela Molaotlhomo. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.]
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[South African courts will take punitive action against anybody who has
diplomatic relations and has registered as a South African citizen if they
are found with explosives classified as dangerous to people who are not
soldiers, regardless of whether he or she used these weapons voluntarily in
a foreign country or used them with instructions from that country.

We are aware that there are countries where these weapons are not illegal
and are not seen as dangerous or injurious, and some of these countries
that do not even have diplomatic relations with the Republic of South
Africa. But if you are a South African citizen and you are found in
possession of these weapons in those countries, you will face the might of
the law.

If a foreign citizen is found in possession of illegal weapons, be it at
the beach or an airport, or inside South Africa, a South African court will
lay a charge against the said person. But if a foreign citizen visits the
Republic and is found to have illegally used explosives or weapons
prohibited in South Africa, and his country of origin has no diplomatic
relations with South Africa or his country is not a part of the declaration
to eradicate such weapons, South Africa will have no choice but to
extradite such person.
On 28 August 2007, we saw these dangerous explosives killing innocent
people in Hyderabad, south of India. It is said that a chemical called
neogel was used. These are some of the things that we are talking about.
About 40 civilians died, and 80 were seriously injured. We as the ANC
therefore make an appeal that this Bill be passed, so that there can be
peace in the whole world. The ANC supports this Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr J SCHIPPERS: Chairperson, thank you for the opportunity to participate
in this debate. I want to focus on the prohibited and restricted
conventional weapons, as contained in sections 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the Bill.
The Bill ensures that a distinction is drawn between categories of
conventional weapons that are prohibited on the one hand and restricted on
the other. Prohibited conventional weapons refer to nondetectable fragments
and blinding laser weapons. Let us deal with this category.

Protocol I of the convention deals solely with the nondetectable fragments.
It briefly states that the use of any weapon of which the primary effect is
to injure by fragments which cannot be detected in the human body by X-rays
is prohibited.

Protocol IV of the convention deals with the use of blinding laser weapons.
Article 1 prohibits the use of laser weapons specifically designed to cause
permanent blindness to the naked eye. It is clear that no country that
ratifies the protocol shall transfer such weapons to any state or nonstate
entity. Article 2 specifies that in the event of the use of such weapons,
countries should take feasible precautions to avoid the incidence of
permanent blindness. Article 3 refers to blinding as an incidental or
collateral effect of the legitimate military employment of laser systems,
including laser systems used against optical equipment. Article 4 spells
out what is meant by permanent blindness, namely the irreversible or
uncorrectable loss of vision which is seriously disabling with no prospect
of recovery.

The second category is restricted conventional weapons, which include
mines, booby-traps or other devices and incendiary weapons. This Bill
describes the former as weapons which employ a mechanism or device
specifically designed to detonate ammunition. It is prohibited in all
circumstances to direct these weapons either in offence, defence or
reprisal against the civilian population. The indiscriminate use of such
weapons also includes the indiscriminate placement of those weapons.
Feasible precautions must be taken to protect civilians from the effects of
these weapons.

With regard to antipersonnel mines this Bill is not applicable, because
they are prohibited in terms of the Antipersonnel Mines Prohibition Act,
Act 36 of 2003.

Section 7 of the Bill refers to the incendiary weapons, which means weapons
or munitions which are primarily designed to set fire to objects or cause
burn injury to civilians through the action of flame, heat or combination
thereof, produced by a chemical reaction of a substance delivered on the
target.

In terms of section 10 of the Bill any person in possession of any
prohibited weapon or component part immediately after the commencement of
the Act, must within six months notify a police official of such possession
and hand it over to the South African Police Service. All weapons and
component parts collected shall be forfeited to the state. In closing, the
ANC supports the Bill.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the apartheid regime ventured into nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons research in the 1980s with six nuclear
weapons being assembled. However, when we were predicted to become a
democracy in the 1990s these weapons were dismantled. Either way, we were
the first nation to voluntarily give up the development of nuclear arms.

The MF applauds the fact that the democratic South Africa is a peace-loving
nation. South Africa has a history of international agreement on weapons as
a signatory to the biological weapons convention since 1975, the chemical
weapons convention since 1995 and the nuclear non-proliferation treaty
since 1991. This Bill is set to bring the legislation in line with the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects. As a strong advocate for human rights the MF
supports the Bill. Thank you

Mr S B NTULI: Chairperson, in my speech, I want to clarify one thing. The
extraterritoriality of this Bill suggests that if you are an outsider from
a different country, and you have committed those actions that are outlawed
in terms of this legislation, we are not necessarily going to try you with
this legislation, because it is meant for South Africans. So, the
territorial question must also be clarified.

We do not want to assume to be the police of the world. What we want is
that, as a country, we also do what the Geneva Convention asked us to do as
a country. We also expect other countries to endorse and adopt and ratify
this convention. That is the first thing I wanted to say.

I also want to stress that, in our preamble, we say that we as the Republic
commit ourselves to this international humanitarian law, and particularly
the law on armed conflict. We further recognise the general principle of
protection of the civilian population against the effects of hostilities.
We further recognise the principle of international law, that the right of
the parties in an armed conflict to choose methods or means of warfare is
not unlimited. In other words, the Geneva Convention actually places a
restriction, through this Article, that certain elements cannot be applied
in this regard, even if you are using them in conventional warfare.

For us particularly, this Bill should also add or go a long way in making
sure that we reduce the number of victims, since this is the month of
women. We need to reduce the number of victims where we see women, because
in a conflict you see them carrying babies and so on, roaming about,
because they have to run away from the war-torn situations. This convention
is then also an attempt to make sure that we cleanse the world of such
barbaric acts.

I then also want to just highlight the issues that we are covering when we
talk about these restricted weapons. We are talking here of antipersonnel
mines, nondetectable fragments, mines, booby-traps and other devices and
blind lasers and so on. I want to agree with the comrade who said that one
of the things that we have to try to do since the definition of these terms
in a material situation tends to be different, is see to it that this
doesn’t delay us in implementing this legislation. The only thing we have
to do is to make sure that the definitions are internationally agreed to.

I then want to read an excerpt from the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission’s Report. It has to do with the disappearance of one of South
Africa’s citizens:

  In May 1990 De Kock went to see Du Toit to discuss an order he had
  received to manufacture a parcel bomb which would be posted to Coetzee to
  kill him.  De Kock required assistance and expertise of his branch and he
  agreed to help.  De Kock’s visit was to him in his personal capacity,
  thereafter Bosch visited J F Kok and they came to see Du Toit.  He agreed
  they could continue working on the project.  J F Kok began working on a
  design for the bomb but when he had to leave the office his brother J Kok
  took over.  The bomb they made had explosives inserted into the earphones
  of a Walkman unit which played audio cassettes.  This had been chosen for
  two reasons, the first being that it would not cause damage or injury to
  anyone else in the vicinity of the person listening, the second being that
  cassettes could be chosen which would attract Coetzee’s interest.  One was
  his favourite musician Neil Diamond, the other one labelled “Evidence –
  Hit Squads”.  After the first device had been completed and tried out
  successfully a second one was built which, according to J Kok was fetched
  by Bosch and Bellingan who helped with packing.  Both the Kok brothers
  knew Coetzee was the target.

But listen:


  The parcel arrived in Johannesburg and was delivered to Mlangeni on 15
  February 1991.  He opened the parcel in his office and left the packaging
  there.  He took the Walkman home and when he tried it out it exploded
  causing fatal massive head injuries.


That was what brought to an end the life of Comrade Bheki Mlangeni.

Therefore, one of the objectives of the Bill is to rid our society of such
antipersonnel devices. The convention on warfare is governed through the
Geneva Protocol, which cautions us against the use of excessive force
against your enemy.

As we look back at the period during which the aforementioned incident took
place, it was really an unnecessary force used, bearing in mind the
historical and political developments at the time on the eve of the
Convention for a Democratic South Africa. Similar mine devices cost us the
life of Ruth First in Mozambique and many more. Thus this Bill is in line
with the ANC policy to opt for nonviolence, which means that it came as a
result of the banning of the ANC in the early eighties.

As we are now part of government, and we are in power, we are also
integrating into the international community. We also have to comply with
the international community’s law by signing, ratifying and passing this
Bill into law in compliance with Article 14.

I therefore recommend that the House agrees with the ANC, as it has already
indicated, to pass the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, I want to take this
opportunity to thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee, members of
the portfolio committee and all parties who supported this Bill. I agree
with them that some of these weapons kill people long after the conflict
has ended. That is how dangerous some of them are.

I’m happy that the concerns of the defence industry were taken into
account. Of course it would be impossible to satisfy the defence industry
because as far as they are concerned, this Bill, to a certain extent,
affects their businesses. But, unfortunately we have committed ourselves as
the government and especially as the Department of Defence to peace, and we
want to make sure that there is peace in the world. The only unfortunate
thing that we know is that there will not always be peace in the world.
When there is war we must be able to know how we limit our effort to make
sure that there is peace.

I want to assure members that this convention does not affect in any way
our ability to fight wars. We can fight wars and we are capable of
defending our country. Many of us had agreed that this conference deals
with the injurious and indiscriminate killing of innocent civilians.

I again want to thank everybody and I am also very happy, as a man of God,
to hear and see that South Africans are committed to peace. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                    LOCAL GOVERNMENT LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson and hon
members, our country’s Constitution charges local government with the
responsibility of delivering specified sets of services to the people. The
institutional context in which this task is being undertaken has proved to
have some unintended ineptness, which restricts the ability of the system
to meet our expectations.

The particular issues of concern which are the subject of the Local
Government Laws Amendment Bill of 2007 are embedded in the core local
government legislation such as the Municipal Demarcation Act, the Municipal
Structures Act, the Municipal Systems Act and the Municipal Property Rates
Act.

Shortcomings in the implementation of these laws have been identified and
it is our considered view that there is an urgent need to take legislative
steps in order to stabilise the system and to optimise its functional
efficiency.

We came to this view after consultation with various stakeholders who
generously shared with us insights that were gained in the crucible of
practice. These stakeholders include national government departments and
provincial departments responsible for local government affairs, as well as
the SA Local Government Association.

In addition to enhancing local government’s underlying systems and
processes, we are also proposing to encourage utilisation of the ward
committees as the primary institutional modality of rooting democracy
amongst the people and for generating mass participation in matters of
government.

The adoption of core local government legislation, as well as related
legislation which falls under the functional domain of other departments,
has rendered some existing legislation redundant. Such legislation will
have to be repealed. At the same time, there is a need to ensure proper
alignment between various pieces of legislation and therefore this is one
of the objects of this legislation.

All these issues will exercise the collective mind of members of the
Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government who, in turn, will
set the stage for us to meet again on the occasion of the Second Reading of
the Bill. I wish to thank them in advance and to express a hope that we
will interact on the Bill soon. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, the DA welcomes the Bill. These changes have
been long overdue and we feel that it is still not comprehensive enough.
The DA will support all measures to hold councillors and officials more
accountable and make this sphere of government perform better.

The effort to change the Municipal Systems Act and to allow for clearer
differences between officials and political activists, by forcing municipal
officials to resign when they become official candidates for national and
provincial elections, is welcomed.

Too many officials do political work during office hours or behave as
political activists in their work situation. We further caution whether it
is constitutional to force officials to resign or rather to be forced to
leave. This is a matter that will have to be debated within the committee.

We welcome section 106(4)(a) of the Municipal Systems Act that provides
that the Minister may request the MEC to investigate maladministration,
fraud, corruption or any other serious malpractice that, in his or her
opinion, has occurred or is occurring in a municipality in the province.
The MEC must provide the Minister and the Minister of Finance with a report
on the investigation, detailing the outcome of the investigation. We need
more investigations and discipline. Thank you very much.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP welcomes the Local Government Laws
Amendment Bill as tabled here today. Since 1994, many changes have come
into effect as local government progressed through its different stages of
development. New municipalities and metros were formed and new directives
on how to manage these local authorities were put in place in order for
them to fulfil their commitments.
Governance in local government is intimately connected with the people we
serve, thus it must not stagnate. There needs to be constant change to all
legislation pertaining to local government management and the participating
role that communities play to determine their own future. It is very
important to have an active and a well-empowered ward committee system in
every ward as a matter of urgency, thus we need a fresh look at new ward
committees, their functioning and their empowerment of participating role-
players.

The ACDP therefore supports this First Reading debate on the Local
Government Laws Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Chairperson, I would like to commend the Minister for the
amendment. I think one has to go directly to the DA that is making a big
noise here: The main reason this Bill is to be amended is to make sure that
there is a specific section – clause 6 – that provides for compulsory
establishment of ward committees by municipalities, whereas in those
municipalities where the DA is in power such a process was not allowed. The
same applies to the IFP in KwaZulu-Natal.

This Bill is intended to make provision for the out-of-pocket expenses of
ward committee members. As you would know, during our last visit to the
municipalities in 2003, this was an issue of concern.

The Bill is also intended to make sure that the duties and powers of ward
committees, the inclusion of the deputy executive mayor, as well as the
participation of municipal staff members in the national, provincial and
municipal elections are all looked into.

The other reason is to make sure that all the apartheid laws whose
legislative process the very DA was party to, are to be dealt with and to
be changed, together with the by-laws that were undermining the
developmental agenda of the ANC. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Chair, I don’t know what the previous speaker has listened to
and where – I can’t work it out. But I will stick to what I wanted to say.

I have said that in the existing legislation governing local authorities
amendments are required other than what is currently contained in the Bill
now before Parliament. There are many clauses in this Bill, however, which
should be welcomed. Examples of such improvements are the curtailment of
the term of office of municipal managers and the compulsory provision of
municipal accounts to both landlords and tenants.

Unfortunately there are also disconcerting amendments. One of these is that
municipal managers will in future have the sole right to decide on
investments of the council. You can rest assured that entities seeking
investments from municipalities will be wining and dining municipal
managers. Therefore, the door could be opened for corruption. The provision
which is made for members of ward committees to be reimbursed for out-of-
pocket expenses equally leaves the door open for corruption and
mismanagement as there is no definition in the Bill to clarify the meaning
of out-of-pocket expenses.

The fact that the formation of ward committees will become compulsory is
not as worrying as the fact that municipalities are once more saddled with
unfunded mandates. This Bill does not provide for reimbursement to
municipalities of the increased expenditure to be incurred by having to pay
not only for the out-of-pocket expenses of thousands of ward committee
members, but also for secretarial services. In the case of Cape Town, for
instance, 105 ward committees must be formed and minutes of all their
monthly meetings must be kept.

The capacity certainly does not exist within municipalities to carry the
extra workload with the current staff. Additional staff will have to be
appointed at great cost. The usage of IDP committees by municipalities
would have been more to the point and would have served the interests of
the community just as well as ward committees. Out-of-pocket expenses will
have to be paid, as I said, to thousands and thousands of ward committee
members in South Africa, and I am sure that the municipalities have not
budgeted for this.

There are flaws in the Bill, but we will nevertheless support it. Thank
you.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, the Department of Provincial and Local
Government took a step even before the committee did so. We welcome this
exercise because it represents an important aspect of the work that we are
doing in the field of governance, namely monitoring and evaluating
legislation and the impact it has on what it was intended to do, and
therefore identifying things that urgently require cleaning up – so to
speak. This Bill seeks to do that and does it in an interesting way.

This Bill also represents an important political opportunity for us to
reflect on what we must do to address current problems that relate to
municipal governance and so on. So, the four Acts that are the subjects of
the Bill are an important aspect. The Bill provides the community and the
stakeholders that work in this area an opportunity to point out to us those
areas that we must attend to, so that we can speed up and accelerate
service delivery and ensure that the law does not itself become a hindrance
to that provision.

Most importantly, the Bill is an exciting one because it says to us that in
those areas where we have provided legislation such as the Municipal
Finance Act, some of the aspects of the previous legislation that came
before it must then be made to comply with it so that you have a better
alignment of broad legislative issues with financial and intergovernmental
financial flows, as the Bill suggests.

I am amazed at the remarks that are being made about corruption that
relates to ward committees when in fact what we are doing is saying that
there is a positive view about these issues. There’s important work that is
being done without anybody saying anything about the free contribution of
people’s time, their energy, and their own money. There is no
acknowledgment of that contribution that is useful to deepening democracy
in this country. All we are doing is going for isolated incidences of
corruption that have not even taken place. This is how negative some people
can be.

I would have thought that we would appreciate the opportunity for deepening
democracy – and nobody ever said that it’s going to be a cheap exercise.
It’s an absolutely important issue to recognise that in deepening democracy
we are not going to have it free and it’s not going to be available to us
in any other cheaper way. It is important to acknowledge the contribution
that people are making and, in fact, support them in establishing a deeper,
more dynamic interaction between people.

This Bill also provides an opportunity for us to look at other legislation
and the relationship between this one piece of legislation and other
pieces, so that we have a more coherent system that does not conflict with
other pieces of legislation. We therefore welcome this opportunity and
those stakeholders that may have missed the bus during the introduction of
this Bill in the Government Gazette. The committee is opening up that
space. We have already invited submissions. So, members must tell their
constituencies to come and contribute. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: I take your advice that I
am under no obligation to respond. But I just want to thank all the hon
members for their participation in this First Reading. I think that they
gave us a good flavour of what to expect when the discussions take place in
earnest in the portfolio committee itself.

I thought I should also respond quickly to what the hon member Swart was
saying about the ward committees – the concern that this is going to be an
unfunded mandate. I think it’s important that we all take note of the fact
that government has been consistent in ensuring a massive increase in the
year-on-year equitable share allocation to local government. We have
emphasised the need for local government to make sure that some of our
important activities are indeed prioritised when allocations are made to
individual programmes of municipalities.

Public participation, at least in the post-1994 dispensation in matters of
government, is not an optional extra. It goes to the heart of our own
conception of a democracy. If this is the basis on which we are going to
approach our work, then we expect municipalities not to see these increases
in the equitable share allocation as something that has nothing to do with
generating and improving levels of public participation in matters of
government. So, we would expect them to make use of this resource to ensure
that ward committees are formed throughout the country. By the way, the
establishment rate today stands at over 96%. We want to see them being
established everywhere in the country, including in Cape Town. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                    CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson of the portfolio
committee, Members of Parliament, it is absolutely crucial that before
delving into the actual amendments proposed I outline a critical context to
these developments which will help everyone understanding the foundation of
the changes we are proposing.

One of the defining characteristics of South Africa’s transition from a
repressive apartheid regime to a country whose prowess in constitutional
changes is celebrated the world over, is the transformation of the
country’s prison system. The adoption of the South African Constitution in
1996 marked a pivotal point in the history of prisons in South Africa, as
it instructs us to ensure a detention system that is based on the Bill of
Rights. The Bill of Rights outlines human rights as one of the inalienable
rights human beings should be entitled to, with significant implications
for the country’s prison system.

The White Paper passed by our Cabinet in February 2005, therefore, was a
milestone that placed correction of the offending behaviour and
rehabilitation of offenders at the centre of our mandate. With this new
strategic direction we seek not only to tighten security and protect the
victims and the public from thousands of offenders, but to protect the next
victim of any offenders when they finish their sentences while still very
energetic with capacity to further maim or injure society.

We therefore seek to address a very complex social phenomenon whose
elements include addressing deep-rooted causes of the drive to commit
crime, limiting the social stigmatisation which becomes a hurdle in social
reintegration, intervening in a manner that empowers offenders to lead
socially responsible and productive lives after release, and mobilising
families, communities and various role-players to take up a more proactive
and constructive role in ensuring the efficacy of the country’s
correctional system.

This new approach, which is also informed by the extensive experience and
the best practices we have accumulated over years, is not accommodated in
the existing Correctional Services Act. It therefore became imperative to
initiate and to drive this process leading up to today’s First Reading of
the Correctional Services Amendment Bill.

I shall endeavour to outline the rationale more comprehensively, to unpack
the suggested changes and the envisaged scenario and social impact, before
giving some details on the exact changes proposed.

Besides the basic alignment of the Act with the new language framework and
some technical changes to some names and words, there are six key issues on
which the suggested amendments are based, which include: firstly, the
enhancement of societal participation in the rehabilitation and social
reintegration of offenders; secondly, modifying the conditions for the
incarceration of sentenced mothers with babies; thirdly, providing a
legislative framework for the new model for rehabilitation; fourthly,
improving humane treatment of inmates; fifthly, improving the
administration of the parole and correctional supervision system and
lastly, streamlining of the functions of the judicial inspectorate to
enhance its capacity to deliver on its mandate.

Community participation is regarded as the epitome of an effectively
functioning correctional system, which the White Paper alludes to with
absolute clarity in chapters 3 and 13. These chapters elaborately unpack
how families, communities and various stakeholders need to contribute in
advancing the cause of corrections. The current scenario is such that there
is no legal framework for realising the ideal outlined in these chapters
other than mere familial contacts.

I have for a number of years received numerous requests from people who are
aware of the challenges we are faced with and who had volunteered to get
into our centres to make a contribution – doctors, social workers and other
ordinary members of society. With the amendments being approved, in
particular clause 13, the National Commissioner of Correctional Services
can and may allow community organisations, nongovernmental organisations
and religious formations to interact with offenders for rehabilitation
service delivery and even engage them where required to deliver the
services on behalf of Correctional Services. Clauses 50 and 68 also seek to
give the national commissioner powers to mobilise or accept volunteers in
community corrections.

With regard to the sentenced mothers with children, the issue of the length
of time children can spend with their sentenced mothers is also being
addressed, with the reduction of the legally permissible period from five
years to two years. This is informed by extensive research conducted, which
demonstrates that the requisite child-mother bonding and stimulation can be
achieved within the first two years of the birth of a child.

Various developed countries have provisions for children to stay with their
mothers for a period of between 12 and 18 months. We took cognisance of the
fact that the environment in a correctional facility is not conducive for
the overall development of children, in particular during the first five
years of their lives.

We understand the requirement for effective early childhood development and
the resources we have can better assist those younger than two years. As we
strengthen family and community participation in correctional centres, we
will also be able to engage better with families to take responsibility for
closing the gaps – assisted, of course, by departments like Social
Development and Education.

With regard to the Offender Rehabilitation Path, we have also sought to
provide a legal framework for our new model that is captured in the
Offender Rehabilitation Path – ORP – adopted for guiding the management of
an offender life cycle from admission to social reintegration. The
department is now implementing the unit management system through which
correctional sentence plans that address personal development needs are
developed.  So, clauses 37, 38, 40 and 41 of the proposed Bill are helping
to close the gaps identified in the current Act, including the provision of
care to offenders.

The other crucial element is the promotion of humane treatment of
offenders. Although this is clearly spelt out in the Constitution, the
scope for abuse of power and authority existed with our single cells used
for punishment for transgressions committed during incarceration. The Bill
seeks to outlaw the punitive use of the single cells for solitary
confinement. And this lot here will never know what solitary confinement is
all about.

The Bill introduces oversight mechanisms for the use of these single cells,
which include the compulsory reporting of such a decision to the judicial
inspectorate and to the Commissioner of Correctional Services with an
intervention plan for correcting the offending behaviour and a need for the
supervision of the implementation of such decisions. These provisions
outlined in clauses 24, 30 and 31 will equally apply in cases where further
restraints are required while an offender is in a single cell.

With regard to the correctional supervision and parole boards, the other
crucial element is the improvement of the administration of the parole
system. The White Paper is premised on a need for the restoration of harmed
human relations and the creation of an interactive process at every stage
of the delivery of correctional services. Offenders will be provided with a
platform for oral representation in the parole system, while also
empowering the correctional supervision and parole boards to compel the
offender to participate in correction, development and social reintegration
programmes within the prison, in communities – as you saw in Khayelitsha –
and in society at large.

The provision of parole is the sole responsibility of the executive arm of
government. It is a contract between the government and the offenders to
continue serving a portion of their court sentence in the community,
subject to specific conditions. The current Act prescribes minimum non-
parole periods and thus erodes the government’s responsibility to
rehabilitate an offender and thus grant parole when and where the offender
has demonstrated acceptance of responsibility and commitment to avoid
reoffending.

In prescribing minimum non-parole periods, the Act invariably creates an
expectation - that’s the principal Act - and a culture of entitlement to
parole. The Bill seeks to address this through the executive authority
prescribing an incarceration framework on the advice of the National
Council on Correctional Services. The application of these provisions is
based on the assessment of the impact of various corrections and
rehabilitation interventions on the offender.

The introduction of the incarceration framework in clause 73A will ensure
consistency in the application of the Minister’s powers in this regard. It
is also important to note that in terms of section 73A(3) “the
incarceration framework may not be applied in a manner that would be in
conflict with any other law or any direction given or decision made by a
court of law”.

The whole parole system has been enhanced alongside the improvement of
rehabilitation interventions and therefore there is unprecedented capacity
for effective management of the system.

Last, but not least, the Bill seeks to relieve the inspecting judge of the
administrative burden through the appointment and seconding of a chief
executive officer to the judicial inspectorate to manage the day-to-day
operations. The intervention will enhance the inspecting judge’s focus on
mainstream issues of ensuring effective oversight and adherence to the
constitutional and legal provisions aimed at ensuring detention of
offenders under conditions that are consistent with human dignity.

I am quite confident, Madam Speaker, that these changes will indeed place
the delivery of correctional services on a new pedestal and affirm our
position as a key player in the transformation of the prison system not
only in South Africa, but also in the continent.

I am also very sure that these fundamental issues I have raised will need a
fundamental shift in the mental framework of many people in order to
understand that they are key to reducing reoffending and therefore to the
safety and security of the South African public. I wish to make a call to
you as public representatives and to the public at large to join in
building a national partnership to correct, rehabilitate and reintegrate
offenders for a safer and a more secure South Africa. Thank you,
Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Minister. Before I
recognise those who have indicated to speak, I want to remind all that the
nature of the debates, as envisaged by the programming committee, was to
provide for the Ministers to respond or reply to concerns raised by members
during the debate or clarify issues. However, Minister, you said that you
have waived because you wanted to go into the introduction; otherwise that
is what was envisaged.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, I don’t know what happened but the Minister
seems to be upset today. But, I don’t think one should just generalise in
what you were saying, Minister. The ACDP, in fact, welcomes the amendments
to the Correctional Services Act. For us it is of paramount importance that
the correctional and rehabilitation services succeed in our country, with
most correctional centres overcrowded with far more inmates than they were
actually created for.

The ACDP acknowledges that inmates should be treated in a humane manner at
all times. They must be protected against one another and against
gangsterism and against some Correctional Services staff members. On the
parole system the Bill intends to improve the administration of the system
by streamlining communications and allowing better representation for
inmates coming up for parole.

The Bill also seeks to create better opportunities with caregiving, NGOs
and religious organisations. The Correctional Services Amendment Bill
intends to broaden the relationship with communities and NGOs involved in a
process of reintegrating offenders into society. Public participation is of
outmost importance in an effort to ensure that when inmates return to
society they do not choose behaviours which are unlawful and find
themselves back in jail, either willingly or unwillingly.

The ACDP, therefore, supports the First Reading of the Correctional
Services Amendment Bill.

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, much in this particular Bill is unobjectionable.
It changes the terms and in some respects brings the Act in line with the
concepts that were articulated in the White Paper to which the Minister
referred.

The Minister made a number of comments about the Bill, some of which I
would like to respond to. The first issue was that concerning mothers and
children. I quite understand where the Minister comes from in terms of
making sure that wherever possible children should not grow up in a prison
environment. But, the fact of the matter is that each child is different
and has different circumstances, and we are certainly not a developed
country in the same sense as many countries in Europe.

It is a fact that the crèche that is in the women’s prison in Pretoria is
much better than crèches in many of the communities from which many of the
inmates come. It might actually be preferable for those children to grow up
in that environment rather than being put in foster care, which might
destroy the family relationship.

This Bill is already before the committee and the committee has started
dealing with some of the more controversial aspects of it. These include
the fact – which the Minister referred to – that the Minister, in
consultation with the National Council for Correctional Services, may
determine minimum periods of sentences before inmates may be considered for
parole. At the moment inmates must serve a minimum period of between one
sixth of their sentence and 25 years in the case of life sentences. I think
this is one of the things that the committee has to grapple with because it
is controversial that the executive can now, as it were, determine the
minimum periods of sentences.

The real problem is that it is one thing to legislate and it is another
thing to bring about changes in the correctional system. I will just give
you one example: The current principal Act contains in section 7 a
provision that prisoners must be held in cells which meet the requirements
prescribed by regulation in respect of floor space, cubic capacity,
lighting, ventilation, sanitary installations and general health
conditions.

Now, we all know that prisons throughout South Africa are grossly
overcrowded. These regulations were promulgated in 2004 and they provide
certain minimum standards for building and accommodation. In two replies to
me, the Minister admitted that only 22 facilities of the 241 that DCS
manages actually conform to the regulations. So, the plea that I would make
is that we look very carefully at what we put in the Act to make sure that
the state itself can comply with the conditions that are contained in the
Act. It is hopeless if we have an Act in place and the state itself is
unable to comply with those provisions.

That is why I am very pleased that the Bill contains a provision requiring
the national commissioner to provide a compliance report ... Thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, we from the ANC want to welcome this amendment
and we think it is long overdue. I think the Bill is dealing with very
fundamental issues and amendments. The most important thing that the Bill
wants to address is the issue of children in prison.

We are busy, as a portfolio committee, talking about this Bill and holding
public hearings, so that we may hear from the public and we will come back
to this House and debate it.

For now I want to welcome the introduction of this Bill. Thank you very
much.

Ms M P MENTOR: Chairperson, I am not speaking because the Minister used my
name, I was going to speak anyway. In fact, I thought that he read my mind.

The ANC agrees with this amendment – I do as a member of the ANC. I would,
however, still raise two issues that I would like the Minister to go and
address, even if he has already forfeited his right to reply here, and I
would also ask the committee to consider these two aspects.

The one issue is the promotion of human rights, as well as human dignity
for prisoners, which I do not squabble with – my organisation and our
government also support it. In fact, our struggle was based on the quest
for human rights principally.

However, there is a perception in the South African citizenry that the
human rights of inmates are better than the human rights of those whom they
have offended in breaking the law. I think that is an issue that we have to
address. For instance, if a rapist has been found guilty of rape, the rape
act itself is dehumanising and it is degrading and it affects one’s human
dignity. But in terms of international law and protocol you have to secure
the human rights of a prisoner who has diminished and violated the human
rights of a woman in raping and dehumanising her. So, I think these are the
issues that we will have to go and look into.

The second issue is that of an inspecting judge not having the right to
deal with issues of corruption and maladministration, in that this
responsibility will be given to the investigating unit, which will be
appointed by the national commissioner. Now, what happens if it is the
national commissioner that is corrupt? Will the investigation unit that he
or she appoints be impartial when it has to investigate and report on
maladministration or corruption on the part of the person that appointed
them?

These are the two critical issues that I would request be looked at.  If
the Minister had not forfeited his right to reply, I would sit here and
wait for his response. But, because he has already forfeited his right to
reply, I would hope that he would reply to me in writing at least, and that
the committee would consider these two issues. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF EXTRADITION TREATY
       BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRCA AND THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, the first treaty is the extradition treaty
before us today, which is a fairly standard treaty that we tend to deal
with from time to time in the justice committee and, having considered the
request for the approval of the extradition treaty between the Republic of
South Africa and the Argentine Republic, the committee recommends the
approval of the extradition treaty in terms of 231(2) of the Constitution.

We also want to put on record that should the House want us to embark on a
study tour to Argentina to ensure that this extradition treaty is fully
implemented we will have no objections as a committee and we will fully
comply with such a request.

I am not sure if you want me to deal with the next one as well?
[Interjections.] To where? Iran? We are waiting for that extradition treaty
with bated breath and we volunteer fully. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are there any objections to the
approval of the extradition treaty as it appears on the Order Paper? No
objections.

Extradition Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the Argentine
Republic approved.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF TREATY BETWEEN THE
     REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC ON MUTUAL LEGAL
                       ASSISTANCE IN CRIMINAL MATTERS

Ms F I CHOHAN: This treaty is also a standard treaty that we deal with and
the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
considered the request for approval of the treaty, recommends that the
House approves it in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution. Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are there any objections to the
approval of the treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the
Argentine Republic as it appears on the Order Paper? No objections.

Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the Argentine Republic on
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters approved.

  Consideration of request for approval by parliament of convention between
 the government of the republic of south Africa and the swiss confederation
    for the avoidance of double taxation with respect to taxes on income

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF Convention between
  the government of the republic of south Africa and the government of the
  Portuguese republic for the avoidance of double taxation with respect to
                               taxes on income

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF Convention between
  the government of the republic of south Africa and the government of the
  kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the avoidance of double taxation with respect
                             to taxes on income

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, I had not decided on the country where we would
want to take our study tour. [Interjections.] That is a very good
suggestion.
We have these three conventions here which, on behalf of the committee, I
would like to also implore this House to adopt.

These conventions before the House today are an important feature of our
democratic order as we relate to other countries outside of our borders in
relation to taxes. The main purpose of these agreements is to remove
barriers to cross-border trade and investment. We have three of them; the
first one is between our country and the Swiss Confederation, the next one
is with the Portuguese Republic and then with the government of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia.

The double taxation agreements between South Africa and the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the Portuguese Republic are new agreements, and the one
with Switzerland is a renegotiation of an existing agreement.

The convention with the government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia comes
shortly after the visit by our President to Saudi Arabia in March this
year, and it is South Africa’s commitment to the relationship of the two
countries. This agreement takes into account the unique nature of the two
countries’ regimes and provides for tax certainty in the treatment of our
professionals who work there. An exemption from tax in the host state is
provided for two years in respect of teachers and researchers.

Article 20 of the agreement with the Portuguese Republic differs in that it
refers to the exemption in respect of professors and researchers only. The
chairperson of the committee was fully briefed by the department on these
conventions both prior to the ratification and after, and we are satisfied
that they are in line with our country’s policy and don’t undermine any of
our macroeconomic imperatives.

Therefore, on behalf of the committee I wish to implore this Parliament to
ratify these agreements. Thank you, Chairperson.

There was no debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are there any objections to the
approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Government of the
Republic of South Africa and the Swiss Confederation for the Avoidance of
Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income as it appears on the Order
Paper? There is no objection.

Convention between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Swiss Confederation for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to
Taxes on Income approved.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are there any objections to the
approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Government of the
Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Portuguese Republic for
the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income as it
appears on the Order Paper? No objections.

Convention between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Government of the Portuguese Republic for the Avoidance of Double Taxation
with respect to Taxes on Income approved.


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are there any objections to the
approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Government of the
Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income as it
appears on the Order Paper? No objection.

Convention between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the Avoidance of Double
Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income approved.

The House adjourned at 17:12.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 76).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
         South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 101-2007].

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
3.    The Minister in The Presidency

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
         Council of South Africa (IMC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 144-2007].

4.    The Minister of Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
         Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 168-2007].

5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker Museum –
         Isigcinamagugu for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [PR 107-2007].


