---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 May 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-05-16
---

WEDNESDAY, 16 MAY 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

House Chairperson Ms C-S Botha took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I intend moving
the following motion:

   That this House –


   (1)      notes that according to the recently released South African
         Unemployment Report, increasing numbers of South Africans are
         opting for self-employment as a means to survive; and


   (2)      resolves to debate the importance of leveraging informal sector
         growth for the purpose of effecting job creation.
Thank you.

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I intend moving
the following motion:

  That this House resolves to debate the role of the private sector in
  skills development and the inappropriateness of the Seta system as a
  response to our skills development needs.

Thank you.

    ACCOMMODATION FOR PATIENTS FROM OUTLYING AREAS ATTENDING LIVINGSTONE
                                  HOSPITAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr C T FROLICK (ANC): Voorsitter, die Livingstone-hospitaal in my
kiesafdeling is een van drie hospitale wat deel vorm van die Port Elizabeth-
hospitaalkompleks. Saam met die Provinsiale Hospitaal en die Dora Nginza-
hospitaal lewer die kompleks gesondheidsdienste aan duisende inwoners van
die Nelson Mandela-metropool.

Verlede jaar het my kiesafdelingskantoor bewus geraak van ’n aantal
pasiënte afkomstig uit landelike gebiede buite die metro, wat ’n dag voor
die tyd na die hospitaal reis vir behandeling die volgende dag. Die rede
hiervoor is dat vervoer uit die landelike gebiede skaars en onbetroubaar
is. Die gevolg is dat tientalle siek, kranklike pasiënte snags sonder
heenkome is en die rusbanke of die vloer in die hospitaal gebruik om op te
slaap.

’n Gesamentlike projek deur die bestuur van die hospitaal, 12 kerke van die
United Congregational Church, die Syringa Huis vir Bejaardes en my kantoor
het daartoe gelei dat alternatiewe oornaggeriewe vir sulke pasiënte
geïdentifiseer is.

Met die hulp van vrywilligers het my kantoor verantwoordelikheid aanvaar om
15 kamers by die nabygeleë ouetehuis te herstel, op te knap en te verf. Die
kerk, op sy beurt, aanvaar verantwoordelikheid om die kamers van meubels en
ander benodigdhede te voorsien. Vrywilligers uit die gemeente hou saans
toesig oor die pasiënte en bedien hulle die volgende oggend met ontbyt
voordat hulle by die hospitaal gaan aanmeld.

Die fasiliteit is op 10 April 2007 amptelik geopen en het tot dusver
oornaggeriewe gebied aan behoeftige mense vanaf plekke soos Sedgefield, die
Langkloof, Humansdorp, Paterson, Graaff-Reinet, Addo, Kirkwood, Uitenhage
ens. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr C T FROLICK (ANC): Chairperson, Livingstone Hospital, situated in my
constituency, is one of the three hospitals that form part of the Port
Elizabeth hospital complex. Together with the Provincial Hospital and the
Dora Nginza Hospital, the complex renders health services to thousands from
the Nelson Mandela Metropole.

Last year my constituency office became aware of a number of patients from
rural areas outside of the metro who start their journey for treatment at
the hospital a day before their appointment date, the reason being that
transport from the rural areas to the hospital is erratic and unreliable.
As a consequence, many sick and frail patients are without shelter for the
night and use the benches at the hospital or the floor to sleep on.

A joint project by the management of the hospital, 12 churches from the
United Congregational Church, the Syringa Old Age Home and my office has
led to the identification of alternate overnight accommodation for such
patients.

With the help of volunteers, my office has accepted the responsibility of
fixing, restoring and painting 15 rooms at the nearby old age home. The
church, on the other hand, has accepted the responsibility of furnishing
the rooms and providing whatever is still necessary. Volunteers from the
congregation look after these patients at night and serve them with
breakfast the next morning before they report to the hospital.

This facility was officially opened on 10 April 2007 and has to date
provided overnight accommodation to needy people from as far afield as
Sedgefield, the Langkloof, Humansdorp, Paterson, Graaff-Reinet, Addo,
Kirkwood, Uitenhage, etc. [Time Expired.]]

          ANTICIPATED SHORTAGE OF COMMUNITY SERVICE DOCTORS IN 2008

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): House Chairperson, the DA calls on the Acting Minister
of Health urgently to develop a plan of action for the staffing crisis
looming for public hospitals next year. South Africa is heading for a major
health catastrophe in 2008, when the number of community service doctors
entering the system will be cut to a quarter of the usual intake, because
of the effects of a reduction in the length of medical degrees.

Community service doctors are the backbone of many hospitals and, in fact,
in some rural hospitals they are the only doctors available. The effect of
this will therefore be disastrous. It may well result in many patients
dying and will most certainly result in many sick people going untreated.
The situation in public hospitals will be compounded by the already high
vacancy rates for doctors and nurses in permanent posts.

One of the specific services likely to be affected would be the roll-out of
ARVs and the associated testing that accompanies this process. The new
strategic plan for HIV/Aids requires a massive staff complement,
particularly from doctors. The Department of Health has at this time no
contingency plans to help hospitals cope with the impending problem of a
reduced number of community service doctors, despite repeated requests to
do so by many stakeholders. The department needs to do its job and make a
plan. Thank you. [Applause.]

   GOVERNMENT’S FAILURE TO INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AGAINST HUMAN TRAFFICKING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE (IFP): Chairperson, I wish to draw attention to the
evils of human trafficking and our government’s embarrassing failure to
honour its undertaking to take concrete action in this respect.

Human trafficking is nothing less than a modern form of slavery, and all
governments of the world should unite to eradicate every form of human
trafficking. Unfortunately, however, South Africa has failed for three
years to make good on its undertaking to comply with international minimum
standards for the elimination of human trafficking.

Already in 2004, that is three years ago, South Africa ratified the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime and its anti-
trafficking protocol. Government then committed itself to passing
comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation and develop national procedures
for victim protection. The sad news, unfortunately, is that after three
years, South Africa is still failing to honour its obligation. It is indeed
very embarrassing for all South Africans to note that South Africa is still
on the international watch list for failure to honour its word.

In the public interest and in conclusion, I give notice that unless
government introduces comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation within a
month, I shall be submitting a Private Member’s Bill to do so.

                         LAND CLAIM IN SIMON’S TOWN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B A HOGAN (ANC): Chairperson, Mr Toefy, an elderly land claimant, has
twice been promised settlement on his claim for a prime and beautiful piece
of land in Simon’s Town, and twice the Land Commissioner has reneged on the
deal. In 1997 the then Minister of Land Affairs signed off on an agreement,
but the Department of Public Works stepped in at the last moment to veto
that agreement.

In 2003 they promised to give him alternative land in a less prime area in
exchange for a larger portion of property. They did not honour that
agreement either and only paid him a paltry R40 000 for the smaller portion
of the property. The entire property is valued at several million rand
today.

Despite the law stipulating that he is entitled to legal assistance, both
the Legal Aid Board and the Land Claims Commission have declined to assist.
In a letter from the lawyers they say that the Land Claims Commission has
rebuffed us and instructed us to seek funds from the Legal Aid Board. The
Legal Aid Board has in turn advised us that they have no funds available
and that the commission has funds available for these matters, which the
Legal Aid Board cannot access or distribute.

Mr Toefy has been dealt a terrible injustice. He has been waiting 12 years
for his claim to be addressed. Twice his hopes have been raised and twice
they have been dashed. Now he cannot even get the financial help he is
entitled to.

I wish to draw the attention of this House to the fact that this is not an
isolated incident in Simon’s Town. The famous Luyolo community and many
others have faced enormous frustrations and delays. We cannot and may not
allow this situation to continue. [Applause.]

                INCLUSION OF KHUTSONG IN NORTH WEST PROVINCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM notes with dismay the
continuing protest action in Khutsong, where there is widespread
unhappiness in the community regarding their summary inclusion in the
province of North West. Taxis are boycotting, schools are empty and the
streets are filled with scenes of riot police and burning tyres.

While this situation is regrettable, one cannot deny that the community is
using the only means at its disposal to communicate with the government
that is refusing to listen to them.

The provincial boundary change process occurred without proper
consultation. It is not surprising that more than one community felt
aggrieved about this drastic change being unilaterally imposed upon them.
The height of the irony is that the ruling party will not even reconsider
this provincial demarcation, but it is more than happy to discuss
internally the scrapping or reduction of the provinces.

What does it say about participatory and transparent democracy when the
ruling party would rather talk to itself than the citizens of the country
on such vital matters? I thank you. [Applause.]




             SUPER-14 RUGBY FINAL AND STATEMENTS BY MR KOMPHELA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER: Voorsitter, dit is uniek in die geskiedenis van rugby in
Suid-Afrika dat twee spanne – die Bulls en die Sharks – in die eindstryd
van die Super-14-reeks teen mekaar speel. Die VF Plus wens hulle geluk met
hierdie besondere prestasie.

Hierdie prestasie en die oorwinnings oor die Australiese en die Nieu-
Seelandse rugbyspanne dui baie sterk daarop dat Suid-Afrika vanjaar ’n baie
goeie kans het om, soos in 1995, die Wêreldrugbybekertoernooi te wen.

Die regering se taak ten opsigte van sport is om finansieel te help met die
ontwikkeling van sport op alle vlakke. Die VF Plus steun hierdie
ontwikkeling sodat alle spelers ’n gelyke kans het om die nasionale span te
kan haal.

Internasionale sport en Wêreldbekertoernooie is egter nie die plek vir
regeringsinmenging in die keuse van sportspanne of politieke eksperimente
nie. Indien die regering die agb Butana Komphela se voorstel steun dat ’n
meriete Wêreldbekerrugbyspan se paspoorte ingetrek word ten einde te
voorkom dat hulle aan die Wêreldbekertoernooi kan deelneem, sal ek reël dat
die Minister van Sport en Ontspanning of die agb mnr Komphela hierdie
besluit persoonlik op Loftus voor ’n groot wedstryd en Suid-Afrikaanse
rugbyondersteuners, wat met hul betrokenheid en geldelike bydraes rugby aan
die gang hou, kan kom verduidelik. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, it is unique in the history of South African
rugby that two teams – the Bulls and the Sharks – play against each other
in the final match of the Super-14 series. The FF Plus congratulates them
on this special achievement.

This achievement and the victories over the Australian and the New Zealand
rugby teams indicate very strongly that South Africa has a very good chance
of winning the Rugby World Cup Tournament, as they did in 1995.

It is the government’s duty towards sport to help financially with the
development of sport on all levels. The FF Plus supports this development
so that all players will have an equal chance to reach the national team.

However, international sport and the World Cup Tournaments are neither the
place for government to interfere with the selection of sports teams nor
the place for political experiments. If the government supports the hon
Butana Komphela’s proposal that the passports of a Rugby World Cup team,
chosen on merit, are withdrawn in order to prevent them from participating
in the World Cup Tournament, I will arrange for the Minister of Sport and
Recreation, or the hon Komphela, to come and explain this decision in
person at Loftus before an important match and in front of South African
rugby supporters, who keep rugby going with their involvement and financial
contributions. I thank you.]

                 VISIT BY SURVIVORS OF SHARPEVILLE MASSACRE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S A MSHUDULU (ANC): Madam Deputy Chairperson, the ANC lowers its banners
with pride and comfort in welcoming the survivors of the 1960 Sharpeville
massacre in Cape Town. This delegation is led by the executive mayor of
Sedibeng District Municipality, Comrade Mlungisi Hlongwane.

To remember the brutality that was committed 47 years ago and to celebrate
the human rights we now enjoy, the Sedibeng District Municipality organised
this trip of 100 survivors from the Sharpeville massacre. These visitors
are men and women who were in the famous march. Some of them were shot and
injured and others are family members of those who were killed.

This journey of living history is connecting the Sharpeville survivors with
other struggle veterans in the Western Cape. Yesterday they visited Robben
Island, where they left a plague acknowledging the links between their
struggle and the struggles of many other freedom fighters who were
imprisoned there. Tomorrow they will be with us in this Parliament,
witnessing the fruits of their struggle for freedom.

The ANC, as the leader of the people, wishes to extend a warm welcome to
these heroes. This visit is another step in deepening the link between the
commemoration of the Sharpeville massacre and the struggles of so many
communities around the country for human rights.

The ANC hopes that Parliament, led by the Speaker, will offer them the
hospitality that they so rightly deserve. I thank you.  [Applause.]

                     TASIMA CONSORTIUM AWARDED CONTRACT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B FARROW (DA): Madam Chair, the R408 million eNatis contract was
awarded to the Tasima consortium during September 2001. City Press reported
that a Tasima employee claimed that the system was implemented without
being tested properly with a realistic number of people using it
simultaneously, in order to meet deadlines. If this is true, then the
Minister and the contractors must both address this issue before the
portfolio committee.

Since its implementation almost a month ago, on 12 April, eNatis has been
overrun with problems. Newspapers have reported widely on the dysfunctional
system – eNatis has now become synonymous with bottlenecks at traffic
centres, excessively long queues, traffic centre closures and now rising
transaction fees. Despite this very apparent and damaging evidence, no one
has owned up to the expensive and frustrating eNatis blunder.

Instead, on 8 May, the Department of Transport communicated that the eNatis
system would be up and running on Wednesday, 9 May. National transport
spokesperson, Collen Msibi, was reported as saying: "We would like to say
that the system is up and running and we would like people to go to their
traffic centres tomorrow for transactions on the eNatis system.".

Despite the department’s apparent attempt at a public relations exercise,
the chaotic reality paints a very different picture. The public has a right
to know exactly what is going on and who is taking responsibility for
rectifying this unacceptable situation. The Minister can no longer continue
to smooth-talk the eNatis system’s obvious problems as he has done over the
past month. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                SUCCESSFUL COMMUNITY POLICING IN GARSFONTEIN

                            (Member’s Statement)
Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Chairperson, the success in fighting crime
effectively is vested in good co-operation between a motivated SA Police
Service, a committed local community, vibrant community police forums, well-
organised security companies and other important role-players.

Good teamwork between all involved in the fight against crime, combined
with a will and dedication to succeed at local level to take our streets
back from criminals, contributes to building safer communities.

The Garsfontein Police Station in my constituency area is walking the talk
in fighting crime successfully. Just recently, this police station has been
equipped with additional personnel and operational equipment as well as
vehicles. Even the station building is getting a facelift. Attendance of
community police forum meetings is on the increase, and collectively, the
community is determined to win the fight against crime.

This is an unfolding success story. There is, however, one element lacking
in this success story, namely that the SAPS at this police station is not
allowed to share the statistics of declining priority crimes in the area
with the community police forum and the motivated, inspired local
community. Serious consideration should be given to sharing crime
statistics with the local community where successes are achieved. By
working together, we will achieve success. I thank you. [Applause.]

               REINCORPORATION OF MATATIELE INTO KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P F SMITH (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP marched in support of the people
of Matatiela on 8 May to express our solidarity with the community that
struggled to remain part of KwaZulu-Natal. It is clearly its right, despite
the government’s wish to transfer the region to the Eastern Cape. We will
continue to express our support in whatever way we can.

The IFP is fully aware that the people of Matatiela are tired of
nondelivery and being sidelined. For these reasons, they want to give up
their Eastern Cape connection in favour of being reincorporated into
KwaZulu-Natal.

The people of Matatiela must be allowed to choose where they want to
belong. There is a good case. There are good pragmatic, economic and other
reasons for granting them their wish.

The people of Matatiela are trailing behind in receiving basic municipal
services. As a result, development in many areas has come to a halt.
Furthermore, the lawmakers in Pietermaritzburg are only two hours away,
compared to seven hours that it takes to reach Bisho.

The IFP views the fact that the people of Matatiela mobilised against the
way the decision was imposed on them from above by way of a petition and by
public protest as a triumph of civil society. The IFP appreciated the move
by the Constitutional Court which, in response to an appeal from the people
of Matatiela, ruled invalid the constitutional amendment and the subsequent
legislation that sought to change the boundaries between the two provinces.
The IFP cannot support the government’s attempts to redraw provincial
boundaries against the will of the residents concerned. We stand by the
people of Matatiela. I thank you. [Applause.]


                  SANDTON-ROSEBANK ANC CONSTITUENCY OFFICE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H P MALULEKA (ANC): Madam Chair, the ANC Sandton-Rosebank constituency
office was opened in November last year to service the Sandton, Rosebank
and Alexandra constituency community. It is under the Zone 16 ANC
jurisdiction, which is one of the greater Johannesburg regional zones.

As of now, we have a co-ordinator who is responsible for data collection of
all nongovernmental organisations, churches, business concerns and all
sectors of influence. The construction of the Gautrain is taking place
within my ambit and on my doorstep.

Our constituency office is faced with challenges of taking Parliament to
the people. It has a challenge of managing development and high-class
transformation projects. Marginal communities and sectors have an
opportunity of reorganisation and realignment. Any problems faced by the
community can be best addressed by members Oupa Monareng, Dan D K Maluleke
and Errol Megaman. We are available every Monday from 10:00 to 17:00.

Prominent businesspeople, Ministers and personalities reside within our
constituencies. We are therefore grateful to feel welcomed and safe in this
community. I thank you. [Applause.]

                      SETAS’ ROLE IN SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE: The dressing down given by Finance Minister Trevor Manuel to
labour union leaders on Workers’ Day was little else than a ploy to deflect
attention away from government’s failure to deliver on skills development.
Minister Manuel’s reported comments attribute the inefficiency of the
Sector Education and Training Authority in part to the lack of proper
oversight done by Seta boards, on which labour enjoys 50% representation.
While the lack of proper oversight is admittedly a problem throughout
government, the notion that the inefficiency of the R5 billion Seta
bureaucracy will be enhanced by increased intervention from labour unions,
whilst the role of the private sector has roundly been ignored by
government, is simply ludicrous.

It is vital that the important role of the private sector in skills
development and the inappropriateness of the Seta system as a response
thereto be recognised by the ANC government. I have therefore placed a
motion before Parliament to debate the issue at the earliest opportunity.

The private sector constitutes the demand side of skills development in
this country. As such, it is the growth needs of the private sector that
determine what skills should be developed, and how. Yet government has
thought it good to remove skills development from the hands of the private
sector and put it in the hands of a highly interventionist state
bureaucracy, which it does not have the capacity to steer effectively.

As Minister Manuel’s comments show, despite the many failures of the Seta
bureaucracy to effect a skills revolution, the ANC government still has no
inkling of what the real problems behind the slow pace of skills
development in South Africa are. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    TEACHING OF COMPUTER SKILLS AT INANDA
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H C MGABADELI: Chairperson, I quote President Thabo Mbeki, who spoke of
“the happiness that can come to men and women if they live in a land that
is free”. Inanda has proved to do that.

Masibonge emakhosini athanda abantu bawo, sibonge inkosi uNgcobo
ngokubambisana kwakhe noZakithi Magubane oyikhansela lesigceme 3.
Impumelelo iyaqhubeka. Siyabonga Ngqongqoshe wezolimo.

Sibonga kakhulu ngale ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[We thank amakhosi who love their people. A word of gratitude goes to
Inkosi Ngcobo for co-operating with Zakithi Magubane, who is a councillor
for ward 3. Success is on the increase. We thank you, Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs.

We are thankful for ...]

... a visible working relationship with the substation at Mtshebeni. Thanks
to Director Mgobhozi and his team, indeed the maximum number of people from
Inanda see the need for the existence of the police service.

Regarding joint efforts with the youth and education, we want to thank Dr G
Msimang, who is a Cluster B team leader at Inanda. He has really opened up
the issue of a long-lasting solution to scarce skills. Hallelujah to the
Department of Education. Each one teach one!

What a joy to mothers, fathers and their children attending computer
lessons together with the assistance of government communication Abet at
Inanda. Many thanks to the Department of Communications, including CEO
Sibonisile Nozipho Mbatha. Now, women, old and young, are sending and
receiving their own emails at Inanda. They have bridged the digital divide.
The globe is at their doorstep. Phambili [Forward], ANC! [Applause.]

                   MEMBERS OF THE POLICE INVOLVED IN CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Thank you, Madam Chair. I didn’t know that you were
going to call us.

The unacceptably high level of crime in our country has affected the lives
of all South Africans. It is unfortunate that crime has now become part of
our everyday lives. This makes the fight against crime and the work that
the brave men and women of the SA Police Service have to perform more
urgent.
A co-ordinated and concerted effort is needed if we are to make
inroads and win the fight against crime. It is therefore disappointing that
a police officer was one of the five men arrested last week after being
linked to a cash-in-transit heist in Limpopo.

The dishonest action of a few police officers not only unfairly undermines
the good work that is being done by the many other hardworking policemen
and women; it also erodes the public trust and confidence in our police
service. It is for this reason that dishonest police officers who obstruct
rather than contribute to the fight against crime must be weeded out of the
police service, brought to book and jailed. Thank you.

                     PROVISION OF SANITATION IN SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Chair, it is a great concern for the IFP
that Minister Hendricks, the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, warned
that government’s stated goal of supplying all schools with proper
sanitation by 2008 will not be realised in time because of a lack of
capacity in various municipalities.

The Minister was speaking at a summit in the North West. During discussions
at the summit, it became clear that the biggest challenges faced are the
lack of skills and capacity within municipalities as well as a shortfall in
their budgets. An estimated R3,1 billion is still needed to eradicate the
sanitation backlog in the entire North West Province.

In 1996 the sanitation backlog in the North West was 390 000. Now, eleven
years later, the backlog figure still stands at a massive 296 000. That not
all schools have access to adequate sanitation remains a grave concern for
us. This issue is a priority, as poor sanitation in the school environment
has a ripple effect on the lives of the learners.

Relevant departments should work with the Department of Education to ensure
that sanitation is provided in schools that do not have these facilities or
where they are inadequate. I thank you.


             SUPER-14 RUGBY FINAL AND STATEMENTS BY MR KOMPHELA


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, we want to join the hon
Mulder in congratulating the Blue Bulls and the Sharks on qualifying for
the finals of the SANZA Super 14 trophy. These boys and their coaches have
obviously done very well to reach this level of the competition.

But we want to warn South Africa that we must not be complacent. Whilst we
were focusing on preparing for the Super 14 competitions, the other
countries were preparing their players for the World Cup that is coming in
France this September. To start this process of preparing for the World Cup
now, is going to need more than parliamentary speeches and recalling old
and retired players who may have been very good in this local competition.
What will be expected of us is broad-minded and creative selectors and a
leeway for the leadership of rugby football to lead in the process of
preparing our players for this World Cup in France.

Parliamentarians would do well not to march up and down in the streets and
the stadia of South Africa because they want to interfere with this
process. They would do well not to raise their concerns to the detriment of
these elected leaders doing their work properly. [Interjections.] Those who
marched at Loftus Versveld, MPs from that side, were interfering. Those who
gave our players reason to show greed on the playing field rather than
shouting in Parliament, are the ones who will help South Africa play well
in France this coming September. [Interjections.]

Remember what happened in 1974? You were complaining, moaning and shouting
like you are doing now, and you lost all the series. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, may I ask: Is the hon Minister making himself
available for the Springbok side? We are not quite sure what he is trying
to get at here.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: If the hon member had ever played
rugby, he would never ask that question. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I did play rugby. I don’t quite know what point
he is making. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Excuse me, hon Ellis. I would like to
continue. Let me just state the Ministers I have recognised. They are
Erwin, Pandor, Didiza, Hendricks and Balfour.

                     TASIMA CONSORTIUM AWARDED CONTRACT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (for the Minister of Transport):
Chairperson, I presume that the quality of rugby played by Mr Ellis is the
reason he is in Parliament, or possibly his age. [Laughter.]

Chairperson, I’m currently the Acting Minister of Transport. Clearly,
whilst the eNatis process is very important for us to automate the system,
the problems we are having are a matter of concern. I will communicate with
the Minister of Transport because I think it is important that we have a
full statement on exactly what the position is. I’m sure that once I have
communicated the message to him, he will find an appropriate way of making
a full statement with the facts, as opposed to possible propositions. Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Pandor, apparently you did not
raise your hand. Then it is hon Pahad.

                INCLUSION OF KHUTSONG IN NORTH WEST PROVINCE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, I just want to respond to the
question on Khutsong by stating that the Minister for Provincial and Local
Government will be having a press briefing, either later today or tomorrow,
in which he is going to be addressing all of these issues. So, just be
patient. You will get the response from the Minister for Provincial and
Local Government.

We need to add that it is not true that consultations did not take place in
Khutsong. Both the Gauteng Legislature and the North West Legislature
carried out consultations in that area. But, be patient. The Minister will
explain everything tomorrow.

                  SANDTON-ROSEBANK ANC CONSTITUENCY OFFICE

                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMISEBENZI YOMPHAKATHI: Sihlalo, ngithi mangibonge kwilungu
elihloniphekile, uMaluleke, ngokuthi lisinikeze umbiko ovela emphakathini
eliwumele, nokuthi lisazisile ukuthi yini abayenzayo. Siyabonga futhi
naselungeni elihloniphekile uHlengiwe Mgabadeli ngezincomo azibekile. Lokhu
kuyabonisa ukuthi uma aMalungu ePhalamende ewenza umsebenzi, kuyasisiza
nathi singamalungu esigungu sikahulumeni ukuze sazi ukuthi yiziphi izinto
esizenzayo eziyizinhlelo eziphumelelayo, kanti futhi kuyasiza nokuthi
sikwazi ukuxhumana kalula nemiphakathi.

Ngithanda-ke ukusho ukuthi, ikakhulukazi njengoba eGauteng sakha iGautrain,
singathanda ukuthi uma kukhona izinkinga umphakathi ohlangabezana nazo
ukwazi ukuxhumana nozakwethu uNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe wezemisebenzi
yomphakathi, uJacobs, osebenzisana kakhulu nenkotileka esiyibekile,
iMbombela, ukuze kuthi uma kukhona  izihibe sikwazi ukubhekana nazo
kusenesikhathi. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu Minister’s
response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, I thank the hon member, Mr
Maluleke, for giving us the report from his constituency and also for
briefing us on what they are doing. We are also grateful to the hon member,
Hlengiwe Mgabadeli, for the commendations she put forward. This shows that
if Members of Parliament do their work effectively, we, the executive, are
helped in a way because we are able to keep track of our programmes and
monitor the success thereof. It also makes it easy for us to communicate
with communities.

I would then like to say that - particularly in Gauteng as we are
constructing the Gautrain - we would appreciate it if, should the community
encounter any problem, they would contact my provincial counterpart, the
Gauteng MEC for Public Transport, Roads and Works, Mr Jacobs, who works
closely with Bombela Consortium, which is the contractor that we have
appointed. This would help us in removing any obstacles which may be there,
well in advance. [Applause.]]

                     PROVISION OF SANITATION IN SCHOOLS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I’d like to
respond to the statement from the hon member of the IFP. Just to put it in
context, the hon member knows that as government we’ve set ourselves
targets to meet as far as the provision of basic services to our people in
this country is concerned. The target for provision of water and sanitation
in schools was set down as 2005, and that target has been missed.

The target we have set for ourselves is reaching the provision of water and
sanitation to all our schools by the 2008-09 financial year. What will it
take for us to meet that target as a country? Obviously, it will require
hands-on support by the Department of Provincial and Local Government and
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, making sure that
municipalities are capacitated to deliver on this target. We work with them
in terms of the identification of backlogs, and in terms of ensuring that
this is in their plans and that my department comes in and assists in that
regard. I also mentioned that we will require a reasonable budget for this
target to be met.

Working with the Department of Education, we are identifying and dealing
with a whole host of problems, including how you actually provide the basic
permanent service in many schools that are not permanent structures. We
need to verify the basic service level in terms of what a school is and how
much provision of basic services should go into that school. I can assure
the hon member that the summit looked at the state of readiness of the
province in terms of the provision of basic services. I thank you.

                SUCCESSFUL COMMUNITY POLICING IN GARSFONTEIN
                   MEMBERS OF THE POLICE INVOLVED IN CRIME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I can only support what
Dr Koornhof has said about the Garsfontein police station. Good teamwork
between all those involved in the fight against crime, combined with a will
and dedication to succeed at local level and to take our streets back from
criminals, will contribute to building safer communities. I agree fully
with what you are saying, Dr Koornhof.

Collectively, a community that is determined to win the fight against crime
will be a strong community, and that’s what we should say to our
communities, that it’s not the government’s responsibility alone.

Gatsheni, uxakekile uyathetha apho. Awumamelanga, kodwa ubugqiba kukhalaza.
Ubokumamela, Gatsheni. Hlala phantsi, Gatsheni. [Gatsheni, you are busy
talking and not listening, but you were just now complaining. You must turn
to listen, Gatsheni. Please sit down.]

I am bigger than you. Those brave men and women of the SA Police Service
need our support. You are quite correct. Those who do wrong within the
ranks of the SAPS and even Correctional Services, Justice, Home Affairs and
everywhere else, should face the law and face sentences in my correctional
centres. Period! [Laughter.]

               REINCORPORATION OF MATATIELA INTO KWAZULU-NATAL
   GOVERNMENT’S FAILURE TO INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AGAINST HUMAN TRAFFICKING

                            (Minister’s Response)
The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I am responding to two issues raised by the IFP. Firstly, the
hon Smith knows very well, in raising the Matatiele matter, that the
Constitutional Court has given two judgments on this issue, and not on a
single aspect has any substantive issue about the provincial boundaries and
those two pieces of legislation been found to be unconstitutional. The only
aspect that is found wanting is that the KwaZulu-Natal legislature had not
consulted, which is a procedural issue. I’m very happy to tell you that the
two Bills will be introduced in Parliament in the next week or two and the
procedural defect will be rectified. They have been approved by Cabinet.

Secondly, the hon Koos van der Merwe, our resident clown in Parliament, has
raised the issue of human trafficking. I must say that the issue of
trafficking is obviously a very important issue, but the stunning thing is
not what he says, but what he doesn’t say. The hon Koos van der Merwe
himself participated in the debate around the Sexual Offences Bill and he
supported the Bill.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Madam Chair, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary to
call an hon member “a House clown”? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, if
the shoe fits.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: I’m waiting for a response from the Chairperson and not
from other clowns. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I was wondering whether
anybody was going to respond to that and was going to agree with you. Hon
Deputy Minister, will you take your chair for a moment, please? But, hon
Dhlamini, do you not feel you have transgressed the same rule now?
[Laughter.] It is not parliamentary and therefore I would like to call on
you and the person who first made the statement to withdraw it. [Laughter.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: I withdraw it, Chair. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I withdraw
it graciously, Chair. [Laughter.]

The point I was making is that the hon Van der Merwe participated and
supported the Sexual Offences Bill. The Sexual Offences Bill as an interim
measure has a whole chapter on trafficking. We have criminalised all
aspects of trafficking that have any sexual connotation, which, if anyone
knows anything about trafficking, covers 99% of all trafficking situations.

Secondly, the thing that he doesn’t mention to us is, of course, that the
SA Law Commission is doing a full and comprehensive report on the matter.
So, to hon Koos, next time he should read Bills before he supports them.
[Laughter.]

                NATIONAL SPORT AND RECREATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, Cabinet colleagues, hon
members and ladies and gentlemen, three weeks ago our nation was engulfed
in a cloud of frustration as the Proteas crumbled in the ICC World Cup
semifinals in Jamaica. This week we will see two South African teams in the
Super 14 of the SANZA Cup in Durban, for the first time in the history of
that prestigious tournament. Bafana Bafana’s qualification games for the
African Cup of Nations in Ghana are going very well. We shall still see
what happens to the Tri-Nations down the line and the Rugby World Cup in
France towards the end of the year.

The above scenario depicts the ups and downs of our national teams’
performance. It also reflects the impact of this inconsistent performance
on the mood of our people. As a department, we have an obligation to be
steadfast in our resolve to lay better and surer foundations for the long-
term performance of our teams and for a quality performance of these teams.
We must forever improve the organisation of sport, its governance as well
as the access to participation by as many South Africans as possible. This
is what the Bill before us is endeavouring to do.

Sport is a powerful transformation force. It only depends on the agenda of
those in charge for it to fulfil its potential. Under apartheid sport was
used as a tool for domination, subjugation and indoctrinating some of our
citizens into a superiority complex and others into an inferiority complex.
During the democratic dispensation sport must contribute to nation-
building. It must contribute to social cohesion.

Building on the spirit of its Preamble, section 1 of our Constitution
emphasises values such as nonracialism, equality and human dignity as some
of the key elements of the South African society we are trying to build.
Section 7(2) of the same Constitution enjoins the state “to respect,
protect, promote and fulfil the rights envisaged by that Constitution”.

This Bill is a modest approach to making a contribution to what the
Constitution enjoins all of us to do. Those who have always enjoyed
privileges are not going to feel very comfortable with this Bill. But those
who have always been denied access will accept this Bill as the sole pillar
to which to cling in order also to have access to what others have always
had. Yes, more mouths will now be opened for the same cake, but we don’t
need to fight over the cake. We must manage the process! [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! One second please, hon
Minister. Hon members, please try to keep the conversation a bit lower; it
is intrusive.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, the ethos of a sharing
and caring society will not come spontaneously. We must be midwives to the
changes that must come. We must be willing catalysts.

Our country continues to talk and watch as sport continues to be a free-for-
all. Powerful individuals and well-resourced officials with very good
contacts tend to ride roughshod over transformation and good governance
issues. The best we can do now is to cajole, encourage and persuade
federations. We cannot compel them. Very little has happened so far in our
senior teams.

Most political philosophers, from Aristotle through Lenin to modern change
managers agree that for change to happen there must be an element of
coercion. This is even more so when a society is emerging from a deeply
divided past. Somebody must lead. This cannot be left to chance and market
forces.

The late Comrade Steve Tshwete correctly equated sports federations to
wheelbarrows. They will not move of their own volition. Someone must pick
them up and push them. This Bill tries to do that with sensitivity and
care, but always faithful to the values enshrined in the Constitution.

The bulk of the Bill aligns our law with the changes caused by the de-
establishment of the SA Sports Commission.

Clause 13 of the Bill makes provision for the Minister to intervene where
problems and disputes fail to be resolved through the internal dispute
resolution processes of sports bodies. The Minister is also being empowered
to intervene when our sport and the values of our country are being brought
into disrepute.

Clause 14 provides for the Minister to issue guidelines or policies for the
promotion of the values of equity, nonracialism, nonsexism and the
advancement of human freedom, rights and dignity in sport and recreation.
The Minister of Finance announced in his Budget Speech the introduction of
incentives for federations that are diligent with transformation. This Bill
makes it possible for Sport and Recreation South Africa to monitor such
diligence and to motivate for such intended incentives.

We will not select South African teams, we will not dictate who should be
elected to be president of which federation. But we will adjudicate when
this national asset, sport, is being wasted and demeaned. This is what most
governments do in the democratic world. This is what our people have been
calling for, for years now.

The Bill is reasonable. It places responsibility for transformation in the
hands of the Ministry, which is accountable to this House and to the
citizens of our country.

We hope the hon members of this august House will lead the desire of those
people who brought us here. Our selfish prejudices must die for the nation
to live. Thank you for your support. [Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Chairperson, hon members and comrades, firstly, on behalf
of the ANC and the committee, we wish to extend an appreciation of the
vigorous participation of members of the committee in dealing with this
amending Bill, and of the tremendous support we obtained from the people
out there, in the six provinces where we had extensive consultations to
find out whether the Bill could be fine-tuned to meet the expectations of
the people.

We also want to commend the MECs and the chairpersons of the provinces for
the support they gave us in preparing that, wherever we were in the six
provinces, people would be waiting for us and would participate in
discussions on this Bill.

This is the continuation of the work of the ANC. In 2002, at the 51st
national conference of the ANC in Stellenbosch, a resolution was adopted
that we must speed up transformation regardless of who gets concerned, as
our people are patiently waiting for that change. We are meeting that
obligation and are fulfilling the mandate the ANC was given by the people
in Stellenbosch.

The freedom we enjoy today came about primarily as a result of the sweat,
the toil and the blood of the masses of the people, and their outcry was
that the country has to be changed to be a better place for all of us to
live in and enjoy. Thus, a democratic and progressive South Africa emerged
and therefore we speak out in support of those who pushed for this
democratic country to be what it is.

This Bill was referred to the committee on 26 August 2006. Immediately
after that the committee took it to the people for their input. We invited
people from across the country and we also invited journalists to come and
participate and ask questions of clarity on this Bill. Only two of those
journalists turned up. Only those two are able to articulate the
understanding and politics that underpin this piece of legislation, because
they have asked the correct questions. Those who were not there are still
asking the wrong questions about interference by the Minister. It is not
the intention of the Bill to let him interfere but he must decisively
intervene where anarchy prevails.
The young people of this country and Solidarity participated, under the
cloak of the DA. They never said it was not true that the Bill tried to
address issues of transformation in this country to advance the
togetherness of the people in this country. They said it was true but this
leads the Minister to interfere in sport. We denied that and said it was an
intervention and not interference.

Mr Spies, on behalf of Solidarity, was the person pushing these views. We
have explained this position and he seems to have understood. Many people
out there are asking why we call this Bill an amending Bill and not a
transformation Bill. For the first time in 13 years the Minister is taking
a decisive decision on issues of equity redress, and therefore this Bill is
beginning to talk on those issues, issues about which many people feel
agitated.

The Minister should recognise sports confederations in writing. Minister,
people have made amendments and are saying you can’t say it should be the
SA Sports Confederation because the Minister would not recognise other
confederations, and therefore they propose that it be the Sports
Confederation. I hope that the Minister will take that into consideration.

The preparations by the SA Sports Confederation for Team South Africa must
include consultations with several sporting bodies and federations. In
section 2(e) of the Bill it is stated that all national federations must
develop sport and recreation activities and they must also develop plans
entailing everything mentioned by the Minister of Finance.

Section 13 of this Bill states that sports federations that do not have a
development plan will not benefit from this. The Bill further states that
the Minister will be supplied with the development plan and also with all
that it entails to make sure that such a plan is taken into consideration
by all the federations that are involved.

The new section 3A talks about service level agreements. People out there
said that service level agreements should be between the Minister or the
department and the federation so that the Minister is able to engage the
work of the federation towards delivery of this developmental agenda that
we seek to achieve. I think people were right to ask for that kind of
change.

The Minister will deal with the termination of the policy and also with all
other criteria with regard to the developmental agenda of sport.

Section 6 states that before a national federation recruits a foreign
player or a foreign sportsperson to participate in sport, the Minister must
satisfy himself that there is no other person suitable for that job in the
country. All recruited people should comply with all other relevant
criteria pertaining to entry into the Republic of South Africa contemplated
in the Immigration Act, Act 13 of 2002. Full information and disclosure
about that particular person should also be done.

People in this country are given an opportunity to run these institutions
irrespective of saying no one is capable of running an institution, as the
Premier Soccer League and Safa allege.

Section 8 states that sport should be a responsive tool to unity and nation-
building. As soon as it shifts from that it brings tension and antagonism
and it erodes what the intention of sport is, and therefore ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon members, you are talking
too loudly and it is difficult to hear the speaker. Please keep your voices
down.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Minister, the Bill talks about the colours board. This
board tries to avoid so many different colours that are said to belong to
national teams. I am sure many people do not understand which colours are
the colours of the country’s national teams. This colours board that the
Minister will put in place will definitely be recognised by each one of us
so that when South Africa is playing you will recognise the colours of this
country.

The Minister must issue guidelines of policies to promote equity,
representivity and redress in sport. These are fundamental issues and
things that are required by the Constitution of this country. We are not
prepared to renege on them. If other people request the amendment of the
Constitution, maybe it could be considered. For now, the issues of equity
and redress underpin our transformation agenda, and that is what keeps us
alive and gives us this hope that one day we will be where other people
are.

In section 13 of the Bill we read that federations should annually submit
reports to the department on annual activities so that the Minister is able
to understand sports activities throughout the country.

I want to thank all South Africans. We have just brought you closer to what
everybody that we interacted with hopes for - the day the majority of the
people in this country will say that we have a breakthrough to the first
economy of sport in this country, which is not the exclusive terrain of
some section of the community. Then we shall say at least we have brought
justice to the people of this country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S J MASANGO: Chairperson, Ministers and hon members, this amending Bill
was initially to give powers to the Minister to intervene in case of
disputes in sports bodies and to substitute the SA Sports Commission with
the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee, or Sascoc. But, in its
final form, it seems to be a licence for the government to interfere in the
aspect of South African sport.

As most recently witnessed by Western Cape Premier Ebrahim Rasool meddling
in the affairs of South African rugby, if the ANC’s track record is
anything to go by, this Bill, if passed, will be used to impose the ANC
political agenda on transformation in South African sport.

While it is necessary for government to be able to create and foster an
environment in which all South African sporting bodies can thrive and as
consequence all South Africans can benefit, it is not its place to enforce
a particular political ideology on this country’s sporting bodies.

Premier Rasool now seems to believe that if someone’s family fought with
the ANC against apartheid that should be a criterion considered for
selection. That is government interference gone mad. This is precisely
taking the route of the name change.

If the Minister of Sport and Recreation has a formal pass to intervene,
what will stop him from taking Premier Rasool’s sentiments to the ultimate
level? South Africa, like any other country, has amateur sport and
professional sport. Professional sport is paid, which means that it is a
business sport. According to the Constitution of South Africa they are
private, not public companies.

The Constitution gives every individual and organisation the right to join
an organisation of their choice. The purpose of this Bill is to compel
federations to join nongovernmental organisations such as the SA Sports
Confederation, mentioned in the Bill. If this government upholds the
Constitution of the country, then a federation has the right to join or not
to join the SA Sports Confederation approved by the Minister, as long as
that federation is an NGO.

Last year we had public hearings here in Parliament, where sport
federations and those who have an interest in sport presented their views.
Yes, some were in favour of the amendment and others were not, and there
were good reasons for supporting the amendment of the Bill.

Early this year we had one public hearing in each province. In the
provinces where I attended, I must point out that most of the people did
not have a clue about the Bill and their participation was not at all
focused on the Bill. This can be attributed to the fact that people
received the Bill at the public hearings and there was no way they could
read and understand the Bill. But I must say that what most of the people
were complaining about were lack of facilities, development of sport at the
grass-roots level and mentoring. This is what the DA has been saying all
along. Very few people talked about transformation and nothing was said
about race, even though the ANC tried to bring race into the public
hearings.

As long as municipalities do not maintain their existing facilities in
disadvantaged areas, transformation will remain a pipe dream or it will
only exist on the basis of quotas and not merit.

On 17 October 2006, this House passed the South African Institute for Drug-
Free Sport Amendment Bill, and in my speech I raised two concerns. One of
the concerns was the inclusion of Sascoc to substitute the SA Sports
Commission, while Sascoc is a nongovernmental organisation and federations
are not compelled to join it. I did raise this concern again in the
portfolio committee meetings when we were deliberating the Sport and
Recreation Amendment Bill. But I was surprised in the last meeting on the
Bill when the ANC pronounced that they were no longer in favour of Sascoc
being the representative of the federation and that Sascoc had to be
removed from the Bill.

There could be more than one reason why the ANC is not in favour of Sascoc,
but I will mention one which I think prompted the ANC to do away with them;
it is that Sascoc took a decision without consulting the Minister or the
chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation and placed
Karate South Africa under curatorship.

The government should develop sport at grass-roots level and not interfere
with professional sport. The DA will not support this Bill.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Chairperson, hon members and Minister, the main sporting
accomplishments that the teams and players from South Africa have achieved
highlight the potential that sport has to bring communities and individuals
together, as well as challenges and divisions that we still face as a
country.

The Springboks’ Rugby World Cup win in 1995 and Bafana Bafana’s African Cup
of Nations victory in 1996 are examples that emphasise the unifying role
that sport can play, as well as divisions that still exist in our society.
The Springboks’ victory was celebrated by and unified a certain segment of
our society, while Bafana Bafana’s win was celebrated by and brought
together a different segment of our society. Therefore, Minister ...

... uma singakabi nabadlali abahlangene abaxubile, sizazoba nababukeli
abangahlangene. [... if we do not yet have players who are united yet
diverse, we will still continue having supporters who are not united.]

Therefore the issue is at developmental level. We need to develop people
across racial lines. It is our challenge to break down the racial, cultural
and other barriers that still exist in sport and prevent our nation from
celebrating as one.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon members, please lower
your voices. Thank you. Please proceed.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Sport is a national unifier that can bring people from all
walks of life together. South Africa is a sport-loving country and for many
people who live in abject poverty and face a bleak future, sport offers a
glimmer of hope and an escape from the cycle of poverty in which they are
stuck. Access to and participation in sport is not just an issue of
leisure; it is also an issue of economics.

The pride that is felt when our sportsmen and women do well is not only
important for nation-building, but provides many young aspiring sport stars
with role models and inspiration. They can now aspire to be like and
emulate the success of their role models. It is therefore important that
the Department of Sports and Recreation, together with relevant sporting
authorities, provide the necessary structures, co-ordination and
inspiration needed for the equitable promotion of sport in South Africa.

We in South Africa are in a very challenging situation with regard to
sporting issues. Our nation expects success from our sport stars and in
trying to provide the necessary framework for this success, the sporting
authorities must address the very important and necessary issue of
transformation in sport.

As a result of the injustices of apartheid there are still many imbalances
and inequalities which need to be corrected. In trying to correct these
inequalities, it is however important that we do not cross the line and
start interfering unnecessarily in sport matters.

It is our obligation to provide an environment that is conducive to the
promotion and development of sport. This is in line with the United
Nations, which recognises that participation in sports and recreation is a
fundamental human right which all governments should make available to
their people.

The National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill before us today will try
to address some of the issues that I’ve mentioned above, including the
important aspect of equity in sport and the promotion of development of
sport.

Transformation in sport is a controversial issue that has many detractors.
But it is non-negotiable - it must take place. I believe that we can and
will find an equitable balance in ensuring equal access to sports and
achieving the necessary transformation in various sporting codes if all the
people involved in sports play their part and contribute to the achievement
of these goals. The IFP supports the Bill. [Applause.]
Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, hon Minister, colleagues, the ACDP is seriously
concerned about government’s attempts at what appears to be a hostile
takeover of sport in South Africa, and we will not support this amending
Bill.

This Bill clearly goes too far and it raises suspicions of abuse of power,
control and manipulation. Yes, the ACDP certainly does agree that
government efforts to facilitate and speed up transformation must be
intensified, particularly at the level of schools, colleges, universities
and communities.

Access for all South Africans to sports facilities and equipment, with
dedicated, skilled coaches and motivated role models to lay solid
foundations and inspire excellence are not negotiable. But, bullying
tactics are inexcusable. What a shocking example we are setting!

What is government doing interfering in the selection of national sports
teams? The debacle over Luke Watson, for example, is so unfortunate. And as
inspiring as his struggle credentials are, it is his ability on the rugby
field that will earn him his opportunity to represent his country.

Many have had to be patient on their way to fulfilling their destiny, and
we can sympathise with their frustrations. Government interference,
however, is outrageous and is robbing this young man of his dignity and
even his destiny.

Then we have the committee chair of Sport and Recreation calling for the
removal of passports for teams deemed not to be fully transformed. There
are laws that protect people from this sort of abuse, hon Komphela.

It is a fact that more and more South African heroes on national sports
teams are from previously disadvantaged communities, and they excel with
pride in their achievements, not having the humiliation of just making up
quotas. The ACDP will not vote in favour of this Bill. I thank you.

Mr M M DIKGACWI: Chairperson, I don’t know what hon Dudley understands
about this Bill, because her understanding of it is based on newspaper
reports. We invite her to come and read the report.

Okwesibini, bendicinga ukuba utata uMasango ... [Secondly, I thought that
hon Masango ...]

... was going to represent the view of his constituency in Witbank, that
they don’t understand why the Springboks emblem is still being used by
South Africa, but he did not raise that point.

But let me go to my speech. Chairperson, members of the Cabinet and
colleagues, the late President of the ANC, Comrade O R Tambo, during the
consultative conference of the ANC that was held in Morogoro, said that,
and I quote:


  We must close ranks and intensify the struggle. In devising our tactics,
  we shall be required to tax our ingenuity to the utmost. We shall have to
  display flexibility without succumbing to opportunism, but it can be
  done. We have the organisation, the leadership and the cadres capable of
  seeing the web of ramifications and relationships that make our struggle
  so complex and capable of prosecuting the revolution by drawing on an
  extensive armoury of methods and forms of struggle that belong to the
  arsenal of revolutionaries.

Thus every conscious effort of our sportsmen and women to excel in the
various sporting codes and in helping others grow contributes in countless
ways to the building of our nation and to the nurturing of a caring and
people-centred society.

It is in the context of transformation and of the attainment of our freedom
that we must understand the role of sports in the development of our
nation. There is an abundance of talent through the length and breadth of
our country, in our villages and in our cities, to be unearthed and
developed.

I often think how much more successful we could be as a nation in the
international sporting arenas if we were able to draw our athletes from
100% of our population, rather than from 20% or 30%. A bigger resource pool
must surely mean a more united South African front, keener competition and,
therefore, higher levels of performance.

I’m aware that several national federations still have a mandate to
undermine the necessary, that is the proposed Bill, which will unearth and
ensure profound representivity.

The Bill does not suggest interference in selecting teams. That will be
left to the teams. However, federations are taking too long to ensure
representivity in selecting teams. So, government must make sure that this
is corrected by saying, “no to gatekeepers”.

Phantsi ngobugqwirha bokukhetha abadlali ngokwebala lomntu, hayi
ngokwetalente umntu ayiphiwe nguThixo! Kode kube nini na, zizwe? [Down with
selection of players on the basis of their colour, and not on the talent
that a person has been given by God! How long will this continue?]

Clearly, the road ahead for normal society remains a key challenge, and
sport is a barometer by which we measure our progress. Sascoc, the SA
Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee, is not the vehicle through
which to do this.
The Bill does not aim at contravening sporting codes; it seeks to promote
the values we hold in the country, such as equity, representivity, etc.

I find it very convenient and interesting that when the chips are down ...

... yonke le midlwembe iyachulumanca. [... all these outcasts get excited.]

But when we introduce this Bill as a progressive government, we are
ensuring that we continue to encourage national reconciliation with regard
to the differences and disparities concerning access to opportunities in
the belief that the Bill, when passed, will be the benchmark. When
consensus fails, the Bill, when enacted, will inequivocally stipulate how
things should be done to effect transformation.

The Bill is changing the status quo and the aim is to make all sports
bodies accessible to all South Africans in order to change the past. What
more must we say, hon Lee.

Ukuba asazi, bantakwethu, masibuze. Ndiyayibona ke nale nto ebangela ukuba
bangakwazi nokuhlala ezitulweni ngoku: Kaloku inyaniso iyahlaba. Kananjalo,
umenzi uyalibala; umenziwa akalibali. [If we do not know, let’s ask. I can
then see why they are now restless: because the truth hurts. Furthermore,
the perpetrator cannot remember, and the victim does not forget.]

The Bill is long overdue. There has always been a concern around lack of
government intervention when national federations have not met national
development goals. There are crises in rugby in relation to administration
and in soccer in relation to the power struggle, and the list is endless.

What happened to the agreement in principle, when we talk about the
importance of emblems, the national anthem and the national flag, to use
both the Protea and Springbok emblems just for the period of the world
cups, and for them to be abandoned thereafter? This question was asked in
Witbank. That did not happen. I’m highlighting problems around rugby, not
to say that soccer is any better.

The issue of facilities is a challenge to the development of young
champions, especially from rural areas. Save to say that as the ANC we want
to say that it is immoral, unethical and unAfrican to have a leader that
does not intervene when the majority of its people are undermined,
disregarded, and the dignity of another person is disrespected,
irrespective of whether or not he or she is a citizen of this country.

The callous action by the DA and other minority parties is worrisome, to
say the least.
Mhlalingaphambili, ukuba bendingekho sePalamente bendiya kuthi mabaye ku
... Kodwa ke ngenxa yokuba ndilapha ndiza kuthi: Huntshu, Sathana! Phuma
endlwini yam! Hamba, mthakathindini! [Kwahlekwa.] [Chairperson, if I was
not in Parliament, I would say to them: Go to hell! But because I’m here, I
will say: Away, Devil! Get out of my house! Away, you wizard! [Laughter.]]

Listening to ordinary South Africans ...

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. The hon member has
just uttered a rather unparliamentary remark, and I would suggest that he
retracts it. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! Hon member ...

Mr M M DIKGACWI: What part was unparliamentary?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member, I haven’t
finished yet. [Interjections.] Order! Order! I think that in the interest
of facilitating good debate in the House, as some of us might not have
understood the phrase used, could you please withdraw it?

Mr M M DIKGACWI: Which phrase is that?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Please withdraw the remark you
made, hon member.

Mr M M DIKGACWI: I’m prepared to withdraw the remark, Comrade Chair, but
which one? I said a lot.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): We’ll look at the Hansard and
we’ll come back to you. Please proceed.

Mr M M DIKGACWI: I’d appreciate that.

Listening to ordinary South Africans, you’d find that they question the
very freedom and rights that we fought for and ask: Where have you ever
heard in the history of this country, present or past, of a situation
where, with habitual untruthfulness and a concoction of unadulterated lies,
you mislead the nation with delusion and hallucinations?

Government cannot outsource its responsibility to ensure that
transformation is heeded by all who live in this country, black and white.
Therefore Sascoc cannot be the best vehicle for driving the transformation
charter of the sporting fraternity, as government is and should be.

It’s a figment of fatal imagination to believe that the transformation
agenda of federations will be led by Sascoc, which needs to transform its
leadership, which in turn refuses to transform its structures.

Minister, you are going to intervene and interfere ...

... de abanye babo bagule baqikileke ngemiqolo. Sidikiwe! [... until some
of them become sick and writhe. We have had enough!]

The Australian government has just aborted the tour by their cricket team
to Zimbabwe, and that is intervention and interference by government. There
is nothing new from key leading sporting nations. South Africa is not
different, but reacts as the need arises.

During the state of the nation debate, hon Tony Leon said that, and I
quote: “As a nation we should spend more time listening to each other, and
not be too quick to judge as illegitimate the concerns and expressions of
any group.”

I could not but hear the words that were lightly spoken when the hon
Minister for the Public Service and Administration said, and I quote: “We
must guard against the habit that is setting in, this habit of painting
with very broad strokes, generalising to large groups and entire
institutions.”

Neither could I miss the words that were spoken lightly when the hon
Minister of Education said that, and I quote:
  For us to be national agents for social change, we have to throw off the
  cloak of self-imposed superiority that seeks to pretend that some of us
  know it all. We also have to throw off the cloak of imposed inferiority
  that causes some of us to define ourselves as unequal to deep challenges.

Having listened as carefully as I could, both to the words that were spoken
lightly and those that were not, I’m still uncertain as to whether we have
developed sufficient national cohesion enabling us to use a common
vocabulary, whatever language we use.

Yintoni ebenza bavale iminyango? Siza kuyivula nokuba iqanyangelwe
ngooqomoyi bamaqhaga. Avulekile amasango! Bafuna ukutya bodwa
oontamolukhuni! [What makes them close all the doors? We are going to open
them even if they are padlocked. Doors are open! These right-wingers want
to be the only beneficiaries.]

Hon members, without memory it would be virtually impossible to learn. We
would not be able to learn from experience because experience is something
remembered. I’d forever have to start at the beginning, not realising that
a hot stove invariably burns the hand placed on it. What I know is what I
remember, and that helps me to be who I am – hon Lee.

On behalf of the ANC, I wish to acknowledge the bold steps taken by the
President of the SA Rugby Union by, at last, realising that the exclusion
of Luke Watson was not based on his “biomechanical challenges” as defined
by the coach, but the involvement of his father, whom the detractors of
democracy believe was a nuisance for not supporting the apartheid system
while his skin was pale compared to that of the people he supported.

I hope, though, that the boldness shown is not a moment of brilliance, but
a sustainable effort at balancing the scales and truly transforming our
sport. I must hasten to caution that the failure to select black players
for the upcoming Rugby World Cup, as specified by the President of SA Rugby
Union, will be reviewed. I hate heroes of the moment.

OoGqozo asibafuni! Baba ngamagorha omzuzwana babuye basidubule. Yhu,
nincede ningasityis’ intloya. [We do not want people like Gqozo, who become
heroes of the moment and later turn guns on us. Please, don’t feed us
skimmed milk.]

Luke, when you are given an opportunity, show the selectors and the
technical management that South Africa as a whole does not adore you
because of the history of your father.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr M M DIKGACWI: Sithi bopha, Thahla, bopha! [We say forward Thahla,
forward!]

Mr W D SPIES: Chairperson, governments are there to create a safe
environment for their people to live, work and enjoy sports and recreation
as they choose. Governments should stick to their core functions and leave
the rest to civil society. Unfortunately, South Africa is different. While
people are living in fear because government doesn’t protect them,
government spends its resources interfering with each and every aspect of
civil life, including sports and recreation.

The new section 13(5) of the Act allows the Minister to intervene in
disputes with sporting bodies. In practice, it means that if Mike Stofile
and Jake White are in a dispute regarding a certain aspect of the sport
rugby, then Minister Stofile can intervene and issue a directive as he
likes.

This is not acceptable. Sports should be left to the sportsmen and women to
manage in the interests of the sport involved. The FF Plus does not support
the Bill and we hereby give notice that we will challenge it at an
appropriate international forum. I thank you.

Mr M V NGEMA: Chairperson, sport in South Africa is a multibillion rand
industry and contributes more than 2% to the country’s gross domestic
product. Unfortunately, this multibillion rand industry is still largely
divided along racial lines. We are 13 years into our democracy and there
are still high-performance sport activities that are associated strictly
with certain racial groups.

Nadeco fully supports the Bill, as it will rectify the current situation to
a large extent. The Bill ensures that all national sports federations must
prioritise equal representation of all previously disadvantaged groupings
and women in sports. In addition, it ensures that the national federations
are accountable to the Minster of Sports and Recreation, and to Parliament.
Nadeco also applauds section 10(3), which stipulates that all national
federations are required to ensure that there are development programmes in
place which will redress inequalities.

Nadeco supports the fact that the Bill prevents the Minister of Sports and
Recreation from intervening in team selection, sport administration,
selection and dismissal of executives, but makes provision, as a last
resort, for the Minister to intervene in resolving disputes with sports
federations. This Bill will place South African sport and recreation
policies at an international standard. Nadeco fully supports the Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, the PAC strongly
supports this amending Bill. Time has given us conclusive evidence that,
unless pushed, certain sporting codes will not transform. Transformation is
an inescapable imperative. The advent of the democratic order in 1994
implied the transformation of every facet of society to move away from the
oppressive and discriminatory past, to a future of equality and
representivity.

The sad reality is that in labour, the judiciary, sport, in short,
everywhere, there is resistance to change. The Bill gives us a legal
instrument to ensure that change takes place. Only soccer has been truly
nonracial, even during the apartheid era, but all other codes have remained
out of reach for Africans.

We should not be blackmailed by the villains of yesteryear who are feigning
victimhood in order to defend their apartheid era privileges. The PAC
supports the amending Bill. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, to be a true democracy, the country’s rainbow
nation needs to be represented in every sector. The sporting sector has
been criticised for not being a true depiction of democracy, which this
Bill serves to address.

While the Bill is clear in its intention and objectives for South African
sports and recreation, the MF expresses some concern on the lack of clarity
pertaining to how the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee, or
Sascoc, will be established, the governance of its members and the
transparency of its activities.

The MF notes that the Bill relies merely on the international protocol,
agreements and covenants. We would like some reference to be made to our
Constitution. In spite of all the concerns raised by the MF, the Bill is
however promising to transform the sector.

Hon Minister, we pray that this sector will grow from strength to strength,
for the future of our children and the youth of our country. The MF
supports the National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill.

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson and hon members, the tabling today of this Bill
is one of those profound moments in South African sport that will be
reflected upon in years to come.

After several years of discussion and debate we have taken the first step
to empower the Minister to execute the mandate the people of this country
have given the ANC to transform all sectors of society, including sport,
and we’re not apologising for that.

This piece of legislation is long overdue. We can no longer sit back, fold
our arms and allow sport administrators to run federations into the ground
and act as if it is a family business. The mismanagement, lack of
transparency and serious breaches of good corporate governance in
federations and their affiliates must come to an end.

Generally, national federations have displayed a lack of appetite in
calling their affiliates to order, because very often the same national
federations themselves are not exemplary in conducting their affairs. Today
federations act as if they are a law unto themselves. They are accountable
to no one but themselves, while undermining the founding principles and the
spirit of the Constitution of the Republic. At the same time, their
ambivalent, unaccountable, inherently racist approach to transformation is
depriving the nation of the opportunity to reach its full potential in the
international arena.

The bedrock of this Bill is provided for by the ANC conference resolutions
of Stellenbosch, which call for the acceleration of transformation of our
South African sport and sport in general. The days of relying on the
goodwill of sport administrators to transform are gone, as federations will
be required to enter into formal service level agreements with the
department and will have to submit their transformation plans and
statistics of player profiles to the department. [Interjections.] The ANC
supports this Bill, even though – and for those who are howling – it does
not go far enough in addressing the fundamental issues affecting South
African sport.

Hon Minister, we are looking forward to engaging further in this regard in
ensuring that very soon this House will process a comprehensive sport
policy for South Africa that will encapsulate transformation as its key
cornerstone towards the achievement of nonracialism in sport.
[Interjections.] It must further provide for synergy in the efforts of all
stakeholders to eliminate fragmentation and duplication while focusing on
our national objectives.

At the time of unification there were those who believed that this
country’s readmission to the international sport arena should have been
dependent on the deep and successful transformation of individual sport
codes. The slogan, Minister, if you can recall, at the time was: No
international participation without clear programmes for redress,
development and transformation.

These heroic sports activists, in the interest of promoting national
reconciliation, agreed, reluctantly though, at the time with the motivation
of those who argued for South Africa’s immediate readmission to
international sport. With a large degree of justification, these activists
can rightly proclaim that their beliefs were right, given the slow pace of
transformation in federations over the past 15 years.

At the public hearings held in Port Elizabeth the honorary President of the
SA Rugby Union, Mr Harold Wilson, who was instrumental in uniting the
country’s rugby and school sport said:


  We feel betrayed and let down by the federations that did not keep their
  promises.
Support for international participation was always conditional on
comprehensive development programmes targeting the disadvantaged sectors of
society. This approach had to ensure that all sportspersons were afforded
the same opportunities to allow them to compete equally to ultimately
represent the country in the international sport arena. Former President
Nelson Mandela was personally very supportive of these requests and is very
likely to be among those who are finding that their generosity has not been
reciprocated.

Once again this afternoon the political parties in this House are divided
along the lines of those who believe, and those who do not, that
transformation is not an event, but a process that must be driven
politically and must be morally guided according to the spirit and the
founding principles of the Constitution. These principles include the need
to redress the inequalities in sport by optimising the participation,
involvement and ownership of previously disadvantaged communities in the
playing, administration, management and support of sport in the country.

These parties, led by the ANC, represent the aspirations and ambitions of
millions of patriotic citizens who believe in the future of this country
and who suffered under the brunt of the oppressive racial policies of
apartheid sport that deprived us of the opportunity to compete equally.

On the other side we find those who believe that the normalisation of
society and transformation should be left to the market forces alone, with
the result that the gap between those who have in sport and those who have
not in sport will increase tremendously.

The preamble of this Bill correctly addresses this fallacy by stating that
sport and recreation belong to the nation over which government with its
elected representatives has overall responsibility. [Interjections.] These
parties also need to be reminded that political support was elicited by
sport bodies such as the United Cricket Board and Nocsa before they
competed internationally prior to 1992.

Political intervention or interference is nothing new in sport.
[Interjections.] Intervention happened to ensure that South African sport
teams, which were at the time and still are predominantly white,
participated in the international arena. Today, 15 years later, certain
parties try to lecture us on the dangers of mixing sport and politics. We
must not underestimate the role of opinion columnists, commentators,
writers, former players - all experts – all of whom benefited handsomely
from the previous dispensation and even from the fruits of democracy! The
prevailing views on transformation in sport portrayed in the media come
from these “experts” who are biased in promoting certain players, while
wasting no time to belittle and destroy the career prospects of emerging
black players. Somehow these people are of the opinion that merit and
competence – you must listen carefully now – only reside in white people.
And blacks always have to prove their competence, over and over again, even
when these black players are regarded in the international community as
world-class. [Interjections.]

It is therefore no coincidence to find that the laager has been drawn again
today and that the DA and the FF Plus, joined lately by the ACDP, are
joining forces to maintain the status quo, which is skewed in favour of the
minority at the expense of the majority of our people. Failure of South
African sport teams is also very often attributed to transformation, which
they say negatively influences selection policies. [Interjections.]

The question is: when last did we win a World Cup? The last World Cup we
won was in 1995. We participated in quite a few with these untransformed
teams and they couldn’t deliver the title of a World Cup to the country
again.

The ANC therefore remains unapologetic in the pursuit of transforming
society. We are not asking for any special favours for black people. We are
good enough to compete against the best in the world. The only thing we are
asking for our sportsmen and women is equal opportunities to compete.
[Applause.]

In listening to the comments that came from speakers from the DA, the FF
Plus and the ACDP, I’m reminded of the words used by His Excellency
President Mbeki when replying to the 2007 state of the nation debate in
reference to a poem called The Rose Tree by W B Yeats. The President
stated:


 These words come to mind because in quite a few instances I did indeed
 think that words had been lightly spoken, and truly politic words, but
 which, in their toxicity could, like the wind that blows across these
 parts of our country and across the bitter sea to our south, indeed wither
 our Rose Tree.

I was thus surprised to hear the comments from the ACDP, and the hon Dudley
could have benefited greatly from attending some, if not all, of the
different meetings that we had. Over a period of seven months we engaged
the federations and organised sport formations in the country, the media,
even Afriforum, the ANC Youth League and the Young Communist League, and
each one of them made an input. We are now being accused of a hostile
takeover. How can you take over something that inherently belongs to the
nation? [Interjections.]

The bullying tactics that we are being accused of and the purported
selection of sport teams and interfering with what they do has been
clarified by the Minister. It is not the intention of this piece of
legislation to select sport teams for the country, nor to interfere in the
running of those affairs, but to intervene when these powerful sport
administrators think that the sport belongs to them. We must intervene to
prevent sport in South Africa from being brought into further disrepute.

The hon Masango was part of our public hearings, and really, hon Masango, I
don’t think we attended the same public hearings, because the people of the
country that we went to speak to were very knowledgeable about sport, and
they raised a few key issues. They firstly said: “Why do we elect a
government which can’t do anything about the chaos in sport?” The second
thing they said was: “We have elected public representatives to represent
our aspirations in the highest institutions of the country. Why are you not
doing that?” And that is exactly what the Bill is trying to address.

The other matter that they raised dealt with Sascoc. They said: “At this
moment in time we don’t know Sascoc.” It would have been very irresponsible
to outsource and abdicate our responsibilities to an NGO if we know, as we
are standing here, that they are facing serious challenges and that they
are still being dominated by the very same untransformed sport
administrators. Imagine giving power to them now. It will be power that
will be gone forever.

We want to thank the hon Dhlamini for his support. We take note of the
important role that government must play in the creation of an environment
that is conducive for sportsmen and women. That is why the mass
participation programme and the school sport programme are of such
importance and we will work together with parties such as the IFP in
ensuring that this happens.

In conclusion, we will continue to pursue relentlessly this objective, even
if it makes certain parties in this House and certain sectors in society
uncomfortable. To the FF Plus, I read last week in the newspapers that you
were planning to take us, or this piece of legislation, to court. I’m glad
to see that your lawyers have advised you that it will stand the test of
the Constitutional Court. However, you have moved the goalposts now and you
intend to go international. It is your right to pursue that, but because of
the consultation and the good relations we have with international bodies
such as the International Cricket Council, the International Rugby Board,
the International Olympic Committee and Fifa, we are convinced that we are
on the right track.

There are always parties that complain about interference - I hope Mr Trent
is here. Last year a question was asked by the hon Trent, Question 1707, to
the very same Minister of Sport and Recreation about the matter of the
Southern Spears Region. In that question the member from the DA asked what
steps the Minister and his department intended taking to achieve that
objective. The question by implication means that the Minister has the
power to do that, hon Trent. At that stage he didn’t have the power. He
could lobby, he could persuade, and that was about it. And that is why, Mr
Trent, I think that your constituency as well will agree with this clause
in the Bill that gives these powers to the Minister.

Mr E W TRENT: Chair, may I ask the hon member a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Will you take a question, hon
Frolick?

Mr C T FROLICK: If it’s a clever question I will take it.

Mr E W TRENT: It’s always a clever question. I just want to ask the hon
member to what depths he will sink in order to get himself higher up on the
ANC list in 2009. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I don’t think that question is
related to the debate before the House.

Mr C T FROLICK: You see, that’s why I said I will answer if it is a clever
question. I expected this.

The process of transformation must continue. It is only those in society
and federations who remain stuck in the policies of the past who need to
fear the implications of these measures or oppose this Bill. Those in
society who are leading our federations, and who are committed to
transformation by providing equal opportunities to all, will embrace this
Bill and grasp it as an opportunity to realise the immense potential of
South African sportspeople to become the winning nation that we want it to
be. I thank you. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Thank you, Chairperson. I am not
going to expose members of the Opposition who come to my office from time
to time to seek intervention on sports matters. I am not going to embarrass
them by naming them here, save to say I just really want to thank everybody
who participated in the debate.

What is very good about a debate is that one hears what some people
understand and some did not understand. One also hears how people expose
their own understanding of it, which in most cases does not exist. This
afternoon I tried to listen to the debate to determine what opposition
parties were offering. I heard of nothing being offered.

Mr Masango just went on contradicting himself and displaying an
unparalleled level of confusion. He does not understand that transformation
is not an ideology but a programme. It is not an ideology. There is no
ideology called transformation. [Interjections.]

He accuses us of compelling the federations to join Sascoc. That is what
Masango said. There is no such thing. The federations of their own volition
and understanding of how sport is organised in the country and globally
will know that confederations such as Sascoc exist all over the world. As a
matter of fact, my hon friend, I must invite you on 23 May to talk to the
president of the IOC, who is our host. All of France, Germany, Britain and
Australia have them. I can run a workshop on that when I am given the
opportunity.

Mr Masango, running short of ideas, resorted to metaphysical speculation.
He speculated that we hated Sascoc, because apparently they did not tell us
that they were putting karate under curatorship. He is wrong. Moss Mashishi
was in my office to explain why they were putting karate under curatorship.
I told Moss that it was the wrong route to follow. They ignored me and then
later came back to apologise, when they discovered how correct we were in
the first place. Mr Masango is speculating and not using facts. He is lazy
to do research on these facts. Hon members, we must not be lazy to do
research.

The hon member also makes a bold announcement and says that transformation
is a pipe dream. I nearly fell over. I don’t know what we are doing here.
He also ignores the fact that his being here is a product of
transformation. Those are the rudiments of transformation and that is why
he is here. [Applause.] He then goes on to say that this is a pipe dream.

I thank you, Mr Dhlamini, for emphasising the fact that unity through sport
is the only hope that our children have. Sport is no longer just
entertainment. It is indeed economically productive. When it comes to the
selection of these games, you must look below the surface and you will see
the manipulation, Mrs Dudley. It is not from our side. It is from those who
own the resources and who participate in these federations. They insist on
them being sole beneficiaries in some respects. It is not us, it is them.

Sascoc is an NGO which we will not legislate on. We will legislate
generically. Ask the constitutional lawyers. They will tell you that it is
bad practice only to legislate for one NGO’s recognition. It is good legal
practice to recognise that NGOs do get involved in co-ordinating sporting
federations and when they are properly co-ordinated, they deserve
government recognition. This is what happens throughout the world.

Ms Dudley, I was once given a book about Rip van Winkel, who slept forever
and when he woke up, everything had changed, including his own friends.
There are no such things as quotas. Go to the Hansard and read my first
budget speech here in May 2005, and come and tell me where you got the
quota story. You talk about Luke Watson and that he must prove himself on
the field. Where were you last year? At the end of the season last year,
the Super 14 teammates of Luke Watson – not me – nominated and subsequently
elected him as the best Super 14 player for 2006. We don’t know who it will
be for 2007. [Applause.]

Wake up, my sister, and also go back to the Old Testament and see what God
had intended His people to be like on earth. We must allow His will to be
done on earth now, not one day in some other place. [Applause.]

I cannot fight with Mr Spies. He is too young to understand what happened
in the 1960s and 1970s. He is very young and he will not understand that.
He therefore does not understand the need to be transformed from that
horrendous past to where we are now. I can have a discussion with you and I
don’t want to embarrass anybody here. My friend, you have missed the boat.
We must move South Africa forward to a transformed society. We have
discussed this, like Cedric said, with the international communities. We
can’t abdicate our responsibility to civil society. Civil society is
accountable to its members. Government is accountable to the totality of
society, even the members of the FF Plus. We cannot abdicate our
responsibility. We have an injunction from the Constitution to move South
Africa to a particular place. Please assist us to go in that direction. Let
us not allow our children in the programme of transforming the country to
be left out as orphans. Please support this Bill. [Applause.] [Time
expired.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.


The House divided:


   YES - 185: Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Asmal, A
   K; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F;
   Bhamjee, Y S; Biyela, B P ; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T
   J; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J;
   Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J
   J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Dhlamini, B W; Dikgacwi, M M;
   Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Gaum, A H;
   Gcwabaza, N E ; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Gumede,
   D M; Gxowa, N B; Hangana, N E; Harding, A; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Johnson, C B; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Khumalo, K K;
   Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T;
   Lebenya, S P; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N;
   Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madlala-Routledge, N C ; Magau, K R;
   Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C;
   Makgate, M W; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S;
   Mars, I; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J;
   Mashile, B L; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Maunye, M M;
   Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S;
   Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J;
   Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D;
   Mokoto, N R; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morwamoche, K W;
   Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpontshane, A M;
   Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G;
   Nawa, Z N; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngcobo, E N N; Ngcobo, N W; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngwenya, W;
   Njikelana, S J ; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R
   S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J; Olifant, D A A;
   Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pahad, A G H; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R
   D; Rabinowitz, R; Rajbally, S ; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Rasmeni, S M;
   Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D;
   Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B;
   Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J;
   Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Smith, P F; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sotyu, M
   M; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tshivhase, T J;
   Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der
   Merwe, S C ; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Yengeni, L E;
   Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 37: Blanché, J P I; Botha, A J; Botha, C-S; Coetzee, R; Davidson,
   I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J;
   Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Joubert, L K; Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; King,
   R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Masango , S J;
   Minnie, K J ; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
   Schmidt, H C; Semple, J A; Spies, W D; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M;
   Trent, E W; Van Der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M;
   Weber, H.


Question agreed to.


Bill accordingly read a second time.

The House adjourned at 16:08.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report oF the JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE On BUDGET ANALYSIS WORKSHOP

   1. Introduction

   Parliamentary oversight over the executive has reached a point where  the
   Legislature and its committees need to build capacity  to  keep  up  with
   reforms in the public sector. Such reforms have included new requirements
   for planning, budgeting, financial management and reporting. As a  result
   the Legislature has had to refine and develop its oversight processes  to
   ensure  that  information  from  the  executive  can  be  comprehensively
   interrogated to ensure better service delivery. More specifically it  has
   impacted on the manner in which parliamentary  committees  perform  their
   functions.


   The Joint Budget Committee (henceforth the JBC) has, over the past years,
   held several  workshops  to  develop  aspects  of  its  functioning.   In
   accordance with  this  approach,  the  JBC  held  a  workshop  on  budget
   analysis, practices and techniques on Monday the  19th  and  Tuesday  the
   20th of February 2007. Although the workshop focused on  these  subjects,
   discussions also touched on other issues relevant to the  Committee.  The
   workshop was facilitated by The Applied Fiscal  Research  Centre  (AFReC)
   and took place at Lagoon Beach Hotel, Milnerton.  Proceedings included:


          • A discussion on the JBCs’ Terms of Reference;
          • A presentation by AFReC on budget analysis techniques;
          • A  presentation  by  National  Treasury  on  In-Year  Monitoring
            instruments and;
          • A presentation by the Auditor General on auditing techniques and
            the Financial Management Capability Model.

   This Report serves both as  a  recap  of  the  event  and  a  summary  of
   challenges and action points for the JBC on how to be more  effective  in
   its oversight role.

   2. Joint Budget Committee’s Terms of Reference

   Parliament has, for the  past  several  years,  been  occupied  with  the
   process of reviewing and strengthening its oversight  function.  Part  of
   this involves developing oversight practices over budgetary matters. As a
   result,  Parliament  decided  to,  amongst  other  things,  establish   a
   committee, the Joint  Budget  Committee,  with  the  following  Terms  of
   Reference (TOR):


       1) Consider proposed  allocations  in  the  Medium-Term  Expenditure
          Framework  and  the  Appropriation   Bill   and   whether   these
          allocations are broadly in keeping with the policy directions  of
          the Government;

       2) Make proposals regarding the processes Parliament  should  follow
          with  regard  to  its  role  in  the  developing  of  budgets  in
          accordance with constitutional requirements;


      (3)   On a regular basis monitor monthly published actual revenue  and
          expenditure per department, and to ascertain whether they are  in
          line with budget projections;

       4) consider, when tabled, the Medium-Term Budget  Policy  Statement,
          with the exception of those  sections  dealing  with  the  macro-
          economic situation and revenue;

       5) conduct hearings on the  Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework  and
          Budget Policy  Review  Document,  with  the  exception  of  those
          sections dealing with the macro-economic situation and revenue;


   During the Workshop, the need to operationalise the JBC’s TOR  was  noted
   as fundamental. In the process of operationalising its TOR, the Committee
   identified various ongoing concerns, which needed to be addressed.  These
   include consolidating its mandate, especially its role  and  relationship
   vis-à-vis other Parliamentary structures and  other  state  institutions,
   addressing issues of capacity  and  programming  and  reviewing  its  own
   progress.

   2.1. The  Joint  Budget  Committee’s  TOR  and  Relationship  with  other
   Committees


   In terms of its general mandate, the JBC identified the  need  to  ensure
   that  budget  oversight  was  practiced   in   conjunction   with   other
   parliamentary committees, for example those engaged in  overseeing  state
   finances.


   To prevent overlap and improve operations, the JBC  recognized  that  the
   roles and responsibilities of each required clarification. The  Committee
   discussed, for  example,  to  what  extent  it  could  assess  issues  of
   institutional performance, such as value for money - which  falls  within
   the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA’s) remit. The  issue  of
   the JBCs engagement with the  provincial  and  local  spheres  and  other
   organs of state,  such  as  the  institutions  supporting  constitutional
   democracy – the Chapter Nine Institutions – were also raised.


   Once clarified, each committee could  then  design  analytical  tools  to
   engage the executive in its respective focus area effectively. Generally,
   the JBC felt it would be appropriate  for  the  Committee  to  be  making
   recommendations to Parliament. Related to this, the JBC  also  felt  that
   2007 was  a  suitable  juncture  to  revisit  and  update  its  2005-2009
   Strategic Plan.


   In relation to the role of JBC in influencing Money Bills, the  Committee
   stated that clarity was required in  terms  of  the  JBC’s  role  in  the
   Appropriation  Bill,  currently  formally  referred  to   the   Portfolio
   Committee on Finance and the Division of Revenue Bill, which  the  Select
   Committee on Finance engages with.
   The JBC further recognized that it should be  informed  of  progress  and
   make inputs into the work of the Task Team established by the Joint Rules
   Committee with the aim  of  developing  legislation  in  accordance  with
   Section 77 of the Constitution to allow Parliament to amend Money Bills.


   In addition, the  JBC  recognized  that,  in  conducting  oversight,  the
   imperative of  facilitating  public  participation  from  both  organized
   interest groups and from disadvantaged stakeholders, such as those active
   in the second economy, was an ongoing challenge. The Committee felt that,
   to supplement informational inputs of this kind, it could also engage  in
   more direct oversight through, for instance, visiting  sites  of  service
   delivery.


   Lastly, the JBC highlighted that due to Members busy  schedules  and  the
   programming arrangements for the National Assembly and  National  Council
   of Provinces, the ability of the Committee to fulfill its  mandate  in  a
   timely manner was considered to be serious challenge.


   2.2 Oversight over Parliament’s Budget


   A further specific oversight issue identified was  the  question  of  the
   JBCs  role  in  monitoring  and   assessing   Parliament’s   budget   and
   expenditure. The Committee felt that, until  the  legislation  regulating
   Parliament’s financial management has been adopted – the  development  of
   which the JBC  should  track  –  the  Committee  should  hold  Parliament
   accountable for budgetary matters.


   3. Capacity and Training Needs


   In terms of workload and capacity, the JBC highlighted a  lack  of  human
   resources and other support as an ongoing concern. To better  manage  its
   workload,  the  Committee  discussed  the  option  of  restructuring  the
   Committee and utilising a sub-committee system, similar to that  used  by
   SCOPA. In this regard, it was emphasised that the mandates of these  sub-
   committees  should  be  very  clear.  The  Committee  also  examined  the
   possibility of  developing  relations,  perhaps  through  memorandums  of
   understanding, with service providers and non-executive organs  of  state
   such as the Auditor-General and the Financial and Fiscal Commission.


   Training for Members on budget analysis was also raised as a focus  area.
   Specifically the JBC,  with  the  assistance  of  AFReC,  identified  the
   following training requirements or topics:


          •  Topic  1:  Information  and  training  on  in-year   monitoring
            activities and  instruments,  specifically  how  to  effectively
            utilise departments’ Strategic Plans and monthly  and  quarterly
            expenditure reports.
          •  Topic  2:   Training  on   public   finance   terminology   and
            instruments: the JBC highlighted the need for  more  clarity  on
            public  finance  terms  such  as  inputs,  outputs,  activities,
            outcomes, allocative efficiency,  operational  efficiency,  etc.
            These should be clearly demonstrated in  terms  of  departmental
            examples.
          • Topic 3:  Budget  formats  –  best  practices  that  departments
            should use when budgeting.
          • Topic 4: The role and nature of adjustment budgets  and  whether
            such adjustments were used for under or over expenditure.
          • Topic 5:  Training on performance budgeting, which would aid  in
            determining the impact of  changes  in  output  and  quality  of
            services when resource envelopes are adjusted.  The  example  of
            the rehabilitation of specific prisons in the country  was  used
            to illustrate the need to clearly  understand  the  relationship
            between costs (resources, inputs) and outputs.
          • Topic 6:  Fiscal  dumping  -  how  to  interpret  early  warning
            signals and act on instances of fiscal dumping.  In this  regard
            the JBC noted examples of extraordinary fiscal dumping exercises
            and highlighted the need for the appropriate timing of  national
            budget payments to other spheres of government.
          • Topic 7:  Transfers  and  subsidies.   Although  linked  to  the
            concern about fiscal dumping, the JBC highlighted the  need  for
            clarity and proper understanding of the prerequisites of grants,
            transfers and subsidies to entities as well  as  information  on
            expenditure and quality of outputs delivered.
          • Topic 8: Public participation in budgetary  processes:  the  JBC
            and other committees may need to explore how  to  link  up  with
            civil society initiatives on the budget.  The  Institute  for  a
            Democratic South Africa (IDASA), for example,  has  a  programme
            dedicated to budgetary analysis and the Committee could  enquire
            about possibilities for support.
          •  Topic  9:  Vacancies  in  the  public  sector–  the   need   to
            contextualise the practical problems and current remedies.


   As an initial  step,  the  JBC  stated  that  guidelines  on  the  annual
   programme of the Committee as well as a manual on best practice to inform
   topical and technical questions to  departments  would  be  of  practical
   assistance and be useful for developing institutional memory.

   4. Presentation by the National Treasury and JBC Discussions


   The National Treasury (NT) presented on various  subjects  including  the
   implementation of financial management legislation,  expenditure  reports
   and monitoring, infrastructure projects and under expenditure.
   4.1 The Implementation of Financial Management Legislation


   Concerning the implementation of financial management legislation such as
   the  PFMA,  Treasury  stated  that  the  lack  of  project  planning  and
   management capacity was a serious problem evident throughout  government.
   Although enthusiasm  was  present,  information  and  skills  were  often
   lacking at under-performing departments and entities.   Examples of  this
   were the recurring requests by some departments for monthly disbursements
   of one twelfth of the total annual funding envelope – this often does not
   coincide with the practical expenditure needs.


   The JBC noted the lack of financial management skills within  government.
   The Committee further stressed the need for departments  to  comply  with
   legislative requirements and,  in  this  context,  made  the  example  of
   departments not paying suppliers within the 30  day  time  period.  Small
   suppliers in particular needed to be protected from  extended  delays  in
   payments.  Treasury stated  that  the  necessary  funds  for  payment  of
   suppliers were normally adequate although, due to internal inefficiencies
   and poor cash management in departments, these payments  were  often  not
   made within the prescribed time periods.


   4.2 Monitoring Expenditure and Infrastructure


   Treasury highlighted the importance of monitoring budgeted versus  actual
   revenue and expenditure figures as well as audited outcomes  of  previous
   budgets.  Treasury agreed that PFMA Section 32 reports  -  whose  purpose
   was to report on the implementation of the Appropriation Act,  and  after
   October of each year, the Adjustments Appropriation Act – were  important
   but limited oversight instruments: they could not,  for  example,  assist
   the JBC and other oversight bodies in picking up on fiscal dumping in the
   last quarter of each financial year. Apart from Section  32  Reports,  NT
   also  produces  an  internal  report,  which  monitors  departments   and
   entities’ expenditure patterns and service delivery.  These  reports  are
   not published.


   Treasury also presented on the financing, expenditure and  monitoring  of
   infrastructure projects. Some of the problems in infrastructure  roll-out
   were highlighted, such as the  lengthy  delays  in  environmental  impact
   assessments  and  delays  associated  with  litigation.   Treasury   also
   explained its national infrastructure project register, which tracks  the
   progress of governmental infrastructure projects from the  identification
   phase through to the design, construction and completion phases.  Similar
   registers  were  also  being  established   for   provincial   government
   infrastructure  programmes.  Notably,  the  register  was  not  currently
   reflected in Section 32 reports. Treasury stated that it was  reliant  on
   accurate and  timeous  input  from  departments  and  provinces  for  the
   updating of this register. Treasury added that it would be  difficult  to
   utilise the register for oversight purposes as it was complex system.


   Treasury also  indicated  that  there  were  separate  teams  to  monitor
   individual infrastructure projects although their ability in this  regard
   varied: large construction projects, such as dam construction, were  easy
   to monitor whilst smaller projects, such as the Department of  Trade  and
   Industry (DTI)’s small enterprises development agency outlets  in  towns,
   were more difficult. The NT stated that the monitoring of these  projects
   should also be a bottom-up  participative  process  in  that  communities
   should assist with the verification of completion and quality  standards.
   The NT could only effectively focus on the financial reporting aspect  of
   departments’ service delivery programmes  and  outputs.  Some  monitoring
   functions are delegated to Provincial Treasuries.


   Treasury added that the monitoring of infrastructure  projects  at  local
   level was particularly problematic.  The  example  of  the  multi-purpose
   community centres (MPCCs) was  used  –  with  NT  indicating  that  local
   authorities often did not want to maintain and operate these centres. The
   tracking of Housing was also noted as a challenge  –  Treasury  explained
   that the nature of the Department of Housing’s database as  well  as  its
   internal tracking systems made it difficult to count finalized units. The
   example of the slow pace of the  N2  Gateway  project  was  given.   This
   project generated unique delivery  problems  and  delays,  compounded  by
   community preferences for the location of houses and the relative cost of
   temporary relocation.


   The JBC noted the lack  of  proper  asset  registers  and  the  need  for
   departments, provinces and municipalities to properly value  and  account
   for their assets was emphasized. In addition, the Committee  referred  to
   the importance of parliamentary oversight over the  Gautrain  rapid  rail
   project and the issue of monitoring the transfers of funds from  national
   to provincial government for this  purpose.  Treasury  indicated  it  was
   currently piloting a project monitoring tool to ease financial accounting
   of transfers and subsidies.


   Concerning the question of monitoring and enforcing  conditional  grants,
   Treasury explained that, in cases where government departments failed  to
   meet conditions for grants, it had yet to use the  legislated  mechanisms
   to  enforce  compliance.  Instead,  the  practice  had  been  for  NT  to
   facilitate quarterly meetings with the relevant departments and entities.
   The NT added  that  it  would  welcome  the  assistance  of  the  JBC  in
   formulating and overseeing the implementation of criteria for grants.


   4.3 Under-Expenditure


   Treasury reported that under-expenditure was still a concern,  especially
   in some essential services such as Health – the  Hospital  Revitalization
   Programme was used as an example. Funds were, however, still allocated to
   these services due  to  their  importance.  In  other  cases  funds  were
   redirected to other departments. Generally reasons for  under-expenditure
   varied but, as  was  the  case  of  Health,  dysfunctional  supply  chain
   management and a lack of management skills were often cited as causes.  A
   further example related  to  the  construction  of  certain  correctional
   centres, where the lack of proper feasibility studies  severely  hampered
   roll out. Even though the NT proposed that Public  Private  Partnership’s
   (PPP) arrangements should be followed with the building of these centres,
   the relevant Department resisted.  The issue of the correctional  centres
   was of great concern to the JBC as the centres were supposed to  be  near
   completion.


   Finally Treasury asserted not all instances of under-expenditure were due
   to poor financial management: in the  case  of  the  Department  of  Land
   Affairs, for instance, money destined for land restitution  projects  was
   taken away due to  external  difficulties  in  the  restitution  process.
   Generally, however, most cases  of  under-  expenditure  could  often  be
   traced to inadequate strategic planning.


   4.4 Vacancies


   On the subject of vacancies in the public sector, Treasury revealed  that
   employee appointment procedures in government were  complex  and  lengthy
   and should  perhaps  be  streamlined.  In  addition,  NT  indicated  that
   vacancies in departments were sometimes inflated to that they could  vire
   from these budget line items at the end of financial year to cover  other
   expenditure.


   The JBC stated its concern  about  the  skills  mismatch  in  the  public
   service as well as the payment of bonuses despite the failures  and  lack
   of performance contracts. The  Committee  further  raised  the  issue  of
   unrealistic bonuses when Key Performance Indicators have  not  been  met.
   Key Performance Indicators (KPI’s) should be  thoroughly  researched  and
   require focused scrutiny.
   5. Presentation by the Auditor General and JBC Discussions


   The Auditor General, Mr Terence Nombembe, in his first  interaction  with
   the  JBC,  presented  on  the  Financial  Capability  Model.   Prior   to
   discussing the  model,  the  AG  explained  the  three  types  of  audits
   undertaken by his office:


   a) audits on the  reliability  of  financial  information  presented  in
      annual reports, which look for adequate evidence  for  the  financial
      info presented  in  annual  report.   The  AG  noted  the  increasing
      intensity of doubt about evidence in some entities’ annual reports.
   b) audits of service delivery information – officially known as  “audits
      of predetermined objectives”.  Underlying information should  support
      objectives set out in strategic plan.   The AG reported that  the  NT
      and the Dept. of Public Services and meet to define what  information
      should be included in annual reports.
   c) performance  audits,  which  take  a  closer  look  at  the  delivery
      competence  of  entities.   Performance  audits   cover   issues   of
      efficiency, effectiveness, and economy (the  three  “Es”)  of  public
      expenditure  management.   For  example,  such  audits  examine   the
      input/output ratios of entities service delivery programmes.


   The Auditor General conceded that it is a common mistake to  confuse  the
   last two types of audits.  It is the intention of the AG to  reverse  the
   level of concentration in the first type of audit towards a focus on  the
   last two types of audits.  A balance between the three  types  of  audits
   would bring  the  operations  of  the  AG  closer  to  similar  benchmark
   institutions in the  world.  The  AG  informed  the  Committee  that  for
   purposes of performance  audits  his  office  would  work  together  with
   stakeholders such as the JBC.


   The Financial Management Capability Model


   The Auditor General  of  Canada  has  developed  a  Financial  Management
   Capability Model that can be used by regularity auditors to determine the
   financial management capabilities of government departments.  This  model
   formed the basis for the model currently under development by  the  South
   African Office of the AG.  The object of this  model  was  to  provide  a
   framework to enable the reader of Annual Reports to assess  the  adequacy
   of financial management, to monitor progress and to make comparisons.


   The AG explained the various levels of analysis contained in the model:


       • Level 1:  Start-up level. No  proper  control  framework  exists  -
         basic planning and  control  taking  place  on  an  ad  hoc  basis.
         Financial accounting and  internal  control  systems  not  properly
         developed.  No  internal   audit   systems   or   audit   committee
         established.
       • Level 2: Development level. This level involves the development  of
         proper  internal  control  frameworks  and   financial   accounting
         processes.  Internal  audit  systems  and  audit   committees   are
         established. Both Level 1 and 2  are  considered  unacceptable  for
         departments and the AG typically  requires  progress  reports  from
         relevant departments on how they plan to improve.
       • Level 3: Control level.  The focus at level  3  is  on  the  proper
         implementation and functioning and  the  performance  of  financial
         accounting and internal control systems, including compliance  with
         financial  management  legislation.  The  AG  noted  that  not  all
         departments and entities in South Africa had reached this level and
         added that performance audits would gradually  increase  in  volume
         once financial management requirements (Level 3) are met.
       • Level 4:  Information level. The focus on Level 4 was on  measuring
         how resources are  used  with  reliable  and  sufficient  financial
         information.   This  level  of  capability  typically  resulted  in
         unqualified audit reports.
       • Level 5: Managed level.  The focus is on  balancing  efficient  and
         economical use of resources with quality  and/or  effectiveness  of
         results achieved.
       • Level 6: Optimising level.  The focus is on continuous  improvement
         and learning.


   The AG indicated that the model provided a benchmark for improvement  and
   assists by  asking  the  most  relevant  questions,  and  in  simplifying
   conclusions  over  the  capacities  of  entities.  The  AG  stated   that
   explanations and assessments based on the Financial Management Capability
   Model would be included in the next General Report of the AG.


   6. Recommendations


   In  line  with  its  Terms  of  Reference,  the  Joint  Budget  Committee
   recommends the following:


   6.1 For the JBC to fulfill its oversight and monitoring responsibilities,
   the Committees TOR must be further clarified and developed.   It  follows
   that an operational system for  the  Committee  should  be  designed  and
   implemented. An operational system should address, amongst other  issues,
   the overlapping functional areas between the JBC  and  other  committees,
   for example SCOPA and the Portfolio and Select Committees on Finance,  as
   well as the Committee’s reporting functions. Such a  plan  would  empower
   the  JBC  to  alert  the  relevant  sector  committees   to   interrogate
   departments  on  expenditure  management  issues  as  they   arise.   One
   additional option may be for the JBC to include a matrix of key questions
   as an annexure to every quarterly report.


   6.2 In addition, the Committee should undertake a formal  training  needs
   assessment. As an initial step, guidelines on the annual programme of the
   Committee as well as a manual detailing topical and  technical  questions
   to departments could be developed.


   6.3 Related to the above, the capacity needs of the Committee  should  to
   be addressed. This would necessitate, amongst  other  things,  addressing
   the  issue  of  institutional  memory  and  ensuring  continuity  in  the
   Committee’s human resources and technical support.


   6.4 The JBC should confer with other committees on  strategic  plans  and
   budget votes in order to track input/output ratios and later  assess  the
   outcomes achieved. The Committee also  indicated  that  PFMA  Section  32
   reports provide little information that could be used  by  committees  to
   detect early warning signs on spending and service delivery. The JBC will
   further engage with National Treasury on this matter.


   6.5 That the JBC should consult with the AG in  future,  specifically  on
   the Financial Management Capability Model and  whether  departments  have
   reflected on this model.


   Report to be considered.



