---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-09-04
---

TUESDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:08.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                         CHANGE IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with today’s business, I wish
to announce that – and of course this is the month of announcements – Mr N
T Godi had, on 3 September 2007, left the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania, the PAC, and joined the African People’s Convention, the APC, a new
party in the NA.

          Ms C-S BOTHA STEPPING DOWN AS HOUSE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NA

                               (Announcement)
The SPEAKER: Hon members must note that the hon Ms C-S Botha has stepped
down as House Chairperson of the NA. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank hon Botha for the exemplary service that she has rendered in her
capacity as House Chairperson and her invaluable contribution in building
and defining the role of House Chairpersons. Thank you very much, hon
member. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, in light of the hon C-
S Botha stepping down as House Chairperson, I wish to place on record our
appreciation of the distinguished service that Ms Botha has rendered to
this Parliament, especially in her role as House Chairperson. In particular
we appreciate her role in building and defining the role of House
Chairpersons and recognise her reliable and constructive engagement as part
of a collective in the Office of the Speaker.

Her service as House Chairperson, internal arrangement as the Chair of the
quarterly consultative forum, is indeed appreciated. Well done and go well.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would like to add to the remarks that have been
made by the hon Chief Whip to say that as Speaker I would really like to
take this opportunity to thank Ms Botha on behalf of myself and the Deputy
Speaker. There is a lot that happens that the House does not see, that the
public do not see in terms of the challenges that we face as the Office of
the Speaker. We wish to place on record that Ms Botha worked unreservedly
as part of a collective, very constructively and in a manner we will miss.
So I take the opportunity to really thank you for that and we hope we will
continue to keep in touch with you on matters we believe in which you can
assist us in terms of some of the tasks that you have been handling.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move that the House
appoints Mr M B Skosana as House Chairperson. Thank you.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: Hon Skosana, I wish to congratulate you. [Applause.]

Kgutso! Na e kaba ho na le setho se lakatsang ho etsa tsibiso ya tshisinyo?
[Order! Is there any member who wishes to give a notice of motion?]

There is no interpretation? Are there any notices of motion? That’s what it
means. Now you must get used to it.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Speaker, hiermee gee ek kennis date k  by  die  volgende
sittingsdag van die Huis voorstel:

   Dat hierdie Huis ’n debat voer oor die wenslikheid om die Suid-Afrikaanse
   Lugdiens  te  privatiseer  ter  wille   van   winsgewende,   produktiewe,
   finansiële, administratiewe en operasionele bestuur en om  die  speelveld
   vir mededinging met ander lugrederye gelyk te maak.


Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr S M VAN DYK: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next  sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That this House debates the desirability of privatising the South African
   Airways for the sake of profitable, productive, financial, administrative
   and operational management and to level the playing field for competition
   with other air lines.


Thank you.]

The SPEAKER: Any other notices of motion?

Na ekaba ho na le ditshisinyo kapa mohlomong tsibiso? [Are there any other
motions or notices?]

               UNVEILING OF STATUE OF NELSON MANDELA IN LONDON

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes the unveiling of a statue of Nelson Mandela in London’s
        Parliament Square on 29 August 2007;


     2) further notes that his statue joins other great leaders such as
        Winston Churchill and Abraham Lincoln;


     3) acknowledges British Prime Minister Gordon Brown’s statement that
        Nelson Mandela is the “most inspiring and greatest leader of our
        generation” and that the statue is a “beacon of hope” to all;


     4) further acknowledges Nelson Mandela’s statement that the statue
        should symbolise all those who have resisted oppression, especially
        in South Africa;


     5) congratulates him on this great honour that has been bestowed on
        him; and


     6) further congratulates Graça Machel who will be made a dame by Queen
        Elizabeth II for her humanitarian work tackling poverty in
        Mozambique.

Agreed to.

                             NATIONAL ARBOR WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that 1 to 7 September is observed by our country as National
        Arbor Week;


     2) further notes that the National Arbor Week serves to promote
        awareness for the need to plant and maintain trees throughout South
        Africa and that the United Nations Environment Programme has
        launched a major worldwide tree-planting campaign under the theme:
        Plant for The Planet: Billion Trees Campaign, and that the people,
        communities, businesses, industry, civil society and governments
        are encouraged to plant at least one billion trees worldwide during
        2007;


     3) recognises that forests form an important part of South Africa’s
        natural resource base and make a significant contribution to the
        economy and that trees are national treasures that provide wood,
        habitat, clean air and drinking water for humanity and animals;


     4) recalls that the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is
        undertaking a campaign from 2000 to 2015 to highlight two
        indigenous trees every year, one tree common and the other rare,
        that the Trees for Food Programme will see one million trees
        planted annually starting this year during Arbor Day, and that the
        common tree for this year is Gewone Taaibos and the rare one is
        Poison Bride’s Bush or Gifbruidsbos; and


     5) calls on all the people to prevent veld and forest fires, plant a
        tree to provide economic opportunities to the nation to alleviate
        poverty and hunger and plant a tree at every home.

Agreed to.

         SOUTH AFRICAN RUGBY TEAM IN FRANCE FOR THE RUGBY WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that last night, Monday 3 September 2007, with an
        unprecedented wave of goodwill behind them, the South African rugby
        team left our shores France to take part in the Rugby World Cup;

     2) further notes that the official opening of the event will be on
        Friday, 7 September 2007;

     3) believes that the game of rugby is aimed at developing courage,
        loyalty, sportsmanship, discipline and teamwork;

     4) acknowledges that it is through discipline, ethical behaviour, fair
        play, control and mutual respects for fellow athletes that the
        spirit of the game flourishes; and

     5) conveys its best wishes to the South African rugby Team and wishes
        them success in their attempt to recapture the Webb Ellis Cup.

Agreed to.

                               FLOOR-CROSSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER (ANC): Madam Speaker, the practice of floor-
crossing is consistent with the democratic traditions practised by
developed democracies using the proportional representation electoral
system across the world.

Over the 15-day floor-crossing window period, which started on 1 September
2007, the ANC will welcome any MP, Member of a Provincial Legislature or
municipal council who subscribes to the policies, principles and objectives
of the ANC.

We congratulate the councillors in the Drakenstein and Knysna
municipalities who have joined the ANC to accelerate social transformation.
To the communities in the two municipalities, we want to reassure them that
we will accelerate the battle against unemployment, poverty, disease,
crime, racial and gender imbalances.

The ANC calls on all public representatives who are committed to delivering
services to our people to utilise this opportunity to join the ANC. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

                  CRIME NOT PRIORITY FOR SA POLICE SERVICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Madam Speaker, the SA Human Rights reported on
Monday that it had been robbed for the seventh time since moving into its
current Parktown premises in 2003. On this last occasion, the robbers,
clearly familiar with the premises and equipment, asked the tied-up staff:
“Where are the other computers, and didn’t the insurance pay out?” - with
all the casualness of weekend shoppers at the mall.

If a Chapter 9 institution that seeks to ensure human rights are protected
for all South Africans is treated in this way, it gives ironic insight into
how ordinary South Africans are treated. A kind of besieged weariness comes
upon us when we see our car has been stolen for the third time, or there
has been a fourth attempted break-in within two months at home. We are held
in contempt, our right to be secure in our own homes is held in contempt
and our right to retain possession of things we have earned is held in
contempt.

The SAHRC reported that the police have made no arrests nor provided any
feedback on investigations into the previous burglaries.

It is a sick mockery of our rights when the very institution set up to
defend them is violated and apparently nothing can be done about it. What
chance do the rest of us have?

                          CO-OPERATIVE COLLECTIVES

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, hon members, hon Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, the developing nations of South-East Asia, South America, even
North America and Europe are successfully revisiting the values and
principles of participatory co-operative movement to buttress their
historical, political and economic democracy in order to implement social
justice. They are employing the credit, producer and consumer elements of
co-operative movements effectively against rural and urban poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy, poor health and child mortality. They have in the
process enlisted the strong support of unions and social and economic
collectives.

The unions in our country are doing well in looking after the interests and
employment conditions of workers. However, they place too much biased
emphasis on the dogma of “workerism” and ignore largely organising both the
employed and the unemployed majority for ownership, control and management
of the national economy to enhance the people’s political and economic
freedom, except in the second economy.

It is said: Make more people owners, they will protect and preserve
democracy and freedom. By the same token, the “propertyless”, the poor and
jobless will be a menace to democracy, nation-building and reconciliation.

The IFP also suggests that in programmes of land restitution and
distribution and reform, government should endeavour to make co-operative
principles an integral part of any preparation and training for prospective
landowners and farm-workers.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

           PROJECT TO DEVELOP CULTURAL TOURISM LAUNCHED IN LIMPOPO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C NKUNA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC, together with the majority of
South Africans, work consistently to affirm and promote the rich and
diverse expression of South African culture. Our effort is aimed at linking
culture firmly to areas of national priority such as health, housing and
tourism.

The ANC-led provincial government of Limpopo has launched a R104 million
project to promote cultural tourism in the province. The project aims to
help village artists, crafters and those involved in tourism to improve and
be able to market their products. The objective of the project is to bring
tourism to people in rural areas. It is funded by the provincial
government, the Mopani District Municipality, the Development Bank of
Southern Africa and the European Union.

The project is in line with the provincial government, growth and
development strategy which was adopted in 2004. We call on all South
Africans, business and civil society to lend a hand in the promotion of
cultural tourism as we deepen the efforts to create a better life for all.
I thank you. [Applause.]

                              ZIMBABWEAN CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, Zimbabwe’s Roman Catholic Bishops have
expressed concerns that the political and economic crisis in the country
has reached a flashpoint and only democratic reforms can avert further
bloodshed and a mass uprising. Contrary to President Mbeki’s insistence
that Zimbabweans are confident that the talks are leading to free and fair
elections, many are expressing grave concerns that the talks are changing
nothing.

In fact, the Tsvangirai faction of the MDC have postponed the launch of its
election campaign and party insiders say they are deliberating whether the
party will participate in the elections at all. Morgan Tsvangirai has been
quoted as saying: We will never go into an election that is predetermined.
Both factions of opposition MDC are on record saying they will only
participate in elections if conditions in Zimbabwe, prior to the elections,
facilitate a free and fair contest.

In both Tanzania and Lusaka, the importance of conditions for free and fair
elections in Zimbabwe, seem to have escaped SADC leaders altogether.
President Mbeki’s diplomatic efforts are ignoring the cries of more than 11
million Zimbabweans who expect him and SADC to stand by SADC protocols and
tell President Mugabe that there must be constitutional change before the
coming elections. I thank you.

  ANC PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCY OFFICE IN ATTERIDGEVILLE APPLAUDS TEACHERS
               AND LEARNERS FOR MAKING THE RECOVERY PLAN WORK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R S NTULI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC-led government pursues a
programme of providing education and training to all South Africans
irrespective of race, sex and age. It is in this context that the ANC
parliamentary constituency office in Atteridgeville applauds the
principals, teachers and learners, especially in Grade 11 and 12, for
effectively making the Department of Education’s recovery plan work.

Now, all high schools in Atteridgeville are offering learners in Grade 11
and 12 extra lessons in the afternoons and on Saturdays. We hope that this
will assist the schools to reduce fluctuations in the performance of
learners in the area at the end of the year. We also wish to record our
gratitude and appreciation for the support provided by parents, school
governing bodies and NGOs.
Finally, we express the hope that this good practice is, and will be
replicated in other areas for the betterment of our country. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                               price of bread

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Madam Speaker, the PAC is calling upon government to
fix the price of bread. We are shocked at the news that the price of bread
has increased by as much as 48 cents a loaf. The poor in our country, who
depend on bread, will be hard hit. A loaf of bread must be affordable for
every family in our country. People have traditionally used bread to gauge
the cost of living.

If the recent prices are anything to go by, the cost of living has gone up
for many people in our country. We need urgent action on the price of
bread. Grassroots communities in rural areas are ultimately the biggest
losers in the food price wars. Rural residents on average pay more for
bread and maize meal due to the associated transport cost of delivery to
outlying regions.

In addition to fixing the price of bread, government should immediately
conduct an inquiry into the way the bread industry is monopolised. In the
month of June alone wheat prices went up by 10%. The poorest consumers are
already reeling from maize going up more than 50% so far this year. This
will have disastrous implications for the nutrition of school children and
people living with HIV/Aids. I thank you.

      escape of seven awaiting-trial detainees from correctional CENTRE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Correctional
Services, hon Ngconde Balfour reassured us that heads would roll after
seven dangerous awaiting-trial detainees escaped from the Wellington Medium
Correctional Centre in Mthatha by sawing through burglar bars. We wonder if
the right heads will roll.

It is unacceptable that security and supervision in and outside the prison
is so lax that seven dangerous individuals had the time to saw their way
through solid middle bars and leave the property without being detected.

In addition to security and supervision, there are a number of serious
challenges facing the Department of Correctional Services, including
overcrowding, lack of inmate vocational skills training and rehabilitation
programmes, staff vacancies, inadequate health care facilities and much
more. All of these issues contribute to or detract from an efficient and
well - managed Department of Correctional Services.
Despite the fact that the portfolio committee and other observers have
raised concerns about these problems, not enough is happening within the
DCS to correct and address them. The public needs much more than assurances
after these facts. The public needs to see clear and decisive action being
taken to address service delivery and performance within the DCS on an
ongoing basis so that escapes such as these do not happen in the first
place. Thank you.

                             Poverty eradication

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N D NGCENGWANE (ANC): Madam Speaker, poverty eradication is one of the
ANC-led government’s priorities. Poverty is still experienced mostly in the
rural areas; farm areas, by farmworkers; and the peri-urban areas, in
particular those areas that were mining areas before the mines were shut
down.

One of the main problems experienced by farmworkers is access to government
services, eg, the child support grant, disability grant and the old-age
pension due to some of them not having the necessary documentations, such
as birth certificates and identity documents.

As Mogale City’s parliamentary constituency office, with the assistance of
the Mogale City Local Municipality, we have embarked on an identity
document and birth certificate campaign for rural, informal settlement
communities and farmworkers in particular. The targeted areas are as
follows: Tarlton, Hekpoort, Extension 2 and 3, Rietvlei and West Village’s
informal settlements, Muldersdrift, and the Magaliesburg areas.

The Department of Home Affairs, together with the immigration unit, will
have to assist in identifying the non-South Africans and the Department of
Labour will educate rural workers and farmworkers on their labour rights.
The Department of Social Development will assist to overcome the social-
related problems like child and women abuse, alcohol and substance abuse.

The ANC-led government is the only hope that the poor and the exploited
have. So, it is important and imperative for us to make sure that the
people have the necessary documents in order for them to access the
necessary services.

The ANC cares and is committed to protecting the rights of the poor. I
thank you. [Applause.]

             LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROUDLY SOUTH AFRICAN CAMPAIGN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof E S CHANG (IFP): Madam Speaker, the Proudly South African Organisation
was formed six years ago to motivate South Africans to buy locally produced
rather than imported goods. We, as the IFP, were therefore shocked when we
learnt that the DTI has withdrawn funding for this organisation. The DTI’s
abandonment of this important organisation is really disappointing as this
Proudly South African campaign has a really important role to play in the
promotion and the advertisement of South African goods.

The DTI should not be proud of its action to part with this organisation.
The government and the DTI should rather concentrate or increase their
support to this important organisation and find ways of increasing its
effectiveness to promote locally made goods of good quality and that could
be bought by South African consumers. It is so important to realise that.

Proudly South African is not a profit-making organisation and should not be
looked upon as such. If the DTI is serious about its efforts to promote
South African produced goods, it has to support and provide funds to the
Proudly South African organisation. Thank you.

                    SKILLS SHORTAGE AND EDUCATION LEVELS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M MKONGI (ANC): Madam Speaker, according to the SA Institute of Race
Relations, the Fast Facts Bulletin, August 2007, South Africa’s total
employment grew, on average, by 1,3% between 1995 and 2006 and can possibly
grow by 3,2% between 2007 and 2012.

The number of artisans employed in the formal sector by level of education
between 2001 and 2006 are those who have less than matric were 46 285 in
2001, but 54 268 in 2006. Those who have matric were 89 840 in 2001, but 90
865 in 2006. Those who had diplomas were 60 424 in 2001, but 74 807 in
2006. Those with degrees were 10 034 in 2001, but 10 656 in 2006.

However, in these encouraging developments we find disappointing results in
trade tests written and passed between 1980 and 2006. In 1980, 9 016 people
wrote artisanal tests and 5 033 managed to pass it. This was roughly 55,8%
of the proportion that wrote the test.

However, in 2006, 7 622 candidates sat for the same test and only a
disappointing 3 391 candidates manage to pass the test. This represents
44,5%. This is a matter of serious concern for the ANC government as the
country seeks to address the skills challenge in our country. This
situation is unacceptable to the ANC. Thank you very much.

                         DISPOSING OF AILING ALEXCOR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Madam Speaker, state-owned diamond mining company,
Alexcor, should be disposed of rather than being dependent on the state for
its survival. It is not acceptable that the government is directing funds
away from priority matters such as education and health to provide monthly
financing to a business that is hugely capital intensive but from which our
citizens do not benefit.

Last year, the government pumped R33 million into Alexcor. Yet, the company
is still in the position that requires certainty about regular government
assistance in order to remove doubt over its ability to function as a going
concern. A settlement with the Richtersveld community, which lodged a land
claim against Alexcor, was reached in April, thus paving the way to start
disposing of the company’s assets.

This would be to the benefit of both the relevant communities, as well as
the investment and growth energised private sector, as their entrance is
such to make much better use of the opportunities which this ailing
parastatal is enjoying. Thank you.

                       UMJINDI BARBERTON ROAD PROJECT

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr C L GOLOLO (ANC): Chairperson, construction has commenced earlier this
year on both the Nelspruit to Barberton and Barberton to Bulembu-Josefsdal
border post sections of the R40 road. While the Nelspruit section is a SA
National Road Agency Limited project, the Bulembu section is now a
Mpumalanga department of roads project with a contribution also from the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.

The benefits of these two projects are both in terms of short-term job
creation and long-term economic stimulation of a historically marginalised
poverty pocket of the province and the country.

The two projects combined will employ around 700 people, who will work 260
000 man days over the two-year construction period. Total costs for the two
projects will be R505 million. The projects are both run on the principles
of the Expanded Public Works Programme in order to maximise the local and
historically disadvantaged individuals’ beneficiation.

The R40 road is the core infrastructure component which will unlock the
long-term economic development of the area. The construction of the R40
road from Nelspruit to the Swaziland border via Barberton marks the
beginning of the economic turnaround of this area and the ANC is most happy
to observe that good progress is being made. Thank you. [Applause.]

                              DISABLED PERSONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A F MADELLA (ANC): Chairperson, since its formation, the ANC and its
allies have fought for equality of all sections of the South African
society, irrespective of race, sex, culture, religion or physical and
intellectual make-up.

People with disabilities continue to find themselves marginalised and
socially and economically excluded. This continues to be the general
situation 13 years into our democracy, despite the fact that the ANC
government has introduced policies, programmes and legislation aimed at
creating favourable conditions for the active participation of disabled
people in all facets of our social lives inclusive of our economic and
political spheres.

The establishment of the Office on the Status of Disabled Persons in the
Presidency in 1995, which was followed by similar structures in the offices
of all our Premiers, the adoption of the Integrated National Disability
Strategy, the Employment Equity Act, the Social Assistance Act, etc,
constitute part of the measures introduced by the ANC government to create
conditions for a better life for disabled people in a democratic South
Africa.

The ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, as well as the optional protocol to the convention adopted by
this House on 30 March 2007 demonstrates further the ANC government’s
commitment to improve the general conditions under which disabled people
live.

It is, however,  disappointing  to  note  that  despite  the  two  per  cent
employment equity targets set for disabled people in  both  the  public  and
the private sector, the levels of employed disabled people  continue  to  be
less than one per cent. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                            TELKOM ASSET DISPOSAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Chairperson, the DA welcomes the news that Telkom has
entered into discussions regarding the sale of its assets to private
investors. We also hope that this signifies a turn in the tide away from
the government attempting to increase its presence in the economy through
the expansion of its state-owned enterprises.

It is important for government to ensure that Telkom’s assets are disposed
of in a manner that will encourage and not reduce increased competition in
the market where it is viable to do so.

In this regard the wholesale disposal of Iscor to Mittal Steel and the
subsequent difficulties regarding the prices of steel for production inputs
offered some valuable experience and should not be taken for granted. It is
therefore encouraging to see that Telkom is discussing the sale of its
fixed - line business and its 50% holding in the cellular phone company
Vodacom with different prospective bidders.

In the light of the high costs of particularly fixed telecoms in South
Africa, which ranks amongst the world’s highest, the manner in which the
cell transactions are structured will be crucial, especially in terms of
how it may impact on the unbundling of the local loop.

The DA will therefore be vigilant in its oversight at the sale of Telkom
assets to ensure that growth, job creation and the consumer benefit. Thank
you.

      ESCAPE OF SEVEN AWAITING-TRIAL DETAINEES FROM CORRECTIONAL CENTRE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, Chairperson.

Ek het belowe dat koppe sal rol. [I promised that heads would roll.]

The right heads will definitely roll. It won’t be the wrong heads. The
awaiting-trial detainees’ escape in Mthatha is not acceptable at all. I’ve
said it many times over and over again. One escape is one escape too many.
Regional and national task teams are hard at work in Mthatha right now to
find out who was posted where and why they didn’t do their jobs properly.
Suspensions will be taking place this afternoon. A combined team of
Correctional Services and SA Police Service has already re-arrested one of
the offenders. By the end of the week, I do hope to get better news on all
of them.

The upgrading of security in most of our centres is taking place all over
the country. Mthatha is one of those that are being upgraded with a
security fence, electric fence and with CCTV cameras. All four towers in
Mthatha were manned when this escape happened and none of the people in the
towers saw anything, and that is interesting - that they are in the towers
and they didn’t see anything.

Somebody did not switch on the electric fence outside and somebody did not
put the security lights on. Those people are going to be suspended this
afternoon, not tomorrow. Thank you.

                          CO-OPERATIVE COLLECTIVES
                              ZIMBABWEAN CRISIS
                               PRICE OF BREAD

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, a few statements I would like to
respond to - the first from the hon Skosana.

Congratulations on your new appointment, sir, but in respect of the
statement and the co-operative movement I think it is something that the
House would obviously support. I wish to draw attention to the fact that
next Tuesday, 11 September, this House will debate the Co-operative Banks
Bill, which is a very important step forward in the direction of supporting
institutions that are multiple owned that can be advanced, and I’m hoping
through organs of civil society a range of other co-operatives will be
advanced, including in areas like housing where the profit motive has
actually cut back quite tremendously on what people can be entitled to.

The second statement I would like to respond to is the one by the hon
Dudley. Now, I think that part of what she is saying, is self-defeating,
because it’s the many factions in organisations like the MDC and also in
organs of civil society, including within the churches, that have actually
created more difficulty. [Interjections.]

Sorry, Chair, I listened carefully. I didn’t interrupt her ... and the key
issue is that we must commit to a process. You can’t issue statements every
day people have discussed issues. It’s going to take a while, but at the
end of it, the statements that must be issued should be issued by
Zimbabweans, because the individuals who participate in the process are
able to secure the mandate from the respective organisations. That is the
only way in which you can drive change in a country and that is what we
must hold out for. The more we hope for statements that please this one or
that one, the less chance of success there is in their endeavour.

The third statement I would like to respond to is the one by the hon Pheko.
Are you still from the PAC, sir? Yes. The issue he raises is a very
important and sensitive one, namely the price of bread. Now, across the
world you have seen, as a result of climate change and also general
commodity price cycles, changes in the prices of both wheat and maize. With
maize it is partly because of its use in bio-fuel; subsidised maize is
being used to produce fuels primarily in the United States. This is not a
very good way to support food security, clearly, but in respect of wheat
prices there has been a very significant change. Pasta across Italy, for
instance, has increased by about 30% in the past six weeks. So, we are not
alone in this and I think that part of it requires a national response.

If we try and cap prices here we will create all manner of difficulties for
ourselves. Better we ask the Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs to
lead a process in the FAO – the Food and Agricultural Organisation - to
ensure that we can deal with food security quite differently from merely
looking at the price of basic inputs like maize and wheat as commodities in
the same way as you would with metals, for instance. I thank you, Chair.
                               FLOOR-CROSSING
                          CO-OPERATIVE COLLECTIVES
                             POVERTY ERADICATION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I thank the
Minister of Finance for the advice, but we have also asked the Competition
Commission to look at food prices; starting at the producer, to processors,
and also retail to look at what the impact is and also where the problems
are at that level.

I also want to comment on floor-crossing and just remind members that it is
not actually the ANC that wanted this floor-crossing. I think we must
remember that it actually came from the DA and other small parties, and the
ANC was just a democratic organisation as it always was in allowing people
... [Interjections.]

Ms S KALYAN: Chairperson, on a point of order: I would like to know to
which statement in particular the Minister is responding.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I’m responding to the hon
member here who talked about floor-crossing – the first statement - and I
also want to say all we are doing is to welcome those people ...
[Interjections.]

Ms S KALYAN: Point of order, Chairperson: Was it a motion or a statement?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, order! We will allow ...

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: There was a statement on
floor-crossing.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: We are just responding and
welcoming people who have seen the light and who realise which party is
here for democracy and to deliver to our people.

I thank hon Skosana for his comments and I also want to support his views
on co-operatives. Already the Department of Agriculture has a directorate
that is working on building co-operatives; promoting them, also training
our communities. Also, the Department of Trade of Industry has a huge co-
operative unit and we are working together in building the co-operative
movement in South Africa.

Lastly, I want to commend hon Ngcengwane for assisting farmworkers in her
constituency, Mogale City, and want I to say that as government, the matter
of farmworkers or farm dwellers is being attended to. A committee has been
formed under the Deputy President, comprising the SA Police Service,
Agriculture, Land Affairs, Justice, as well as the Department of Labour –
led by the Department of Labour. Unions have also participated as well as
the unions of farmers.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon Minister, we are
running out of time.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much. [Time
expired.]

                         DISPOSING OF AILING ALEXCOR

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, I have it from an
exceptionally reliable source, namely my colleague sitting in front of me,
that there was a statement made in regard to Alexcor. Let me very briefly
say that most members, I am sure, are familiar with this situation. There
is a land claim that was made on that land; we’ve been negotiating with
that community for a long time and we are very pleased that we have signed
a broad framework agreement, which is a very comprehensive settlement
package. I’m also pleased to say that on Friday we took a further step
forward, a very important step forward.
For Alexcor, this has been an exceptionally difficult time because we
cannot capitalise given the negotiations, but these agreements have put us
in a far better position to move forward. The next step is to go to court
to make the settlement an order of court and at that time I will make a
full statement on it. But, quite clearly, at the moment, any idea of the
state suddenly withdrawing is not legally impossible, but it would be a
real problem for that community and we will make a full statement when the
court has ruled on this matter. Thank you.

                  CRIME NOT PRIORITY FOR SA POLICE SERVICE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, may I indicate
that crimes committed in this country that are reported by any individual,
including the Human Rights Commission, are taken seriously by the police.
No matter how many times such cases or crimes are committed, they continue
to be a priority for the police in our country.

Currently, we have various teams that work on burglaries as part of our
priorities and make sure that we apprehend any perpetrators who are
involved in any form of criminal activity. I must also say that we
currently have various partnerships in the SA Police Service really trying
to fight crime in this country, including business, religious leaders and
various civil society organisations in our country.

However, may I say that one of my major concerns in this House is that we
also have to be careful with regard to how we deal with the police as they
do their work on a daily basis. Hon Kohler-Barnard has never ever, in this
Parliament, commended any good work done by the police. [Interjections.] I
am just concerned and I want to know whether she is part of the people who
continuously condemn the good work or any efforts made by the police in
this country, or whether she is on the other side that continuously sees
perpetrators of crime as heroes. We need to be very careful, because some
of the statements she makes ... [Interjections.]

Mr M WATERS: Chair, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for the hon
Deputy Minister to mislead Parliament by saying that the hon Kohler-Barnard
has not complimented the police at all in their work and in catching
criminals? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! Hon member, that is
not a point of order. Please continue, hon Deputy Minister.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, Chairperson. You are
wasting my time, wena [you].

I want to challenge the hon Kohler-Barnard to please join us and be like
all other South African citizens who are working together in combating
crime. Businesses and individuals who have been victims of crime
continuously engage with us. You must go to church and pray against crime
and stop coming and heckling here. [Time expired.]

             LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROUDLY SOUTH AFRICAN CAMPAIGN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms E Thabethe): Thank you,
Chairperson. I would like to respond to the statement made by the hon IFP
member on the DTI dumping the proudly SA organisation. As far as I
understand from the chief executive officer of Proudly SA, Miss Manana
Moroka, the issue was under discussion with our DDG who is heading this
particular sector. It is unfortunate then to come here and make the
statement that we don’t care as the DTI and as government in terms of
promoting locally manufactured goods. The DTI has plus-minus 20 agencies
that it is serving and through that we have a lot of export promotions from
our own people that we support. There are exhibitions abroad and we pay for
people, including their tickets, accommodation and stands all the time. So
it is not really just and fair to come and make such statements, but I will
make the follow-up and check whether the problems that they had with the
procedures of the funding mechanisms were sorted out or not, then I will
come back to you.

Please, in future, don’t just come with such statements of the DTI not
caring at all about promoting the locally manufactured goods. We are very
aware and that is why we negotiated with the Chinese for a 30% quota, so go
and get your facts right and then come and criticise on issues that you
will be correct on. Thank you and we will come back to you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon Deputy Minister,
and that concludes Ministerial Responses. Before we proceed with the
business of the day, by agreement, I am informed that the Chief Whip would
like to move a motion without notice. Hon Chief Whip Mogase.

                 CONGRATULATING THE PARLIAMENTARY RUGBY TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -
     1) notes that Parliament’s rugby team has won their two opening
        matches at the 2007 Parliamentary Rugby World Cup in France;

     2) notes that our team beat the World parliamentary rugby team 10 – 3
        in their first game on Friday, which they followed up by trouncing
        France 22-12 on Monday; and

     3) congratulates Parliament’s rugby team on their achievements and
        wishes them well in their campaign to bring home the 2007
        Parliamentary Rugby World Cup.

Agreed to.

    REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, hon members, usually justice debates are quite
long and tedious in this House. I promise that this is an exception to the
rule. This Parliament has enacted legislation to repeal what remains of the
Black Administration Act of 1927 with effect from 30 September 2007.

However, the Department of Justice has advised that they are not in a
position to meet the deadline and put in place new legislation which will
effectively introduce a modern and constitutionally sound regime as it
pertains to the role played by traditional leaders in the administration of
justice in some parts of the country.
Accordingly, the department is requesting Parliament to effect an amendment
that in essence shifts the deadline for passing new legislation to 30th
June 2008. The department offers by way of explanation that, in preparation
of the new legislation, they face significant challenges including a more
than expected number of disparate provincial laws and practices in this
regard.

The portfolio committee was advised that a task team comprising officials
of justice, land affairs, provincial local government and arts and culture
had been constituted, which has prepared a discussion document in order to
facilitate consultations with stakeholders but in particular traditional
leaders.

The department has tabled a prepared scheduled outlining the processes
leading up to the tabling of legislation in Parliament in 2007 in November,
including the compulsory 30-day consideration by the House of Traditional
Leaders which will finally culminate in the passage of the Bill in the NCOP
by June 2008.

Hon members, it is crucial that the institution of traditional leadership,
in particular its role in the administration of justice, be modernised and
realigned with the fundamental principles contained in our Constitution.

We therefore trust that the process of tabling this long - awaited Bill be
given priority by the Department of Justice so that the new deadline of 30
June 2008 may be met accordingly. I commend the Bill to the House and I
trust members will support it. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

 CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY THE HOUSE OF THE EXCLUSION OF THE
 REMAINDER OF THE FARM HENDERSON 410 FROM THE ADDO ELEPHANT NATIONAL PARK IN
     TERMS OF SECTION 21(1)(a) OF THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT:
                  PROTECTED AREAS ACT, 2003 (No 57 of 2003)

Mr D K MALULEKE: Chairperson, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental
Affairs and Tourism wishes to request the NA to approve the deproclamation
of the remainder of portion 1 of the Farm Henderson 410 to the extent of
817,2515 from the Addo Elephant National Park and to proclaim another
portion, one of the Farm Henderson 410 to the extent of 706,5253 into the
Addo Elephant National Park in terms of section 21(1)(a) of the National
Environmental Management Protection Act of 2003, Act 57 of 2003, which
reads as follows: “(1) ... a declaration under section 20 may only be
withdrawn, (a) by a resolution of the National Assembly”.

The request for the approval is based on the necessity for the Addo
Elephant National Park and Farm Henderson to swap land for purposes of
integrating portion 1 of the Farm Henderson 410 to the extent of 706,5253
into the Addo Elephant National Park to Farm Henderson. The deproclamation
will ensure that the Addo Elephant National Park does not extend northwards
beyond the R400 provincial road for ecological and logical reasons. I thank
you.

There was no debate.

Exclusion of the remainder of the Farm Henderson 410 from the Addo Elephant
National Park in terms of section 21(1)(a) of the National Environmental
Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (No 57 of 2003) approved.

   CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT IN TERMS OF SECTION
     231(2) OF CONSTITUTION - INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON OIL POLLUTION
       PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE AND CO-OPERATION, 1990 (OPRC CONVENTION)

 CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT IN TERMS OF SECTION 231
     (2) OF CONSTITUTION - INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE CONTROL AND
   MANAGEMENT OF SHIPS’ BALLAST WATER AND SEDIMENTS – 2004 (BALLAST WATER
                           MANAGEMENT CONVENTION)

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, a few years ago there was a very severe
outbreak of cholera in a Brazilian port city and it resulted in thousands
of infections and a number of deaths as well, and the source of this
outbreak was traced to a ship that had pumped in ballast water in the
Ganges Delta in India and then pumped it out again while it was in port in
Brazil.

Here in Cape Town in our port the divers are reporting that the harbour is
suffering from an infestation of green crabs which apparently are a foreign
species and come from the Mediterranean and are devouring our local
crayfish. The source of the green crab is almost certainly ballast water
pumped out here in our port by visiting ships.

Now, those who have some familiarity with maritime matters will know that
ships have ballast tanks into which and from which they pump water in order
to balance themselves or to stabilise themselves, particularly when they
are under way with a very light load, with a very light cargo, a ship needs
ballast in order to be able to maintain stability and not bounce around
like a cork.

But when it takes on cargo then it will pump out the water to compensate
for the cargo and it is only really in the past decade or so that
scientists have become increasingly aware of the health and biodiversity
threats that are posed by the uncontrolled discharge of ballast water
potentially containing harmful organisms and pathogens, and the 2004
International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast
Water and Sediments, which we have in front of us, is a direct result of
this growing awareness.
Among other things the convention empowers nations to enforce the exchange
of ballast water far out at sea - in our case we plan to make this some 50
kilometres off our coast. It also allows for the inspection of ships’
ballast water and for the installation of equipment on board ships that
will monitor and also destroy harmful organisms in this water.

The second convention before us is the International Convention on Oil
Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation. The purpose of this
convention is self-evident from its name. It is to ensure that member
states put adequate measures in place to enable them to respond effectively
to oil pollution incidents and, where applicable, to co-operate among
states in order to deal with oil pollution incidents.

Cabinet has recommended that Parliament should ratify the ballast water
convention and to agree on the accession in the case of the oil pollution
preparedness convention. The transport portfolio committee has been fully
briefed by the Department of Transport on these two conventions and we have
also conducted a brief study tour and oversight visit to the Cape Town Port
to familiarise ourselves with some of the practical and technical
dimensions of these two conventions.

One of the encouraging features of our oversight visit was our engagement
with the South African research group that is working here in the Cape Town
port. This group, with the political support of the SA Maritime Safety
Agency and the Department of Transport, are in fact now world leaders in
the development of ballast water treatment technology. This is a very
inspiring example and we urge the relevant public entities, and not least
our Department of Transport, to continue to provide political support to
this project. The committee has unanimously recommended to Parliament that
these two conventions in question are respectively ratified and acceded to.
Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-
operation, 1990 (OPRC Convention) approved.

International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast
Water and Sediments – 2004 (Ballast Water Management Convention) approved.

The House adjourned at 15:11.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 31 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     (a)    Technology Innovation Agency Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Science and Technology. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Science and Technology and the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation.


2.    Translation of Bill submitted

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Reëling van Onderskepping van
              Kommunikasies en Kommunikasie-verwante Inligting [W 9 – 2006]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).

              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
              Communication-Related Information Amendment Bill [B 9 – 2006]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
              Corporation Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
              [RP 187-2007].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

          (a)     General Notice No 900 published in Government Gazette No
              30099 dated 20 July 2007: Prescription of a new form for an
              application for a registration certificate or provisional
              registration certificate, and the form of the registration
              certificate or provisional registration certificate: For
              public comment in terms of the Atmospheric Pollution
              Prevention Act, 1965 (Act No 45 of 1965).

          (b)     General Notice No 955 published in Government Gazette No
              30142 dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the
              Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends
              introducing the National Environmental Management Waste Bill
              in accordance with the provisions of Rule 241(1) of the Rules
              of the National Assembly.

          (c)     General Notice No 956 published in Government Gazette No
              30142 dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the
              Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends
              introducing the National Environmental Management Second
              Amendment Bill in accordance with the provisions of Rule 186
              of the Rules of the National Council of Provinces.

          (d)     General Notice No 957 published in Government Gazette No
              30142 dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the
              Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends
              introducing the National Environmental Management Laws
              Amendment Bill in accordance with the provisions of Rule 186
              of the Rules of the National Council of Provinces.

          (e)     General Notice No 954 published in Government Gazette No
              30141 dated 6 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the
              Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends
              introducing the National Environmental Management Integrated
              Coastal Management Bill in accordance with the provisions of
              Rule 241(1) of the Rules of the National Assembly.

          (f)     Government Notice No 711 published in Government Gazette
              No 30164 dated 17 August 2007: Correction Notice:
              Substitution of the map describing boundaries of the Vaal
              Triangle air-shed priority area, in terms of the National
              Environmental Management Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
              2004).

     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for
              2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 37-2007].

     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development:

          (a)     Government Notice No 736 published in Government Gazette
              No 30173 dated 14 August 2007: Appointment of Subcommittee on
              Amnesty, in terms of the Promotion of National Unity and
              Reconciliation Act, 1995 (Act No 34 of 1995).


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
              Foundation for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 149-
              2007].

          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the
              Boer Republics for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
              149-2007].

          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for
              2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker Museum
              – Isigcinamagugu for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [PR
              107-2007].


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report.
         The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              National Parks (SANParks) for 2006-2007, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007 [RP 173-2007].

          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National
              Environmental Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2006-2007 [RP 158-
              2007].


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for
              2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
              on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the International
              Marketing Council of South Africa (IMC) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 144-2007].

     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2006-2007, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2006-2007 [RP 168-2007].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
         Commission (FFC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 143-
         2007].

2.    The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements Clothing, Textiles, Footwear
         and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority (CTFL-Seta)
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 60-2007].

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
         Foundation (NFVF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 150-
         2007].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape
         Town for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
         Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2006-2007.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 102-2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on
     Proclamations No. R2, R24, R38, R44 and R51 notification by the
     President in respect of entities identified by the United Nations
     Security Council in accordance with section 25 of the Protection of
     Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act,
     2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), dated 29 August 2007:

          The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having considered
          the request for approval by Parliament of the Proclamations by the
          President in accordance with section 25 of the Protection of
          Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities
          Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), recommends that the House, approve
          the said Proclamations.


    Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism, dated 29 August 2007:

          The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
          having considered the matter relating to the exclusion of the
          remainder of Portion 1 of the Farm Henderson 410 from the Addo
          Elephant National Park in terms of section 21(1)(a) of the
          National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (No
          57 of 2003), referred to it, recommends that the House approves
          the said exclusion.


    Report to be considered.


                          MONDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees
(1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
    Committees:


            Constitutional Review:
            Appointed:   Montsitsi, Mr S D
            Discharged:  Schoeman, Dr E A

            Defence:
            Appointed:    Schoeman, Dr E A
            Discharged:   Montsitsi, Mr S D

National Assembly

The Acting Speaker

1.    Officials authorised to receive forms on floor-crossing

      I hereby authorise the following officials to receive, on my behalf,
      all submissions regarding change of membership of political parties;
      mergers of political parties; subdivisions of political parties; and
      subdivisions that have merged with other parties, occurring in the
      National Assembly during the period 1 – 15 September 2007, in terms of
      item 4 of Schedule 6A to the Constitution:

      Mr M K Mansura, Secretary to the National Assembly; and
      Mr M Xaso, Undersecretary: House Plenaries, National Assembly.

      Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde, MP
      Acting Speaker of the National Assembly


2.    Membership of Assembly (floor-crossing)

    Membership status of the following members has in terms of Schedule 6A
    of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed as follows:


      ▪ Mr N T Godi has, on 3 September 2007, left the Pan Africanist
        Congress of Azania (PAC) and joined the African People’s Convention
        (APC), a new party in the National Assembly.

3.    Membership of Committees
      (1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Portfolio Committees:


         Agriculture and Land Affairs:
         Appointed:  Mohlaloga, Mr M R
         Discharged: Nhlengetwa, Mrs D M

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

  1. The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of
         Public Enterprises for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2006-2007
         [RP 196-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
         Company Limited (SAFCOL) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pebble Bed Modular
         Reactor (Proprietary) Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

  2. The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
         (UYF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
         Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 93-2007].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
         Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 59-2007].

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
         Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority (MER-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 71-
         2007].

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
         Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education
         and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 68-2007].

    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
         Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
         Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 70-
         2007].

    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualifications
         Authority (MQA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 72-2007].

    (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
         Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 64-2007].
  3. The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
         Institution for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 153-2007].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
         Arts for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
         Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 191-2007].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
         South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 175-2007].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


  4. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
         Service (SAWS) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 114-2007].
                          TUESDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Public
         Protector of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         193-2007].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
         Corporation of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

Please note: The following items amend items 4, 5 and 6 under the entry
“Committee Reports” published on page 1392 of the Announcements, Tablings
and Committee Reports of 25 June 2007:

1.    Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions on the Legislative Proposal to amend
     the Lotteries Act, dated 15 June 2007:
        The Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
        and Special Petitions, having considered the Legislative Proposal
        to amend the Lotteries Act (Mr. L Labuschagne), and having
        consulted with the Department of Trade and Industry, recommends
        that permission not be given to the member to proceed with the
        proposal.

        The Committee further recommends that the Department of Trade and
        Industry incorporates the proposal into the department’s reviewal
        process, and report to it six-monthly after adoption of the report
        by the National Assembly.

      Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions on the Legislative Proposal to amend
     the South African Schools Act, dated 15 June 2007:

        The Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
        and Special Petitions, having considered the Legislative Proposal
        to amend the South African Schools Act (Mr. G Boinamo), and having
        consulted with the Department of Education, recommends that
        permission not be given to the member to proceed with the proposal,
        since the education legislation covers the first two portions of
        the proposal. It further recommends that the issue of investigating
        the low rate of school attendance and the high rate of school drop-
        outs be referred to the Portfolio Committee on Education for
        further consideration.

      Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions on the Legislative Proposal to amend
     the Electoral Act, dated 24 May 2007:

        The Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
        and Special Petitions, having considered the Legislative Proposal
        to amend the Electoral Act (Mr. G Morgan), and having consulted
        with the Government Communications and Information Systems (GCIS)
        and the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC), recommends that
        permission not be given to the member to proceed with the proposal.



    Report to be considered.


