---
title: 'National Assembly - 29 May 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-05-29
---

TUESDAY, 29 MAY 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G R MORGAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on behalf of the DA:


  That the House debates –


   (1)      the types of advertising that should not be permitted by
         government communicators at all spheres of government during
         periods leading up to elections; and


   (2)      whether the current GCIS regulations pertaining to advertising
         during election periods are sufficiently comprehensive.

Mr M WATERS: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the DA:


  That the House debates Child Protection Week.

Thank you.

                        PASSING AWAY OF PERCIVAL SONN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -


      1) Notes -


           a) with a deep sense of sadness the passing away of Mr Percival
              “Percy” Sonn on Sunday, 27 May 2007; and


           b) that, at the time of his death, Mr Percy Sonn was the
              president of the International Cricket Council, a position he
              has held since July 2006, and also the first person from
              Africa to occupy the highest office in cricket’s world
              governing body;


      2) recalls that -


           a) Mr Sonn contributed in many ways to the reconstruction of our
              country and that he served  as vice president of the Western
              Province Cricket Board since 1974, as president of the board
              from 1990 to 1992, became president of the Western Province
              Cricket Association in 1993, served as president of the
              United Cricket Board of South Africa for three years up to
              2003 and in July 2004 he was appointed as vice president of
              the ICC before becoming president in 2006; and


           b) Mr Sonn had worked as an attorney and advocate, served as
              Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions, heading the
              Directorate of Special Operations, and as a legal adviser to
              the South African Police Service;


      3) believes that Mr Sonn was a South African patriot who played an
         important role in the democratic evolution of our country and the
         integration of our cricket into the world game after the end of
         apartheid; and


      4) extends its condolences to his family and loved ones, Cricket South
         Africa and the International Cricket Council.


Motion agreed to.
                      CONGRATULATIONS TO RORY SABBATINI

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T D LEE: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -


      1) extends its congratulations to Rory Sabbatini on winning the
         Colonial on Sunday, 27 May 2007;


        2) notes that this was his fourth victory on the PGA tour;

      3) recognises that he is an inspiration to all young South African
         sportsmen; and

      4) wishes him well in his next tournament which will be the US Open.


Motion agreed to.


                ISSUES AROUND PEACEKEEPING MISSIONS IN AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T V TOBIAS (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the Portfolio Committee on Defence
hereby applauds the United Nations and the African Union for the agreement
on joining forces for the restoration of peace and security in the Darfur
region of Sudan.

The Minister of Defence, hon Lekota, earlier on made mention of the fact
that it is imperative that nations of the world should not shift
peacekeeping responsibilities to Africa only, and this is due to the fact
that it can lead to certain political ramifications if you consider the
sovereignty of states as well as the fact that it carries financial
implications which are not necessarily the responsibility of South Africa
alone.

Peacekeeping missions should be a priority of the United Nations as it is
part of the central responsibility it carries. Moreover, we as the
portfolio committee will expect that the issue of equal remuneration of
troops should also be on the agenda of the UN and the AU, as this matter
has been on the agenda for some time, and the AU component has not been
receiving equal remuneration, as is the case with the UN.

We expect that the United Nations will make sure that other countries
participate in peacekeeping missions so that the African continent and its
countries are not seen to be the only ones responsible for peacekeeping
missions.

It is imperative for this force to make sure that those negative forces
that seek to destabilise the continent are brought to book so as to ensure
peace and security. Thank you very much. [Applause.]


                 KILLING OF PATRON DURING ROBBERY IN DURBAN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, another young South African has
lost his life to violent crime. On Saturday, 26 May, seven armed men held
up the St Tropez restaurant in Durban. Four people sustained gunshot
injuries. Another person, Marc Joubert, a school friend of mine whom I’ve
known for 20 years, was killed.

There is something seriously wrong in this country when patrons cannot even
enjoy a peaceful Saturday night dinner at their local restaurant without
being shot at or robbed. Hon members, Marc Joubert cannot be allowed to be
simply another statistic, nor can any of the 51 people who are on average
murdered each day in South Africa.

At age 30, Marc ran a successful building business that employed several
people. He was a prominent and popular member of the Westville community,
and was due to get married to his fiancée in a few weeks’ time. Marc
touched the lives of so many people. Testimony to this are the more than
180 messages of condolence left on the East Coast Radio website in the past
48 hours.

Besides the outpouring of grief, these people are angry and frustrated that
the government has been unable to fight the violent crime that touches all
of our lives in some way or another. None of these people believe that
crime is a perception. All of them love this country, and want to
contribute to its success.

I intend handing over these messages to the Minister of Safety and
Security. I trust they will spur him on to redouble his efforts at bringing
violent crime to an end in this country. I thank you. [Applause.]


                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, two separate incidents of
violence in our schools over the past two weeks serve to highlight the
increasing problems that we are facing with regard to criminal behaviour in
our schools.

In the Western Cape, a Grade 9 pupil was stabbed to death with a pair of
scissors by a classmate at a school in Eerste River on Monday. A 17-year-
old boy has been arrested and will be charged with murder.

At a Durban high school in KwaZulu-Natal, last Thursday, two Grade 11 boys
were beaten by fellow learners in an alleged racist attack. The parents of
one of the beaten boys have called upon the education department to launch
an investigation into racism at that school, and the manner in which the
school has handled racism. This is the second alleged racist attack at that
school in the past month.

Violent and criminal behaviour in our schools is spiralling out of control,
and we all seem to be at a loss regarding how to deal with it and stop this
disturbing behaviour. Drastic measures have to be taken soon if we are to
save our schools from lawlessness and provide an environment that is safe
and conducive to learning. The department must make this a priority. I
thank you.

                SALE OF MUNICIPAL LAND TO PRIVATE DEVELOPERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu D M DLALI (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, umba wezindlu ngomnye wemiba etshisa
ebunzi, ekufuneka sisebenzisane kwaye sibambisane ngawo. Kodwa ke into
engumnqa kukuba kukho oongxowa-nkulu, oosozimali, abathenga umhlaba
kamasipala ngelithi baza kwakhela abantu abahluphekayo izindlu, babuye
babize amaxabiso aphinda-phindeneyo ngezo zindlu, angafikelelekiyo kubantu
abahluphekayo. Amaxabiso ezi zindlu ebengafikeleleka ukuba umhlaba
ubungathengiswanga ngurhulumente, ngoomasipala ke ukutsho.

Kwakhona, kwa aba ngxowa-nkulu bathi bafuduse abantu ngetshova besithi:
“Ngumhlaba wam lo, endiwuthenge kumasipala.” Nto leyo ebi ngena kwehla
ukuba bangaba bekusetyenziswana. Abantu abahluphekileyo bathi babe
ngamaxhoba oosozimali, oongxowa-nkulu ke ukutsho.

Sohlupheka kude kube nini? Igazi lethu limfimfithwa ngaba ngxowa-nkulu,
abangafuniyo ukubona umasilingane nempilo engcono kumntu wonke. Kanti ke
sasilwela umasilingane, impilo engcono kumntu wonke. Enkosi. (Translation
of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr D M DLALI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the issue of houses is one of the
burning issues, for which we need to co-operate and work together. But what
is amazing is that there are capitalists, fat cats, who buy the municipal
land promising to build houses for the poor, and then charge double the
price for those houses which the poor cannot afford. The prices of these
houses would be affordable if the land was not sold by the government; the
municipalities, in other words.

Again, the same capitalists forcefully remove people, saying: “This is my
land, I bought it from the municipality.” That would not have happened if
there was co-operation. The poor become victims of the fat cats; the
capitalists, in other words.

How long must we suffer? Our blood is sucked by these capitalists, who do
not want to see equality and a better life for all, whereas we are fighting
for equality and a better life for all. Thank you.]

                      TWO POLICEMEN KILLED IN CRAWFORD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I wish to
convey our condolences to the families and friends of Inspector Martin van
der Heyde and Student Constable Johnny Botha, who were shot and killed by
burglars in Crawford yesterday.

The ACDP believes that an attack on the police, particularly those on duty,
is an attack on the state itself. Therefore, it should be viewed in a very
serious light.

It is sad to note that seven police officers have died in the line of duty
in the Western Cape alone since the beginning of this year. We believe our
police officers should be given more intensive training about how to arrest
a suspect who is cornered, to ensure that they are not overpowered and then
lose their firearms in the process, as happened in this last incident in
Crawford.
We agree with members of the Crawford community, who have called for more
visible policing and active community police forums, and we trust that
government will look into implementing such measures as soon as possible,
and also speed up intensive training to ensure that our communities are
safer and police are more effective in the execution of their duties. I
thank you.

               COURTS INEFFECTIVE IN APPLYING MAINTENANCE LAW

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms F BATYI (ID): Deputy Speaker, with courts interpreting laws narrow-
mindedly, and with poor education and inadequate legislation, our women and
children continue to suffer without crucial maintenance. The responsibility
of caring for a child is placed on both parents under South African law,
but our women are all too often faced with the sole responsibility of
maintenance. This is in spite of the 1998 Maintenance Act, which was
brought in to address exactly this crisis.
Sadly, however, stories continue to prevail of confusion and inadequacies
in the courts, along with ineffective implementation of the law that
further prolongs the pain of claimants. I have time and again encountered
mothers who as a result of nonpayment of maintenance have been forced to
remove their children from schools.

I personally know of a Cape Town father who, regardless of a High Court
ruling, has not been paying maintenance. Subsequently, the mother of his
children has had to sell the family home. I will continue to get errant men
arrested, but without the government doing its bit, my efforts will remain
but a drop in the ocean.

                       LAUNCH OF THE AGRICULTURAL HUB

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nom J B SIBANYONI (ANC): Sandla sikaSipikara ngilotjhisa woke amalunga
ahloniphekileko. Isitatimendesi simalungana nokuhlonywa kwesentha yezeLimo
eKungwini eBhronkorstspruit nguSomkhandlu wezeLimo neBhoduluko wesifunda se-
Gauteng, umhlonitjhwa uKhabisi Mosonkutu nomnyango wakhe.

Sithokoza umNyango wezeLimo neBhoduluko wesifunda se-Gauteng ngejima lawo
lokuhlonywa kwamasentha alikhomba wezeLimo. Enye yamasentha la, yahlonywa
ekhaya labadala, iPhumula Old Age Centre koSontutununu, hlanu
kweModderfontein eKungwini eBhronkorstspruit.

Siragela phambili ngokuthokoza urhulumende wesifunda se-Gauteng ngokubulala
imikhumbulo engasiyo esebantwini abanengi yokobana imisebenzi yezelimo
ayikho esifundeni se-Gauteng, kodwana yokobana okukhona yigolide nemakhiwo
emikhulu kwaphela.

IKungwini, esiyingi seMetsweding ibalelwa hlangana nalezo eziseendaweni
zemakhaya ezisebenzisa zelimo ngokudluleleko. Leli lingelinye lamahlelo
ekuthuthukiswa ngawo iminqopho ye-ANC, ekwenzeni ngcono amaphilo wabantu.

Umsebenzi wezelimo sewulibubulo njenganje. Ngalokho, umkhumbulo wokobana
umsebenzi wezelimo ngewabantu abangakafundi nabaqalelwa phasi, kufanele
upheliswe.

I-ANC izibophelele ekwenzeni ngcono amaphilo wabantu kunesikhathi
esidlulileko. Isentha le izakusetjenziselwa ukunikela ngeensetjenziswa
ezahlukeneko zemisebenzi yezelimo enjengokulinywa kwehlabathi, ukufuywa
kweenkukhu neemvande zemirorho.

Amano la azakusiza khulu ekurhurumejeleni emuva imikhawulo yomtlhago
nokuletha ipilo engcono emnothweni wezakhamuzi zemakhaya. Isitjho seSesotho
sithi: “Mme o tlile, tlala e nyele.” [Mechanisms to push back the frontiers
of poverty are now in place.] [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiNdebele
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr J B SIBANYONI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, I greet all hon members. This
statement is about the establishment of an agricultural hub at Kungwini in
Bronkhorstspruit by the Gauteng provincial MEC for Agriculture,
Conservation and Environment, hon Khabisi Mosunkutu.

We thank the Gauteng provincial department for agriculture, Conservation
and Environment for its current campaign in launching seven agricultural
hubs. One of these was established at the Phumula Old Age Centre at
Sontutununu next to Modderfontein, at Kungwini in Bronkhorstspruit.

We continue to thank the Gauteng provincial government for dealing with
perceptions that there are no agriculture-related jobs in the Gauteng
province but only gold and tall buildings.

Kungwini is part of Metsweding, which is rural and more dependent on
agriculture. This is another ANC programme to fulfil its vision to make a
better life for the people.

Agricultural work is now a business. This dispels the notion that
agricultural work is classified as only for those people who are not
educated and underrated. This notion must be done away with.

The ANC commits itself to making the life of the people better than before.
This centre will be used to provide different types of agricultural
equipment for tilling the soil, poultry and vegetable farming.

This will assist us in pushing back the frontiers of poverty and bring a
better economic life to our rural communities. And the Sesotho expression:
The coming of the mother at home forces hunger to exude. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we need to revisit that expression because it
is being used quite often in the House. I don’t know how parliamentary it
is. Anyway, in the absence of a point of order to say that expression is
unparliamentary, we will allow it to stand.

                     LAND REDISTRIBUTION AND RESTITUTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M T LIKOTSI (PAC): Deputy Speaker, this statement is about land
redistribution and restitution. The PAC wants to reopen this debate on land
restitution and redistribution with the view that the majority of African
people who have been disadvantaged and dispossessed of their land did not
get enough time to institute their land claims.

The PAC wants to put on record that the issue of land is very sensitive and
since it is so sensitive, this House and this government have to apply
their minds very well towards resolving this problem. [Interjections.]

The issue of nondelivery of services is not an issue, because the most
important issue is the one of land that has to go back to its rightful
owners. [Interjections.]

The citizens of this country are dependent on us as the legislators and
leaders of this country to redress the issue of land. Thank you.

                    POLICE OFFICERS TARGETED BY CRIMINALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Deputy Speaker, the death of two police officers in
Lansdowne yesterday again highlights the issue of safety of our police
officers. Police officers are at an increasing rate becoming the targets of
criminals, which begs the question: Why it is that criminals have so little
regard for the police force?

It shows me that criminals have convinced themselves that it is not
difficult to counter the crime-fighting efforts of the police. Why is that
the case? The UPSA is of the opinion that the answer lies in a multitude of
issues, but the most important is government’s lame efforts to combat
crime.

The problem is that, as in many other instances of government resorting to
quick fixes, no thorough action plan is in existence other than the usual
PR exercises.
The government has acceded to calls for greater numbers of police officers
to be deployed, suggesting that increasing the number of officers in itself
is a solution, but the real problem is the quality of training of new
recruits and their level of readiness for duty. Was the constable ready for
the situation he was put in yesterday in Lansdowne? Do new recruits really
know how to handle certain situations?

In conclusion, we really need to ensure that we put police officers on our
streets that are sufficiently trained and thereby competent to face
unscrupulous criminals. Thank you.

                         WORK PERMITS TO FOREIGNERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Deputy Speaker, despite the Commission of Employment
Equity Chairman Jimmy Manyi’s bizarre assertion last week that the shortage
of skills in South Africa is an urban legend, an analysis of the 2005-06
annual reports for all 26 national departments reveals that government has
some 40 000 vacant posts.

The enormity of the crisis has led to calls by some members of the Cabinet
to recruit engineers, doctors and teachers some abroad. But within our
borders, as shown in last week’s Special Assignment on SABC3, there is
already a pool of skills among asylum seekers and refugees.

However, red tape and bungling in the Department of Home Affairs choked the
country’s ability to benefit from foreign expertise. Reports that less than
10% of the work permits made available last year to foreigners with scarce
and priority skills were taken up, confirms the DA’s contention that the
latest issuance of 35 000 work permits will not succeed unless and until
the chaotic Department of Home Affairs gets its house in order.

The provision of work permit quotas for foreigners with skills and priority
skills could be of great benefit to the growth of our economy. However,
like any government initiative, its successful implementation will depend
on the extent to which it is planned, monitored and evaluated. [Applause.]

          PERFORMANCE EXCELLENCE AT FENI POLICE STATION, MPUMALANGA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Feni Police Station is
located in Mpuluzi Constituency in Mpumalanga province. It services eight
rural villages with a population of about 96 000, according to 2001 census
results. This police station practically introduced a community
participation strategy and active involvement of other relevant departments
in dealing with socioeconomic-related crimes and other crimes.

These initiatives have yielded exciting results in property crimes,
including stock theft and house burglary, which have been reduced by 70%;
contact crimes, including assaults and rape, which have been reduced by
65%; and the dockets backlog, which has been reduced by 85%. The staff
morale is very high.

Just this previous Friday, on 25 May, in the Mpumalanga MEC’s excellency
award-giving ceremony in Nelspruit, this very police station got a trophy
and a certificate for being the best performing station in the Gert Sibande
District with regard to crime prevention and community policing forums. How
exciting!

This police station is a living example of what committed policemen and
women can do and continue to do in our country. We want to congratulate the
policemen and women who work in this very rural police station on the
sterling work they are doing.

We, nevertheless, request the Department of Safety and Security to assist
this rural but outstandingly performing police station with the building of
police cells, as they currently have to transport the detainees to other
police stations each time they make an arrest.

We would also like to request the department to renovate the police
station, as it is poorly constructed, and to allocate more vehicles to the
CPF section, as they have only one vehicle, which is of course maximally
utilised. Thank you. [Applause.]

                          TRIBUTE TO DOUGLAS GIBSON

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the IFP I
would like to pay tribute to the outgoing Chief Whip of the DA. Mr Gibson
previously served as a member of the Transvaal Provincial Council for 17
years and has been a Member of this Parliament for 16 years, of which he
has served 13 years as a Chief Whip.

Douglas Gibson is therefore one of the most senior and most experienced
Members of Parliament and, despite our political differences, I must say,
he is a much respected politician. As Chief Whip of the DA for 13 years he
played his role with professionalism, commitment and passion. We thank him
for the constructive contribution that he has made to Parliament during his
tenure. We look forward to seeing what role this senior frontbencher will
play in future and we wish him well.

The IFP would also like to congratulate Ian Davidson on his unanimous
election as the new Chief Whip of the DA. We welcome him to this very
important position. We know he possesses extraordinary skills and we look
forward to having a constructive relationship with him and his party, as it
has been in the past.

Last but certainly not least, the IFP would like to congratulate Mike Ellis
on his unanimous re-election as Deputy Chief Whip of the DA.
[Interjections.] As a former school principal and a very experienced
educator, coupled with his many years of parliamentary and whippery
experience, Mike is an ideally suitable person to occupy this high
position. We look forward to continuing our good working relationship with
him and his colleagues, and we wish him well. Thank you. [Applause.]

             OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE BY TWO GAUTENG HIGH SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nk P DANIELS (ANC): Phini likaSomlomo, endaweni yaseMidrand, Zone 15,
esifundeni saseJohannesburg kunezikole zamabanga aphezulu eziyisihlanu.
Zonke lezi zikole ziphumelele kahle eBangeni le-10. Kepha ezimbili kulezi
zikole okukhona kuzo i-Ivory Park Secondary School ebiqala ukufundisa
iBanga le-10, ziphumelele ngezinga eliphezulu kakhulu. I-Ivory Park
Secondary School iphumelele ngezinga le-99,34%; iMidrand High School
yathola 98,30%.

Ukukhuthaza abantwana nothisha ngomsebenzi omuhle abawenzile,
singuKhongolose siye safaka isandla ngokuklomelisa lezi zikole ezimbili
ngendebe engumantunta nendishi nekhompiyutha. Futhi kanjalo igatsha
likaKhongolose elibizwa ngeDokt Menzi Mthwecu, liye lafaka isandla
ngokuklomelisa abafundi ababili kulezi zikole ngohambo lokuvakashela
eLondon. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Ms P DANIELS (ANC): Deputy Speaker, in Midrand, at Zone 15, in the
Johannesburg region, there are five high schools. All these schools
produced good results for Grade 12. And two of these schools got
outstanding results Ivory Park Secondary School, which was offering Grade
12 for the first time being one of them, achieved a 99,34% pass rate and
Midrand High School achieved a 98,30% pass rate.

In order to reward and encourage pupils and educators for their outstanding
work, the ANC lent a hand by awarding these two schools a floating trophy
and a computer. And again the ANC branch, named Dr Menzi Mthwecu, sponsored
a trip for two pupils from these schools to London. Thank you.]

                        PROTECTION OF WHISTLEBLOWERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A M DREYER (DA): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, ’n forensiese ondersoek na
die finansiële bestuur van die Landbank deur ’n onafhanklike span ouditeurs
van Deloitte het ’n sensitiewe stadium bereik.

’n Informant van KwaZulu-Natal het belangrike inligting wat moontlike
korrupsie in die Landbank ontbloot aan die DA oorhandig. Die DA het die
dokumente aan die ondersoekspan deurgegee. Die informant ontvang egter
dreigemente en na ’n poging om hom met ’n motor om te ry, leef hy en sy
familie in vrees vir hul lewens.

Indien die regering werklik korrupsie wil uitroei, moet hy die samewerking
van die burgerlike samelewing verseker. Mense sal slegs na vore kom met
inligting indien die regering hulle teen intimidasie beskerm. Die Minister
van Justisie kan deur sy optrede wys die regering wil korrupsie daadwerklik
uitroei. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Ms A M DREYER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, a forensic investigation into
the financial management of the Landbank by an independent team of auditors
from Deloitte has reached a sensitive stage.

An informer from KwaZulu-Natal handed over important information to the DA
that exposes possible corruption in the Landbank. The DA gave the documents
to the investigating team. The informer, however, received threats and
after an attempt to run him over with a car, he and his family are now
living in fear for their lives.

If the government really wants to eradicate corruption, it should ensure
the participation of civil society. People will only come forward with
information if the government protects them from intimidation. The Minister
of Justice can, by means of his action, show that the government really
wants to eradicate corruption. [Applause.]]

                       SERVICE DELIVERY IN TSWELOPELE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Moh M F TLAKE (ANC): Ke a leboha Motlatsa-Spikara. Setatamente sena se supa
phumantsho e ntle ya ditshebeletso Tswelopele District, mane Freistata,
lebatoweng la Bultfontein. Mona ke pepesa katleho e kgolo e fihleletsweng
ke Masepala wa Tswelopele, tlasa tsamaiso ya Mme Majoro Kenalemang le
Makhanselara a hae ho tlisa bophelo bo botle setjhabeng. Lepetjo la ANC le
re “Better Life for All”.

   Pele ka rata ho bua ka motlakase. Ho tloha ka 2000 ho fihla hona jwale
   motlakase o kgantsha matlong a ka bang 96,88%; ho bolelang hore matlo
   ohle a kentswe motlakase.


   Tabeng ya bobedi, metsi - e leng bophelo - mane Tikwane le Phahameng,
   metsi a hlwekileng a dipompo a bapala bana lelapeng le leng le le leng.
   Ena ke tshupo ya bophelo bo botle ruri. Malapa a etsang 61% a na le
   tsebeletso ya dikgwerekgwere. Metse ya Tikwane, Phahameng le mapolasi a e
   potapotileng, mahae a 9 012 a neng a sebedisa mabakete, phediso ya
   mabakete e kentswe matlong a 5 332.

Ena ke tshebetso e tsotehang ya mokgatlo wa ANC, ka dimasepala tsa yona,
tlasa leano la “Better Life for All”.

Ha ke qetella, nkare Tswelopele District ka tlasa tsamaiso ya Majoro Mme
Kenalemang, e fumane kgau ya Vuna ka 2006, mokgahlelong wa B1, boemong ba
Provincial Municipal Performance Excellence. Ke yona mohlodi dimasepaleng
tsa provinsi. E fumanwe e le toropo e hlwekileng ho feta ditoropo tsa
Freitata kaofela. [Nako e fedile.] (Translation of Sesotho member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms M F TLAKE (ANC): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. This statement is testimony
to the fact that there is service delivery in the Tswelopele District,
which is in the Bultfontein region in the Free State. Right here, I can
proudly mention the huge success achieved by the Tswelopele Municipality -
under the leadership of Mayor Mrs Kenalemang, and her councillors - of
bringing a better life for all in the community. The ANC slogan reads thus:
“A better life for all”.

Firstly, I would like to talk about electricity. From the year 2000 until
now electricity has been supplied to about 96,88% of the houses, which
means that almost all the houses have electricity.

Secondly, water, which is our source of life, is available in each and
every house in Tikwane and Phahameng. This is really a sign of good life.
About 61% of the homes have waste removal services. In the communities of
Tikwane and Phahameng and the surrounding farms, out of about 9 012 homes
which were previously using the bucket system, this practice has been
terminated in about 5 332 homes.

This is really commendable work on the part of the ANC in its
municipalities, in accordance with the policy of “A better life for all”.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Tswelopele District, under the
leadership of Mayor, Mrs Kenalemang, won the Vuna Award in 2006 in the B1
category, in the Provincial Municipal Performance Excellence Awards. It was
competing against all municipalities in the province. It was found to be
the cleanest municipality amongst all the municipalities in the Free State.
[Time expired.]]




                                  LAND BANK


                             VIOLENCE IN SOCIETY


                            (Minister’s Response)
The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m glad to see you are back
in the Chair. I hope you are well and have fully recovered. I would like to
respond briefly to five of the statements that were made.

Let me deal first with the statement that stands alone and relates to the
issue of the Land Bank. Firstly, I want to make an appeal. Hon members know
that the Minister of Justice is a woman. As far as I know, Minister
Brigette Mabandla has never been a man. So, gender is an important issue.

Having said that, if we want to resolve the issues, let’s deal with the
Ministries responsible. It’s fairly easy to get up and make statements. I’m
sure Deputy Minister Du Toit will be able to advise that this is an ongoing
matter and that the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs has just, last
week, issued the instructions for the forensic order to proceed. So, let’s
not dramatise issues, let’s deal with issues for what they are.

I’d like to deal also with four issues that were raised by different
members. The first is the one raised by hon Morgan, the second by the hon
Zikalala, the third by the hon Rev Meshoe and the fourth by the hon
Simmons. They all deal with exactly the same issue.

The hon Morgan chose to individualise matters. Unfortunately, race, gender
and all of those things rise in the way in which he puts the problem. The
problem is that there is something fundamentally wrong in society that we
have to deal with. The problem in the way in which four hon members
articulated the issue is that it is the government’s responsibility and
they can rest on their laurels. We will deal with violence in society when
we join hands and deal with this matter collectively. That’s the only way
we will ever resolve this issue. It means that some firm decisions must be
taken, including – which the ``can’t-be-controlled DA’’ doesn’t want - the
strengthening of community policing forums and of course issues like the
training of police. Let’s stop blaming government. Let’s take collective
responsibility, failing which government will be held responsible even for
the things that happen in people’s homes. Thank you very much. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, I’m calling the House to order but
you continue screaming again. I think what we need to appreciate is that
debates are very healthy but you don’t have to scream to a point where we
can’t even understand or follow what an hon member at the podium is saying.
Let’s all exercise patience, irrespective of our differences.




                       SKILLS SHORTAGE IN SOUTH AFRICA

              PERFORMANCE EXCELLENCE AT POLICE STATION IN FENI
                          TRIBUTE TO DOUGLAS GIBSON
                     GAUTENG HIGH SCHOOLS’ ACHIEVEMENTS
                              SERVICE DELIVERY
                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Perhaps, Madam
Deputy Speaker, you should also be patient with the screaming member. He
may very well be screaming in excited agreement with the hon Minister.
[Laughter.] So, it might be necessary to be patient with him too.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, you are out of order. I was patient with
him and he was not in any agreement. [Laughter.] He was actually swallowing
his voice and I could not even follow what the hon Minister was saying.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I wish to comment on this
``urban legend’’. I find the urban legend quite amazing. I’m not sure what
is meant that it’s an urban legend that there is a shortage of skills.
There is definitely a shortage of skills in South Africa. There are people
who are trained, but are not trained for the opportunities that are
available in our society and therefore there is a mismatch which must be
addressed. There are people in our country who do not easily find
opportunities for work and clearly this needs to be addressed. That’s what
might have been meant by “urban legend”. But the mismatch exists and we
should all accept that it does exist.

I do not think it is entirely fair to put all the blame for addressing the
skills issue on the shoulders of the Department of Home Affairs. I think
several departments play a role in ensuring that we do attract the skills
that we want and that we carry through the administrative procedures
necessary for ensuring that if we hire people from outside the country,
they are easily admitted into South Africa and are able to start their
work. I think the Department of Home Affairs, clearly with the various
appointments it has begun to make with the turnaround strategy, is making a
real effort at attempting to improve the very difficult challenges that
they are confronted with and we need to recognise this attempt as
improvement and real change.

I think the comment on the police station is certainly understood and
welcomed. I’d urge the hon member of the ANC to continue to interact with
the relevant department in order to see whether we can indeed secure new
police cells or a new police station in Feni in Mpumalanga. What is of
concern is that she referred to there being only one police vehicle. There
are many police vehicles. Their numbers have been increased and I think the
hon members should try to find out why this particular police station,
which is very busy and successful, is not being given adequate support in
the form of additional police vehicles.

I was surprised at the thanking of the hon Gibson and congratulating of Mr
Davidson. I thought that had been done last week. But maybe the hon Mr Van
der Merwe wasn’t here and so he was taking his chance. So, we certainly
expressed our congratulations in that regard last week. I’m aware of this
even though I was not here in the House.

With respect to the actions of the hon members who support excellence in
the five high schools’ achievements in Midrand, I would like to thank them
for their support. We had an excellent debate with all parties
participating today in the Department of Education’s budget debate and we
agreed that we all need to pursue and support excellence in the promotion
of achievements in schools in our country. So, I’d like to thank the hon
members for providing awards, trophies and computer sets to children and
successful schools in our country.

With respect to local government delivery, I congratulate the Tikwane
Municipality in the Free State as well as Mayor Kenalemang for the award
that they have won. I think it’s very exciting when we see local government
doing the work that is necessary to ensure that the people in our
communities throughout the country have the basic services that are so
necessary for them to live a decent life.

Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]


                           PEACEKEEPING IN AFRICA


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to take
this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee on
raising this very important issue of peacekeeping, especially in Africa. I
think we all agree that Nepad goals will only be realised when there is
political stability and peace in Africa. I also agree with him that the UN
must not only prioritise peacekeeping, but it must move speedily into areas
of conflict.

I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

                 OPENING OF AGRICULTURAL CENTRE AT EKUNGWINI

                            (Minister’s Response)


IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZOHWEBO NEZEZIMBONI (Nk E Thabethe): Phini
likaSomlomo, bengithanda ukuphawula maqondana nesitatimende esenziwe
umhlonishwa uSibanyoni. Siyathemba ukuthi, singuhulumeni, sizosebenzisana
kakhulu namanye amagatsha. Kodwa sifuna ukusho ukuthi thina esibuya
KwezoHwebo Nezezimboni sisebenzelana kakhulu nalaba bezomnotho, kanye
nalaba bezolimo nokongiwa kwemvelo kanye nezokuvakasha.

Sithemba-ke ukuthi ubaba UMosonkutu wenze umsebenzi omkhulu kakhulu ngoba
le ndawo yasenKungwini ingenye yalezi zindawo ezingenazo izinto zokuletha
izinsiza. Kodwa sithemba ukuthi-ke, njengoba sisebenzisana nabo, sizokwazi
ukubona ukuthi singenzenjani ukuze siqhubekele phambili ngomsebenzi wethu
esivele sihlale siwenza.

Ngiyethemba nelungu lisakhumbula kahle ukuthi ngaseMjekejeke, onyakeni
ophelile, besihlanganise amakhosi lapho ngoba senzela ukuthi kuthuthukwe
kuyiwe phambili. Konke lokho sikwenza ngokuholwa umbuso kaKhongolose, ngoba
wazi kahle ukuthi abantu bethu kufanele bathuthuke, baqale amabhizinisi,
baqhubekele phambili ngezomsebenzi ngazo zonke izindlela.

Imifelandawonye yezamabhizinisi ethu, siwuMnyango Wezohwebo Nezezimboni,
isiqalile ukusebenza futhi ibambisene nobaba uMosonkutu nasebenzisana nabo.
Siyabonga kakhulu ngokuthi kubonakale ukuthi uhulumeni ungowabantu futhi
usebenzela abantu – uyophinde wenze njalo futhi. Siyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu minister’s response follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms E Thabethe): Deputy Speaker,
I would like to comment with regard to the statement made by the hon
Sibanyoni. As government, we believe in working together with the other
tiers of government. But we want to say that we, who are in the trade and
industry sphere, work closely with those who are in the economic affairs,
agriculture, conservation and tourism industries.

We believe that the hon Mosonkutu is doing an excellent job there, because
this area of nKungwini is one of the areas that do not have infrastructures
for providing services. But we hope that, as we are working together with
them, we will be able to see what we can do to the work that we always do
to move forward.

I hope that the hon member does recall that we had a meeting near Mjekeke
last year with all amakhosi because we wanted to see the development going
forward. We do all these things because the ANC-led government understands
very well that our people must be developed, and be able to start their own
businesses, and progress in their jobs by all means.

The alliance of our businesses, as the Department of Trade and Industry,
has started to work with the hon Mosonkutu and those who are working with
him. We are pleased about the display showing that the government is for
the people and it is working for the people - and it will do so again.
[Thank you.]]

The House adjourned at 14:44.


