---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-06-14
---

THURSDAY, 14 JUNE 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:56.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the Council I shall move:

  That the Council –


     1) notes that during the youth debate held yesterday on 13 June 2007,
        the leader of the DA rose to apologise publicly for the role they
        played in the apartheid structures, programmes and forums, which led
        to the deaths, maiming and detention of young people who were at the
        forefront of fighting for a nonracial, nonsexist and democratic
        South Africa;
     2) further notes that the hon Watson committed his party – in this
        instance, the DA – to going out and mobilising young people of all
        racial and cultural backgrounds to actively participate in the
        political activities organised for young people during this month of
        June, which is youth month; and

     3) hopes that his party will encourage all South African youth to
        understand that South Africa belongs to all young people
        irrespective of their racial, cultural or ethnic background.


                          NOTICE OF MOTION IN ORDER

                                  (Ruling)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Just before we come to the Order of the Day, I
want to give a ruling which I said I would check when Mr Mzizi gave his
motion yesterday.

Hon members, I would like to make a ruling on the notice of a motion moved
by the hon Mzizi and objected to by the hon Shiceka on the grounds that the
notice of motion was unconstitutional. After perusal of the motion, the
Constitution and the Council Rules, I could not find any provision of the
constitutional rules with which the notice is in conflict.

However, I would like to caution members that motions which tend to either
infringe on the independence of courts or require the Council to interfere
in the function of courts will be ruled out of order. I therefore rule that
the notice of motion moved by the hon Mzizi is in order.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 19 – Correctional Services; Vote No 20 – Defence; Vote No 21 –
Independent Complaints Directorate; Vote No 22 – Justice and Constitutional
Development; and Vote No 23 – Safety and Security:

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, hon members of the House, the White
Paper on Defence prescribes that the secondary task of the SA National
Defence Force is to support all other departments in the execution of their
functions. Therefore, where any one of the departments fails to fulfill its
functions, for any number of reasons, government calls on the SANDF in
order to meet its obligations towards the rest of the citizenry.

Where, therefore, as in the present public sector industrial action, the
Defence Force is deployed either in hospitals or any area of life, it is to
ensure that government continues to satisfy the rights of other citizens,
and not – and I repeat, not as some have suggested - to deny workers who
are taking part in industrial action their right to withhold their labour.

That right cannot be taken away from the citizens. It cannot be taken away
from any workers in any sector, because it is a right enshrined in the
Constitution. Whilst the negotiations continue, government must ensure that
those who are taking part in industrial action continue to enjoy that
right. Nevertheless, those who are not so involved must also continue to
enjoy their rights – the right to life, the right to education, and the
right to all other amenities that they require.

It is important to understand this prescript. In dictatorships, in
undemocratic countries, the state often denies workers the right to strike,
in other words the right to withdraw their labour, as was the case in this
country before we became a democracy. In democracies, strike action means
the right to withhold one’s labour. That is why the government may not use
the security forces to smash marches, or to bust the strike by way of
preventing workers from picketing. Security forces are employed to protect
the rights of others.

The SANDF therefore ensures that the balance is kept between rights and
obligations – the right to enjoy those rights and the obligation to respect
the rights of others. The National Defence Force will never, for as long as
our Constitution prevails, be used to break strikes or to deny citizens any
of the rights enshrined in the Constitution.

I want to pause in order to thank all the dedicated women and men this
afternoon, members of the SANDF who are deployed in the numerous tasks
given to them under the Constitution and as prescribed in the White Paper.

This year's budget speech takes places against the backdrop of the first
state visit to South Africa by a democratically elected president of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome President Kabila to our shores
and greet him in the name of peace, development and prosperity.

I remind those of my generation – and want to educate the younger members
of the House - that the song that we sang when the House adjourned was not
composed when we heard that the visitor was coming. [Laughter.] This song
is a solidarity song with the people of the Congo, first composed by the
people of our country in the townships, and elsewhere, immediately or soon
after the late Patrice Lumumba was assassinated.

I remember that it was a song we sang whenever we were travelling, going to
soccer matches, going on school trips and so on. Then, I must admit, it
didn’t have the meaning that I now actually understand it to have.
[Laughter.] It is a truly long struggle of the people of our region, a
joint struggle with them.

This year then sees the most diverse deployment of the SA National Defence
Force troops since the birth of our democracy. As we speak, the sons and
daughters of our nation are staffing missions in theatres of conflict in
Africa and beyond, as well as at home. They willingly face risks and
dangers of varying degrees in order to advance the national, regional,
continental and universal objectives of building a peaceful future for
humankind.

Our troops are guardians of peace in Ethiopia and Eritrea; they nurture the
burgeoning democracies of Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
and they ensured free and fair elections in the Comoros, Madagascar and
Lesotho. Alongside their sister African forces they monitor and enforce
compliance with the humanitarian ceasefire agreement in the sweltering heat
of Darfur in the Sudan. They are providing much-needed support to the
Central African Republic in repulsing waves of attacks by northern rebels
intent on overthrowing a democratically elected government.

The SA National Defence Force is assisting Mozambique after the explosion
of the ammunition depot outside Maputo. Indeed, we are making further
preparations to eliminate other depots, which are posing similar threats to
the lives of ordinary Mozambicans. The SA National Defence Force is the
mainstay of these operations.
South Africa is currently the 10th largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Not only has it distinguished itself in
these areas, but alongside the work our nation is doing on the diplomatic
front it is contributing in no small measure to the rising profile of our
country. Indeed, its performance is not only acknowledged in all of these
countries, but the SA National Defence Force is now in demand in the
continent and beyond.

Peacekeepers who are placed in these conflict areas must provide security
and protection for the civilian populations amongst whom they work. They
must, first and foremost, stop the ongoing fighting and killing. They must
then be able to redirect the energies of the people into reconstruction
activities. They must be able to pursue integrated approaches to
repatriation, resettlement, reintegration, and the rehabilitation of
refugees, the internally displaced ex-combatants and their families, paying
particular attention to women and children who are victims of the violence
of these conflicts.

They must plan and implement comprehensive and well-blended disarmament,
demobilisation, rehabilitation and reintegration programmes – what
otherwise are referred to now, in peacekeeping circles, as DDRR programmes
– as a basis for consolidating safety and security.

Central to making our interventions sustainable, and in line with the
principles of security sector reform, we have to ensure that the thinking
of the leaders of new democracies is directed towards respect for and
loyalty to the constitutions of their own countries.
Peacekeeping interventions do not end with elections. The detail of those
activities suggest therefore that the training of the members of the SA
National Defence Force has become increasingly intricate because we have to
prepare them for various functions, some of which have nothing to do with
actual fighting. Some of them have to educate and mend schools; others have
been able to educate people in agriculture so that they can begin to
cultivate the land and make a living – activities that take people away
from warfare.

The alarming number of conflict-prone countries underscores the need for a
broader approach to conflict prevention, one that avoids an artificial
divide between preconflict and postconflict crises. It also indicates the
need for an appropriate mix of political, security, humanitarian and
developmental responses.

Securing just, sustainable peace in a conflict-prone situation means
building strong transparent states with professional, civilian-led military
and police. It means developing a democratic framework that tolerates
diversity. It means building an open civil society that promotes democratic
governance and personal security; and it means instilling in all state
institutions – but especially the security forces – a culture of democracy,
rooted in respect for the rule of law and individual rights and dignity.

The acceptance by the Sudanese government of the deployment by the United
Nations of a hybrid African Union-United Nations force in Darfur must be
seen as an important early step in allowing for this process.

Defence policy is classically regarded as a subset of foreign policy. Our
approach is that defence is politics by other means. In the current period,
the Defence Force must be seen as an instrument of politics, particularly
foreign policy. Defence strategy therefore is the art and science of
employing the defence forces of a nation to secure the objectives of
national policy.

The Department of Defence will continue to contribute to African unity by
focusing on our common political objectives. This will require a lot of
political work to ensure that other African countries understand unity as
we do, both at the level of political leadership and at the level of
military leadership.

We continue to increase our diplomatic defence missions abroad. We now have
defence representation in 31 countries, 17 of which are in Africa.

The appearance of non-state actors in different shapes and forms, including
private security firms and private military companies, needs to be reckoned
with. Private, military and all security companies are able to intervene in
conflicts today, tilting the balance of power in favour of their
paymasters. They have the potential to undermine legitimate constitutional
democracies. A case in point is the recent attempt by private funders of
the group that was heading to Guinea in order to overthrow the government
there. Indeed, some of the elements that seek to overthrow governments
command budgets that are bigger than that of nation states.

Whilst terrorism has been identified by the developed world as the biggest
threat, we maintain that poverty and underdevelopment are the biggest
threats to democracies in the developing world, because they expose our
people to manipulation by those of wealthier countries. Competition for
scarce resources is therefore another source of insecurity across the
continent.

Only this morning, the Congolese were pointing out the problem of so many
who continue to take their diamonds and other resources out of that
country, because the armed forces are not yet able to cover the length and
breadth of such a huge country. So, it is in this context too that we can
understand the situation in Somalia.

Very early in our new democracy, it was determined by the executive that
the defence industry was a strategic asset. Motivated by the desire to be
self-reliant, the government directed that all efforts should be made to
retain as many of our strategic capabilities as possible. We remain
committed to our defence-related industries, as a result. But, in order to
succeed in this area, we have to identify those which have the possibility
of survival in an ever-increasingly robust international trade as well as
to find partners with whom we can collaborate in order to conquer bigger
markets.

Our strategic capabilities are weighed against our threat analysis and our
national security plans. Consequently, we encourage and are in support of
all those initiatives which are intended to restructure our defence-related
industries so that most of the home-grown industries survive far into the
future.

When it comes to acquisition therefore we will prioritise, as indeed we are
doing now, commodities which are either domestically developed or those in
which South African industries have a stake. The South African defence
industry is now under the microscope, with a view to its growth and
development. Emphasis is being placed on an integrated approach to the
transformation of the defence industry.

It is a key industry in the South African economy, and all role-players
must participate in this transformation. This includes, of course, various
government departments, parastatals, the defence industry itself and the
private sector.

The Department of Defence has to respond to these challenges and go beyond
that. The African Standby Force was conceived by the African Union as a
rapid reaction force available to itself in order to deal with or arrest
conflicts on the continent. It is composed of five regional brigades. The
SADC brigade is being launched in August this year, in Tanzania. It will
have all the features of a rapid-reaction force.

It is very important that all the countries of our region participate in
developing and sustaining peace and stability in the continent. The
participation of the SADC members must increase interoperability and
commonality, and, as our country is the biggest in the region, the main
burden at the present time must fall on South Africa as part of its duty to
the continent.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Minister, could you summarise? Your time has
expired. Could you please summarise and conclude?

The MINSTER OF DEFENCE: This, in turn, will strengthen our capacity to meet
our challenges, whatever they may be. Therefore we will put in place a
system or a process by which all requests from the African Union, from
wherever else they may come, are processed at the SADC level so that the
SADC brigade, not South Africa, can be deployed rather than troops of
individual countries.

I will rest my input here. My colleague, the Deputy Minister, will have the
privilege of completing part of my speech and then read his own. I thank
you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I’m sorry, hon Minister. Members will be aware
that this debate is going to take us more than four hours, and that we were
also disturbed by the Joint Sitting as we could have started earlier than
we did. So, I will be slightly stricter with time. There is a timer that
tells you when to begin to round off. I don’t want to be nasty and tell
people their time is up. So, if we could just respect one another in that
regard.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon
Minister, Deputy Ministers, hon members, I greet you; and I am sure I can
also greet and salute comrades sitting up there in the gallery.

This policy debate takes place two days before the 31st anniversary of the
Soweto uprising. On Saturday, it will be 31 years since the youth of South
Africa marched in all parts of the country for a better education and
indeed a transformed South Africa. We salute many of those who bravely
undertook the journey and, in the process, sacrificed their youth and their
lives.

As our contribution to youth development, the department currently employs
134 young interns. These legally qualified interns have found a home in
court services where we have 69 interns, and 35 of them are candidate
attorneys placed in the State Attorney’s Office and some of them are also
on contract. About 15 are employed as legal secretaries and two are
deployed as State Law Adviser’s officers.

The department plans to employ 100 law graduates who will be placed at law
clinics of various universities in the 2007-08 financial year. We believe
these initiatives will strengthen our current pool of possible recruits
while at the same time providing an opportunity to the young graduates to
acquire the necessary experience that will help them compete in the work
environment.

I would also say it’s in that spirit that we now host a moot court every
year. For instance, this year we had students participating in that event
from both the University of the Western Cape and Stellenbosch University.

In presenting this budget speech I also wish to convey the message that we
have made progress in meeting the goals we have set for ourselves, such as
improving efficiency in the justice system and thus ensuring greater access
to justice for our people. I wish to take this opportunity to thank all
senior managers who are dedicated to their work and who, indeed, have
assisted us to meet our goals set in our strategy for improving justice,
improving service in the justice system and creating greater opportunity
for our people to access justice.

Within the broader context of the justice crime prevention cluster, I can
say here that broader synergies are being created. Various departments of
the JCPS cluster have worked well together, and I am pleased to be able to
declare that, as a cluster, we have done much to improve the processes
across the whole Integrated Justice System or IJS – the value chain. That
is to say we have established provincial counterparts of the national
development committee, and transversal activities across the various
departments are now being aligned. We have moved away from dealing with our
mandates in an isolated manner.

Let me now turn to the budget allocated to us and I would like to indicate
that the budget that we have this financial year is R8,5 billion. Some of
it, R2,9 billion, is allocated to Court Services, R1,8 billion is for the
National Prosecuting Authority and R925 million is allocated to Chapter 9
institutions. The budget allocated to the Court Services Programme includes
an amount of R467 million to improve infrastructure.

But, of importance to the NCOP is the fact that courts in various divisions
have been allocated budgets. KwaZulu-Natal has a budget of R294 million;
Eastern Cape – R300 million; Gauteng – R350 million; Mpumalanga – R109
million; Limpopo – R172 million; Western Cape – R219 million; Free State –
R156 million; Northern Cape – R71 million; and North West – R138 million.

This year, we are also very proud to announce that we have made great
advances in laying down IT infrastructure at all our courts. I am pleased
because it is truly modernising our courts. There is no moving back in this
regard. I am pleased to say that, no matter what happened, we have indeed
as of this month connected to 446 courts with our e-Schedule system.

For your information, let me give you a sense of what we mean by the IT
infrastructure that we are talking about. We have a justice deposit account
system that we have put in place and we are rolling out. All of these
systems move us away from the manual system that we have had. We have
rolled out this facility to 150 courts and we are left with 300 to go.

We also have a justice management information system which consolidates all
case information in the courts, electronically, in order to produce a
report from any location. If that’s not advancement, I don’t know what
advancement is. [Applause.]

We had working meetings with the Department of Public Works and I am
confident that there will be progress in infrastructure management and
development. About R308 million in our court capital works programme was
spent during 2006-07 on the construction of new courts and additional court
rooms to existing courts.

Improving security at our court buildings was a particular focus of the
department’s reprioritisation process during the 2005-06 financial year. I
am pleased to report that 50 X-ray machines and 200 walk-through metal
detectors were procured and deployed to high-risk court buildings. In
addition, burglar proofing and perimeter fencing were installed at all
court buildings. And that, to me, is progress.

An amount of R467 million has been allocated to facilities management. The
funds will mainly be used for the continuation of construction work of 11
major projects and for the planning and construction of new courts in
Katlehong, Garies, Bityi, Ntuzuma, Soshanguve, Lutzville, Ashton,
Bredasdorp, Sundumbili and Galeshewe.

The department plans to begin construction of new trial courts in Limpopo
and in Mpumalanga in the 2007-08 financial year. The process of acquiring
sites for these courts is at an advanced stage. There is, of course, a
budget that has been set aside for this. There is also money set aside for
the rehabilitation of the existing courts.

With regard to the two courts that I have mentioned, let me indicate here
to you that notwithstanding the delay in the rationalisation Bill, we have
decided to proceed. That is why we are reporting here that we are going to
be putting up those courts.

A major drive in the new financial year will be to ensure that our
facilities are accessible for the disabled. An amount of R120 million is
being committed in the current financial year towards making 36 court
buildings accessible for the disabled.

With regard to the NPA, the support and assistance rendered by court
preparation officials to assist victims of crimes, in particular abused
children, continued. There are presently 68 court preparation officials
with an additional 34 officials appointed with effect from 1 March 2007. A
uniform training module has been developed and is to be submitted for
accreditation. That’s all about access to justice.

Reducing the number of awaiting-trial detainees, especially children, was
one of the strategic initiatives identified by the NPA in the financial
year 2006-07. The objective of the project was to effectively reduce the
number of awaiting-trial detainees. You all know it’s a problem that we
face. The idea was to develop criteria to manage awaiting-trial detainees
according to the severity of the crime, the effective management of
children awaiting trial and to participate at provincial level in awaiting-
trial detainees’ structures.

With regard to sexual offences and community affairs or Soca, over the
years we have observed the sexual offences and community affairs unit
pursuing innovative ways of doing its work. One such example is the
conceptualisation of Thuthuzela care centres, which indeed is a world-
acclaimed integrated model dealing with violence against women and
children. Two more Thuthuzela care centres were launched in the past
financial year, bringing the total to ten.

On the international front, Soca provides training to officials from
various African countries on sexual offences and advanced skills in the
prosecution of child sex offenders and child victim management. This
training was also rolled out nationally to prosecutors and other role-
players. Of course, through Project Ndabezitha – eyamakhosi [for
traditional leaders] – Soca successfully trained one of our traditional
leaders from five provinces on managing domestic violence in rural areas.
And who can deny that this indeed is access to justice at work.

With regard to the priority crimes litigation unit, the unit manages and
directs investigations and prosecutions of priority crimes, including
contraventions of nuclear, chemical, biological and conventional arms
control legislation, and prosecutions and tracing of persons arising from
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, TRC.

With regard to missing persons, I reported that 36 exhumations have been
conducted so far. Twenty reburials have taken place. The unit has also been
engaged with various cases dealing with mercenary activities and nuclear
proliferation.

I now come to the subject of the transformation of the judiciary. I am
pleased to report that we are making progress in the transformation of the
judicial system. In this regard, I thank the chief justice and the heads of
courts in their leadership of the judiciary towards its transformation.

Two Bills, the Judicial Service Commission Amendment Bill and the Judicial
Education Institute Bill are before Parliament. I am certain that, with the
passing of these Bills, we will see greater transformation of the judiciary
system.

Let me say that I do have statistics here that indicate that we have
actually improved our cycle time in the courts. We are noting, through
reading the statistics before us, that the programme on case-flow
management is beginning to show results. I think in time we will be able to
present a more detailed report on this matter.

With regard to the Guardians Fund, I must say that we have recorded
progress in this area. I am pleased to announce that, in the past year, we
have managed to automate three of the six sites and we are hoping to have
all six sites automated by the end of this year. There is greater
efficiency and I do know that the Chief Master is working very hard towards
improving efficiency and capacitating the Masters.

I would like to conclude by calling on all of us as elected members, maybe
precisely because part of our competency is constitutional development, to
work together towards the advancement of the values entrenched in our
Constitution. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy
Chair, Cabinet colleagues, chairpersons and hon members of the select
committee, hon members of the NCOP and distinguished guests, our rallying
cry in Correctional Services is “to serve with humility and pride”.

This month, the nation is celebrating the invaluable contribution of young
people in the liberation of our country. The young lions of 1976 braved the
brutality and the repression of the time to make their mark in the struggle
for freedom and democracy. Many of our hon Members of Parliament were part
of that generation of young people whose contribution will always be
cherished by all of us. Their determination to succeed against all odds
will always inspire us to ensure a better life for all in carrying out our
constitutional and legal mandate as Correctional Services.

In their honour, we have committed ourselves to development, integrity,
recognition of human dignity, efficiency, accountability, justice, security
and equity as values that will guide all our endeavours as the department
which was a bastion of the repressive apartheid regime.

We approach our assignment with the pledge never to dishonour the cause of
freedom, development and democracy for which many laid down their lives. We
carry out our assignment determined never to fail this cause. We remain
inspired to contributing in building a just, peaceful and safe society, by
enforcing court-imposed sentences, detaining inmates in safe custody while
maintaining their human dignity, developing their sense of social
responsibility and promoting the general development of all inmates and
persons subject to community corrections. I am happy with the progress we
have made cumulatively over the past few years in this regard, despite huge
challenges.

It is important to give an account of what we achieved during the previous
financial year which may have been drowned by a wave of public discontent
about government’s efforts to fight crime. We do understand some people’s
anger, their fear and emotional reaction to, amongst others, a violent wave
of crime that we have witnessed and that was well published in the media
albeit in a distorted manner.

With an allocation of R10,74 billion for the 2007-08 financial year, the
department houses in its 240 facilities 158 859 offenders. So, whenever
there is a clamour for one offender, I always look at people like you,
General, as people who are hallucinating. In a figure of 44 579 awaiting-
trial detainees, women constitute 2,1% of the total offender population.
This massive operation is a labour-intensive exercise currently resourced
with over 41 000 officials nationally. So, we are not talking about a
Mickey Mouse department when we talk about the Department of Correctional
Services; we are talking about a huge department.

Rehabilitation programmes are carried out in factories, in workshops, in
classrooms and on farms as well as within communities as an integral part
of blending our functions with the mainstream government programmes of
fighting poverty and underdevelopment. In many respects we are able to
produce enough furniture for ourselves, enough tools as well as food like
pork – we have got enough pigs in this country to feed the whole of
Correctional Services. We have enough chickens; we don’t buy eggs; we don’t
buy milk; we don’t buy bread; and we don’t buy vegetables to cover our
institutional needs while in cases of oversupply we donate that food to
local communities as a contribution in fighting poverty. Thousands of
families across the country can bear testimony to this – regarding those
who go around the country, not those who read newspapers only and read only
negative stories in newspapers. And, those are the people I’m fed up with.

One of our many pockets of excellence is Durban-Westville. Our young school
there produces the best matric results, which last year included six
distinctions by a juvenile offender, Sifiso Zulu. In the true spirit of
Operation Masibambisane, the SA Institute for Chartered Accountants offered
Sifiso a bursary to study towards a   B Com degree at the University of the
Cape Town upon his release on parole in January. He got his distinctions in
December and parole in January. He is at school now and he is learning.
[Applause.]

Foremost in our minds and hearts is the creation of an enabling environment
for effective correction and rehabilitation. Militating against this is
overcrowding, which is an international phenomenon, and scarce skills that
we don’t have. I am happy that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development touched on the awaiting-trial detainees, because, again, within
the cluster, we work very well together to try and make sure that the
system flows and the cases flow from the courts. So, therefore, I will
never stand on any podium and attack my colleagues in the criminal justice
system. It is not my responsibility to do that. My responsibility is to
make sure that I work with them. It doesn’t, hon Mr De Lange, take away the
responsibility that I will sit on them if things are not going well.
[Interjections.]

The fact that we accommodate 38% more offenders than the available bed
space remains unacceptable and we will remain resolute in addressing this
challenge.

We have what we call in Correctional Services the National Council on
Correctional Services, NCCS, that is led by Judge Siraj Desai and the
Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons that is led by Judge Nathan Erasmus. They
are pivotal in ensuring a continuous improvement in Correctional Services
and in strengthening integrated governance. I take my hat off to these two
outstanding judges and their teams for their incisive and visionary
interventions, without which we would have been poorer in service delivery.


Today, our co-operation with judicial officials, in particular magistrates,
has reached new heights, especially after a road show that has covered at
least four provinces where we shared knowledge, experience and strategies
for addressing challenges facing the correctional system in South Africa.

A parole audit commissioned in 2006 found that we have 19 584 backlog cases
across the country. We intensified this work with Case Management
Committees, CMCs, and the Correctional Supervision and Parole Boards,
CSPBs, and we registered a 49,6% reduction to 9 957 cases. We are keeping
track of all these through the parole boards.

The Cabinet legkotla of 2006 directed us, as Correctional Services, to lead
the project of re-engineering the management of awaiting-trial detainees,
MATD. An interdepartmental task team composed of people from Justice and
Constitutional Development, the SA Police Service, Home Affairs and Social
Development is driving the programme.

We have also established an embryonic chief directorate within the
department that will make sure that we take awaiting-trial detainees out of
our correctional centres. They will go into places of safety, so that we
can deal with those that are sentenced and who have already started their
sentences.

We are engaged in a higher gear of service delivery. I am happy to formally
announce to this House that we have a new national commissioner, Mr Vernie
Petersen, and I do apologise for his absence here today. He brings with him
a wealth of experience, knowledge and wisdom about Correctional Services
and our partners. He has been our regional commissioner in KwaZulu-Natal
and Gauteng as well as our corporate services chief deputy commissioner. I
have absolute confidence in his abilities as a leader, as a manager, as an
agent of transformation and a firm decision-maker who will take no nonsense
from anybody. I wish to assure you that Mr Petersen will pick up the reigns
that were left by Linda Mti and smoothly proceed from where he left. His
appointment is a show of confidence in the current executive management
that was put together by “Richman” Linda Mti.

I am also to announce today that we have appointed a new regional
commissioner for the Western Cape. Mr James Smallberger was confirmed today
by Cabinet as the new regional commissioner of the Western Cape and I wish
him well in his work.

Part of gearing the department for heightened service delivery is the seven-
day working week model we have adopted. I am happy again to say that the
target we set for ourselves for the employment of 8 311 additional
employees was surpassed. So, sometimes when I hear people saying “shortage
of staff, shortage of staff”, I wish that those people could go to our
centres and see for themselves. Some of them just speak from reading and
getting all the stories that they get from wherever and never go to those
correctional centres. I must say, there is one comrade here who never fails
to come and report to me about issues when he visits the centres. He was
sitting there, but he is gone now. Where has he gone to?

An HON MEMBER: Absent without leave – AWOL!

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: He has gone AWOL? We have also made
strides in numerous facets of building the requisite institutional capacity
within the department. We have adopted an integrated human resources
strategy. We have instituted a new dispensation for health workers as a
scarce-skill category of workers, and that is one of our biggest problems –
the professionals – but my Deputy Minister will talk about that.

We have also implemented a very successful relationship by building an
objectives model entered into with the Police and Prisons Civil Rights
Union, Popcru, and with the Public Service Association, PSA. I must say, in
the same breath, I want to thank those workers who have really committed
themselves to working for this department and who acknowledge, together
with the leadership of their labour unions, that we are an essential
service and therefore we don’t have to go out and do silly things.

We have also contributed to the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative
for South Africa, Asgisa, by engaging 500 unemployed graduates to gain
critical experience in our department of Correctional Services, DCS.
Security remains one of our main tasks within the department.

We have improved our security as well, with escapes being reduced to a new
historic low number since the attainment of freedom. Only 93 offenders
escaped last year during the 2006-07 financial year – from as high as 281
in 2002-03. You must give us a big hand for that. [Applause.] Thank you. We
are not only talking about Annanias Mathe and muthi and anything; we are
talking about the general picture of this country.

Regarding construction, we are busy with the building of five new
facilities. Kimberley is up and running and feasibility studies have been
done for the other ones. We will now proceed to the next phase of
appointing project managers. The Treasury, Public Works and us have agreed
and we have taken a decision that we are going to build the five
facilities. I’ll tell you where they are: East London in the Eastern Cape,
Nigel in Gauteng, Klerksdorp in North West, Port Shepstone in KwaZulu-Natal
– smile, MEC, so that when I build you Port Shepstone you will know where
to take them when you arrest them. So, please smile. We are going ahead
with those. The only ones that are left behind are Leeuwkop and Polokwane.
Regarding feasibility studies, Leeuwkop is still a problem; and the problem
with Polokwane is about securing the land, but we will get it eventually.
We have many partners that we work with including the National Institute
for Crime Prevention and the Reintegration of Offenders, Nicro; Khulisa and
the SA National Council On Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, Sanca; Business
Against Crime; Open Society Foundation; Moral Regeneration Movement as well
as the University of Tshwane.

Have you heard what I said? I have not mentioned the SA Prisoners
Organisation for Human Rights, Sapohr, because I don’t have a partnership
with Sapohr. I’ll never have a partnership with Sapohr. It is as simple as
that. [Interjections.] He got arrested the other day wearing the uniform of
a prisoner. Police, everywhere you see anybody wearing the uniform of
prisoners, arrest them. Arrest them and let them get charged. Glorifying
wrong acts of offenders and ...

Let me express my gratitude to Kgoshi. Thank you very much to you and your
select committee for the collective wisdom that you bring to us. Your
oversight role enables us to focus on the ball rather than on the person.
Thank you very much for the collective leadership that you and your members
provide. [Applause.]

My gratitude goes to my officials who work day in and day out, even those
who are in Ncome, those who are in Ixopo, Polokwane, Tzaneen and all over
the country who work very hard. I’m saying thank you to them for the work
that they do and their commitment.

I know we are looked at as a very negative department, but I know we are
turning the tide. Things are coming around and I’m making a call to all of
you, as members of the NCOP: Do visit prisons or correctional centres. You
know, I am interchanging so that you know correctional centres are prisons.
Please visit them.

Mluleki, don’t complain to me about the escapes when you don’t visit
prisons. Please, do visit prisons and make sure you know what is going on
in there. He always complains and says: “You know, your people ...” So,
please visit prisons. We serve with pride and humility. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, we presented our
Budget Vote in this House last year and mentioned the issue of
restructuring the SA Police Service in order to better and bring the
services we render closer to our communities. I am delighted to report back
to you that we did not only dissolve the area offices, but we have managed
to cluster our police stations for improved command, control and co-
ordination. This clustering gives an opportunity to cluster stations to
unite in joint projects and deal with cross-station precinct crimes and
threats. In the end, there will be 198 accounting police stations.

The closure of the area offices and redeployment of those experienced
officers to the station levels has created and provided better services to
our communities. Operational managers and personnel from 43 area offices
throughout the country were redeployed to the stations. This will also
improve police response times to crime scenes.

The restructuring of our service will not be complete without the
involvement of our communities. We have formed partnerships with relevant
stakeholders in our communities and we hope they will be the eyes and ears
of the police. Those are the principles that will guide us as we implement
our philosophy in community policing. In the early years of our democracy
it was difficult to build confidence between our communities and the
police, but things are much better now. However, we still need to continue
creating better levels of trust between the people and the police.

Community policing as an appropriate policing philosophy for South Africa
has been discussed with several stakeholders and was endorsed. We
deliberated the matter with the labour unions. We have also interacted with
the relevant unions, Sapu and Popcru, which are subjective partners in the
police. We are also engaging with other stakeholders, which would include
other religious groupings and the business sector.

In many communities where people work together with police, levels of crime
have gone down. Apart from patrolling their streets, the people have also
established networks to generate and share information. That information is
given to the police and has helped to enhance investigations.

The experience of good partnerships between the people and the police has
become a feature in communities such as Alexandra, Sebokeng, Orange Farm,
Orlando, Duduza and Jabulani in Gauteng province; Gugulethu, Maitland and
Khayelitsha in the Western Cape; Fernie and Kwaggafontein in Mpumalanga;
Tumahole in the Free State; Tsolo and Queenstown in the Eastern Cape;
Kuruman in Northern Cape; Ezibayeni, Osizweni and Kokstad in KwaZulu-Natal;
Giyani in Limpopo; just to mention a few.

Community policing forums, CPFs, have a special task to co-ordinate the
relationship between communities and the police. The new arrangement will
allow CPFs, together with communities, to discuss with the police the
priorities affecting the relevant communities and put together a policing
programme that will be co-owned by the communities and the police. The
police must go back to the communities and report on the crime trends in
their areas and on the extent to which they are succeeding in reducing
crime in their areas. This will assist with the oversight regarding the
performance of police on the basis of the agreed priorities by the relevant
communities and police.

We need to look at how we define the relationship between the SA Police
Service and the municipal police services. In this regard, I want to
indicate that it is not our intention to change the administrative
relationship between the municipal police services and their
municipalities. But, our intention is to realign the means for better
command and control with powers which fall under the national police
commissioner as stated in the Constitution.

Currently, there are many challenges we face in the fight against crime.
One of the matters we are dealing with is the nature of the violent crime
we are experiencing in South Africa. The manner in which crime is
accompanied by such a high degree of violence in our country has become a
serious concern, therefore all of us need to be concerned in making sure
that we participate and partner in fighting crime in this country.

At this stage, in more than 50% of cases where people are murdered, we must
indicate that firearms were used. A study over the past 10 years also
indicates that firearms were used in 77,6% of attempted murder cases and
81,5% of aggravated robberies. That shows the level of challenge we are
facing when it comes to the firearms in our country.

As a way of dealing with the challenges in the fight against crime in our
country, the SA Police Service is involved in other projects with various
stakeholders. One of those projects is a joint action plan between the
Department of Education and the SAPS, which is aimed at improving safety at
schools. These partnerships intend to address issues such as security
control and infrastructural challenges at schools. Strategies have been
developed to address problems such as bullying, carrying and use of
dangerous weapons, gangs, substance abuse and other criminal actions.

The Safer Schools Programme resulted in the development of an integrated
guideline on safer schools. This programme aims to establish strategic
links between schools and relevant police stations. But also, as the SAPS,
we welcome and support the proposed legislation on random searches and
seizures in schools. We also acknowledge the ongoing challenge of violence
at schools which has, in many instances, resulted in the attack and killing
of educators and learners.

Over the past six years we have continued to increase the human and
material resources of the SA Police Service. Particular attention over the
years has also been paid to the revision of conditions of service for
members regarding better remuneration packages and other benefits.

Currently, the personnel numbers in the service escalated from
140 560 in 2003-04 to 149 060 in 2004-05 and 156 060 in 2005-06. Currently
we are at 163 060. By the end of the 2009-10 financial year, the personnel
strength will be 193 240. The service, therefore, has seen expansion by 44
060 members since 2003. Replacement of personnel losses during that period
was 20 000, bringing the figure therefore to 64 060.

The budget of the SA Police Service has also seen a growth of 58% from the
2003-04 financial year to the 2007-08 financial year. The biggest slice of
our budget, R15,5 billion, is for visible policing, that is crime
prevention. Visible policing is divided into crime prevention, borderline
security and specialised interventions.

We need to indicate that, over the past three years, the allocated budget
for policing has increased by 43%. Personnel expenditure continues to be
the biggest portion of the budget. More money has been invested in the
further expansion of the vehicle fleet, radio communication, information
technology and firearms. We also need to indicate that the budget for the
2010 Soccer World Cup has been adequately enhanced.

To further enhance our police capacity, we are going to invest in mobile
command vehicles and helicopters that will be fitted with modern technology
over the next three years. We will buy three such vehicles in the current
financial year and we will be able to buy five mobile command vehicles and
seven helicopters as part of crime combating in our country.

Last year, we reported on the agreement between the SAPS and the Department
of Public Works. This agreement allowed police to assume responsibility for
their own accommodation. Since then, we have upgraded 19 police stations
and built 11 new police stations. So far, the latest police stations built
have victim-friendly facilities for the victims of sexual abuse. The
current police stations are also being upgraded to ensure that victim-
friendly facilities exist in all our police stations. We are also building
a forensic science laboratory in Parow, which we hope will assist in our
forensic matters.

In the Gauteng province we have established a new digital trunk radio
network which incorporates the Tetra system, which assists in facilitating
comprehensive policing and better response to the needs of our communities.
It will be switched on during October this year.

We have established a hi-tech project centre that will satisfy the need for
a better co-ordinated approach to crime information and the utilisation of
available skills and technology. This centre has given investigators easy
access to all relevant information which they have used successfully to
oppose bail, identify suspects and apprehend wanted persons.

We have used the centre in recent times on organised aggravated robberies,
including cash-in-transit heists, bank robberies and break-ins. We are also
paying special attention to residential and business robberies, and vehicle
hijacking. In the relatively short period that we have been using the
centre, a number of successes have been achieved in provinces such as
KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo and Eastern Cape. Currently we are also looking at
cyberspace crime or “e-crime” as often as we can, because it also poses a
big challenge for us as the police, especially when it comes to globalised
crime in our world.

In the endeavours of the SAPS to address the scourge of serious and violent
crime, various integrated strategies were adopted. One of them was a
strategy which had an emphasis on arresting perpetrators wanted for murder
and attempted murder.

We have established a dedicated permanent capacity in the police, referred
to as the investigative psychological unit, to address other serious
contact crimes like serial murder and rape cases. This unit has already
yielded positive results.

The use of firearms during incidents of crime has become a serious concern
in our country. We will continue increasing the issuing of competency
certificates which will assist in dealing with the concerns and the
blockages in the firearms control offices. A total of 120 121 competency
certificates were finalised and 84 885 renewal firearm licences have
already been issued.

We are currently busy training and making sure that the SA Police Service
is properly and adequately capacitated. Therefore we have provided various
training courses for our students and for those who are already in the
Police Service.

We recognise the challenges faced by the Independent Complaints Directorate
and we will continue with all efforts to ensure that problems about not
accessing the ICD receive special attention, and that we are able to expand
the ICD to all areas in our country.

The secretariat has been tasked with assisting the community policing
forums, CPFs, in the programme by revamping them. It is envisaged that the
reorganisation of the CPFs will continue into the next financial year. The
secretariat will lead the process of reviewing legislation in this instance
and also on amendments to the South African Police Service Act. I thank
you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson and hon members, it is that time of the
year again when, as Parliament, we are expected to pronounce our verdict on
the performance of those respective departments. But before I do that,
allow me to express my sincere thanks to my Ministers and Deputy Ministers
for their co-operation with yours truly and my committee. For example, the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development and her deputy
addressed the committee two days ago and the committee was so enriched by
the inputs by the two politicians. We all agree that self-motivation
cultivates passion in others to work.

If something happened in the Department of Correctional Services, yours
truly and his committee would be the first to know about whatever happened,
because the hon Minister and his deputy are not shy to pick up their phones
and inform us timeously. What more could we ask for? Whenever we ask these
two to come and brief us at any time, they are also available. It is true
that your reputation is not built on what you are going to do but on what
you have done. It is the same case with other Ministers when they are not
engaged with their heavy schedule.

What makes me happy is that whenever we visit provinces, officials from all
these cluster departments are always there to make sure that our visits are
without obstacles. It is true that unless you believe, you will never
understand. Yes, we agree it is true that when you shoot for the moon, even
if you miss you should not mind because you will land amongst the stars.
Thanks to you my humble, cool, evergreen, dedicated, magnificent,
wonderful, calculated, excellent and dynamic Ministers and Deputy
Ministers.

Back to the verdict on the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development: Hon Minister, let me take this opportunity to thank you and
your deputy for the support that you always give this committee. Let me
convey my thanks to your regional directors, that is Adv Sonti of Limpopo,
Mr Malema of North West and Ms Tshabalala from KwaZulu-Natal.

The co-operation that we got when we visited these provinces was out of
this world. When we visit their respective provinces, they accompany the
committee for the whole week, non-stop. These are people we are going to
recommend to you, hon Minister and your deputy. If there is a space for
them to get promoted, do not hesitate, promote them. [Laughter.]

Transformation in the judiciary is no longer negotiable. Unfortunately,
regarding those who feel threatened or are afraid to hear the word
“transformation”, I think they are in the wrong country. Hon Minister,
please push as hard as you can – you have our support. To you hon Minister
and your deputy, the only thing I can say is: Just focus on winning this
game and to hell with how you win it.

During the budget hearing it was clear that the department is not doing
enough to popularise our equality calls. Maybe we need to improve our
marketing strategies, because they are available and they are helping us a
great deal. The only advice I can give to these officials who are in charge
of this programme is that they should use the same strategy that they used
when they were popularising Operation Isondle.

One other thing that was raised by many of our magistrates is the shortage
of interpreters in their courts. In one office, for example, there are five
court rooms but only three interpreters. Obviously, this means that two
courts are not going to function. I know you can do something about this.

One of the challenges that we raise is this: We discovered that from court
managers downwards, the gap is too big. Those managers have to use ordinary
clerks to assist them. The situation is not workable. Let me welcome the
idea of retraining our judges, hon Minister. We can’t wait to see the
operation of the Justice College.

I know that there are those who are reluctant to be retrained. Maybe it is
because they have reached a ceiling; one never knows.  Unfortunately, we
can’t compromise on this one. Let us just, as an example, look at the
sentencing patterns; let us look at the case of that young man who used a
toy to hold that Home Affairs official hostage. That young man was
sentenced for five years while he had been waiting for his ID for more than
three years.

Again, look at the case of that young boy Sello of Limpopo who was shot and
killed because he was mistaken for an animal. The person who killed that
young boy got a suspended sentence and he was able to pay the R10 000 fine.
Something must be done about our sentencing patterns.

In many of the offices that we visited we found that conditions were not
that good. I am glad that there is now commitment from the Department of
Public Works to come on board. The less I talk about it the better, because
the Minister has touched on that and was satisfied with the explanation.
Just imagine, hon Minister, in one office we were told that they were
waiting for globes from the Department of Public Works for more than six
months.

I am glad that the Scorpions are no longer using their Hollywood or FBI-
style when effecting arrests. It was not necessary. There was a big debate
in the newspapers, and in some parties, about political prisoners who are
still languishing in our jails. I don’t know how true it is, but I am glad
that the Minister dealt with it effectively. However, if there is a need
for it to be emphasised, we would be happy to handle it.

With regard to Correctional Services, escapes from our prisons are a thing
of the past or they have gone down drastically. Thank you very much, hon
Minister, for that. This was confirmed by all your area commissioners. It
was only the incident you touched on regarding that tiny man up there in
Pretoria who so nearly tarnished the image of the department. I am busy
looking for a date when we, as a committee, will sit down and talk about
some of the things that are still outstanding in connection with the same
matter.

I know, hon Minister, you have done well in responding to the Krugersdorp
incidents. Thanks very much for that, because you really acted swiftly and
to our satisfaction.

I think, hon Minister, your officers get a raw deal because they belong to
the security cluster, but when they want to bargain for salaries they are
placed under a general bargaining council. To some of us that doesn’t make
sense. Let us go and review it, because your officials are complaining
about it and they feel they would be comfortable to be placed under the
security bargaining council.

Time flies very quickly and it is so unfair to this committee that we are
given the same minutes as departments who are debating only one department.
We cannot do anything about this. Let me leave the other matters because I
might not be able to say what I wanted to say, based on the time allocated
to me.

With regard to Safety and Security, I want to thank MEC Cele from Kwazulu-
Natal. When we were in that province, he took his time and he was with the
committee for the whole time and he assisted us and made us understand the
situation in Kwazulu-Natal. Ndosi, siyabonga baba. [Thank you very much,
hon MEC.]

My colleagues will deal with some of the issues that were raised during the
budget hearings, because the clock is really threatening me. To my
colleagues, members of this committee, I want say: Thanks for displaying
those leadership skills. We started with these budget hearings from 7 May
until last Tuesday on 12 June, when we finished our meeting at 20:00 in the
evening. We didn’t even have enough days to meet as a committee hence we
resorted to evening sessions.
You have displayed those skills once more by demonstrating that you believe
in the sacredness of work, through which you must do those things that are
expected of you and, above all, fulfil the purpose for which you are in
this Parliament. As for me, I am humbled by that. Well done, colleagues!
What separates the diligent from the lazy, is that the diligent have the
mind to work.

Because I am left with only 13 seconds, let me thank my colleagues and all
parties in this committee. In my committee we are not politicking; we play
the ball not the man. I got full co-operation from these members,
regardless of their political affiliations. I hope and believe that even
when we are going to vote, they would do the same. Thank you very much.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chair, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, all MECs
present, guests, hon members, I would like to thank the various
departments, their Ministers, and in particular our committee chairperson,
the hon Kgoshi Mokoena, for arranging the detailed briefings over the past
few weeks. It has indeed been a very busy period, with our committee
sometimes sitting up to 20:00 and then the hon Deputy Chair having to
arrange supper for us. It has been much appreciated. I didn’t realise that
there were so many commissions and units involved.

The criminal justice cluster, namely Justice and Constitutional
Development, Safety and Security and Correctional Services, interlink with
one another. Due to time constraints, I had prepared an eight-minute speech
which I am used to having but I have been given an extra four minutes,
which is unbelievable and I can possibly go a little bit slower.

I intend to deal with only three of the five Budget Votes, namely Safety
and Security, Justice and Constitutional Development and the Independent
Complaints Directorate. I wish to apologise to hon Minister Lekota and hon
Minister Balfour, for I won’t be touching on theirs but they will probably
be saying thank heavens that the DA won’t be speaking on their departments!
I also want to avoid a lot of the things that have been said in the
National Assembly, where possible, because otherwise we are just repeating
things, but sometimes it is unavoidable.

Deputy Chair, whilst the crime rate is supposedly declining, in certain
instances many people do not bother to report crime incidents to the police
other than to obtain a case number for insurance purposes. Fifty South
Africans are murdered every day of the year and 55 000 women and girls are
raped each year in this country, with the majority of rapes not even being
reported. The crime rate is totally and utterly unacceptable! What perturbs
the public the most, and the Deputy Minister alluded to this, is the
violent nature of the crimes committed. According to the SA Police Service,
some 91 of their members were killed on duty during 2006-07. Just in the
past few weeks in Cape Town alone we had two policemen shot dead whilst
investigating a burglary. We had an incident on a highway in Milnerton
where a vehicle was ambushed and two of the occupants killed – reminiscent
of the Wild West. Learners even at schools are starting to stab one
another. In all these incidents not one of the perpetrators has or gives
one iota of respect for law and order.

Twenty national departments spent a total of R269,5 million on private
security firms in 2006. This total represents a R118,5 million or 78,5%
increase from 2005. This reconfirms that South Africa is in the grip of
serious and sustained crime. The criminal justice cluster is responsible
for a substantial proportion of this total expenditure – some R224 million
or 83%. There are possible explanations for this substantial increase but,
ultimately, every decision made was an attempt to increase security in
response to an increase in crime. The DA’s policy has always been that the
non-core functions of the criminal justice cluster should be outsourced so
that the police can focus their attentions on priorities elsewhere.
However, it remains to be seen whether this increase in expenditure is in
fact freeing up more policemen and women to fight crime on the streets at
the taxpayer’s expense.

The Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD, is an organisation created to
allow for public protection in the case of police abuse. One-fifth of the
entire SAPS’s budget – R5,3 billion – is currently owing in relation to
cases, many civil in this regard, which in itself demonstrates that the
Independent Complaints Directorate is a vital organisation. Some 529
members of the police were suspended for corruption alone this past year.

The ICD is, however, woefully understaffed and underfunded. More than 280
critical positions have been vacant since the directorate’s inception in
1977 due to a lack of funding, and some 22 satellite offices are still
required throughout the country. The DA supports the implementation of
these satellite offices and the additional allocations made to upgrade
investigator and lower-level support posts.

The National Prosecuting Authority, the Special Investigating Unit, Assets
Forfeiture Unit and the Scorpions appear to be well run.

Madam Deputy Chairperson, some of the magistrate courts’ buildings are in a
poor state of repair with many having no air-conditioning as well as poor
security and even poorer facilities for the disabled. We did hear the
Deputy Minister stating that R120 million would be made available to
improve the facilities for the disabled, about which we are pleased. There
is still underspending on the justice budget despite the many demands on
it. We do, however, welcome the R308 million spent on new buildings and
upgrading of infrastructure during 2006-07 and the R467 million allocated
for facilities management for the 2007-08 financial year.

Court sitting hours at all three levels have decreased over the past years,
but the Deputy Minister stated in his reply in the National Assembly that
the results were a “mixed bag” and that the courts performed no worse than
in the past. The people of South Africa, however, expect much improved
results. The lower courts currently carry 209 572 cases, with an official
backlog of cases over a year old amounting to 36 322.

The Legal Aid Board, which utilises mostly candidate attorneys, complains
that they lose many of their personnel who become prosecutors whilst the
prosecutors in turn desert for the Bench because of the pay increases given
to the magistrates. The Deputy Minister has stated that he is prepared to
discuss the matter with National Treasury and the Department of the Public
Service and Administration to see what can be done. A more structured
system needs to be put in place urgently.

In her recent presentation to the parliamentary committee, the chief
justice appealed for the contested clauses to be removed from the Supreme
Courts Bill and the Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill to enable the
urgently needed transitional aspects of these Bills to be implemented. The
Minister, however, in a media briefing stated that she was not prepared to
remove these controversial elements from the Bills, which many believe,
including the DA, will infringe on the independence of the judiciary. I am
sure that this House would like to know what the Minister’s intention is
with respect to these two important pieces of legislation.

Deputy Chair, the DA cannot support Budget Votes No 19, 20, 22 and 23 for
all these reasons and more.

I thank you, Madam Deputy Chairperson. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order! Hon members, in terms of
the Rules of this House, I’m still the House Chairperson. Can I plead with
the members to address me as House Chairperson or just Chairperson? The
position of Deputy Chairperson is a senior position.

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chairperson, hon delegates, Ministers, Deputy Ministers,
MECs from the different provinces, special delegates and our distinguished
guests, peace, justice and stability are the most fundamental pillars of
the developing state. The justice cluster, whose Votes we are debating
today, has the constitutional mandate to manage and discipline military
forces which must ensure that the citizens are defended, the Republic is
protected, and that the territorial integrity of the country is also
absolutely defended from all forms of aggression both inside and external.

From divisive apartheid and bantustan surrogate justice systems, progress
has been made in this cluster. This cluster, particularly the Defence
Force, has achieved the most important milestones to ensure that we have a
united, nonracial and disciplined defence force. The Defence Force is
playing a very strategic role internationally to ensure that there is peace
and stability, and that democracy prevails in our neighbouring countries.

The Defence Force also plays a very important role in combating crime
together with the SA Police Service in the country. Transformation has been
made in the Defence Force and very good and qualitative results have been
achieved, particularly at middle and senior levels. [Interjections.]

This Defence Force has now become the defence force that we had hoped would
be in place to serve and protect its citizens. Indeed this Defence Force is
doing precisely that. But there are challenges that are still visible in
the department and we appreciate the fact that some work is being done to
ensure that these challenges are dealt with.

Challenges still remain regarding the transformation of the Navy,
particularly your middle management and downwards. Gender representation is
still lacking, according to the report that was presented to us. We are
also aware that this has to do with historical reasons and we appreciate
the efforts you are making to ensure that there is a total transformation
in this section.

The other section that also seems to be challenged is air defence. The
skills distribution still seems to be very skewed there. They are not
spread, as the committee would have really liked. We also understand the
challenges and the historic reasons that bring about these challenges.
However, we want to urge the Minister and the department to do everything
in their power to ensure that these challenges are dealt with.

We appreciate and we are aware that the department is putting in a lot of
effort, because it has an established partnership with various institutions
of higher learning. The department is also participating in Asgisa and
Jipsa initiatives to ensure that scarce skills are being addressed. We want
to take this opportunity to compliment and commend the Ministry and the
department for representing us in the peace mission that is taking place at
an international level.

Regarding Safety and Security, my chairperson has already spoken on this
matter but I think it is also important for us to share a few experiences
to say that the select committee has been to a number of provinces, as the
chairperson has said. We are proud to say that the achievements of the
department that we observed there are really commendable.

There are also challenges with regard to this department. In some areas we
visited we discovered that the holding cells were not in good condition and
were not suitable for human habitation. We also realised that the personnel
shortage is hampering the quality of service in this department. We
therefore want to urge the Ministry to do everything in its power to ensure
that this is addressed. We are aware of the plans that are in place to deal
with this matter, but we believe that is one area that needs attention.

With regard to justice, the chairperson has already said that we appreciate
the co-operation that we get from the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the
department. The few issues that one would want to raise relate to the
challenges that we noticed as we were interacting with this department.
Firstly, it seems that discipline regarding some justice officials is
becoming problematic and we think and believe that the Ministry is aware of
these challenges and is trying as much as it can to deal with this problem.

Secondly, concerning the language policy, our people who are from
disadvantaged backgrounds are still compelled to use a language that they
cannot use properly to present their cases. We are aware that there are
interpretation services available for them. However, it is also quite clear
that there is a shortage of personnel. We therefore want to appeal to the
Ministry to deal with these issues.

In conclusion, we want to say, as a select committee and as members of the
ANC, that despite all the challenges that are confronting the departments
whose budgets we are debating, much is being done to ensure that quality
services are delivered to our people.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE (Western Cape): Madam Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon
Deputy Minister and hon members, the budget of this department that deals
with criminal justice demonstrates one thing, namely that the government is
serious in its fight against crime in the province and nationally.

Allow me to thank the national leadership for enforcing regulations aimed
at making government departments move away from a silo-operation approach
to more integration and co-operation. Today, we can say that our law-
enforcement agencies are co-operating, working together in the fight
against crime and are continuing to close the space for criminals in our
province and nationally.

Today, we can confirm that our crime-fighting strategies see more and more
agencies like the police, Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Directorate
of Special Operations, Department of Correctional Services and the
Department of Defence working together in a complementary manner,
complementing one another to ensure that they fight and close the space
against criminals; complementing one another and ensuring that criminal
convictions are realised and that drug lords and gangsters are arrested and
dealt with.

We are in agreement with the Minister that we must continue to drive a
crime-prevention strategy and ensure that people are central in the fight
against crime. We agree that this programme obviously requires political
leadership. We must say that the 2007-08 budget will ensure that the crime-
prevention strategy is implemented and is realised in the provinces as
well. Through our provincial government budget, we will continue to ensure
that work is done to complement law-enforcement agencies and to ensure that
we continue to implement the strategy that recognises the importance and
centrality of our communities.

When we look at the Western Cape, we can say that the challenges that we
have continue to require that we work together in a co-operative and
complementary manner, together in partnership with our people. We have seen
over many years in the Western Cape that gangs and gangsterism are becoming
the order of the day or a way of life, with parents not necessarily saying
anything and supporting the silence regarding gangs and gang activities in
their homes.

Today, we have a big challenge in the Western Cape concerning this
fashionable drug that is called tik-tik or tik, ice or lollipop. We see
more young children getting involved in these particular drugs. Today, we
must deal with this challenge together with the parents and our communities
and not accept it as a way of life for our children and our future
generation.

We are hard at work to mobilise our communities in acting together with the
policemen and women against crime. Understanding these challenges, where
today young children at the age of six are exposed to drugs, like tik-tik,
or are carrying drugs for someone in the community who ensures that they
get paid by commission; understanding the violence in our schools that
young learners are exposed to, we have implemented this Safer Schools
Project in those 109 schools to ensure that we at least build social
cohesion at a young age. Understanding this challenge, the social crime
prevention programme becomes even more important. We need to approach it in
an integrated manner, put it at the centrality of our communities and start
building social cohesion in our society.

The national programme for restructuring our police structures in the last
three years has, in fact, produced some major results in the province. The
introduction of our Bambanani Against Crime programme, with thousands of
volunteers, has become the brand name or household name in our townships or
locations, cities and small towns. Today, our nationally supported train
safety programme has in fact shown that where people are working together
with our police, things are turned around, crime is in fact dealt with and
we see a downward trend.

Our policemen and women are today proud to form this partnership with these
volunteers, Bambanani Against Crime or a Neighbourhood Watch. In the past
three years contact crime has, in fact, decreased by 23% in the province as
a result of this partnership with our communities and volunteers against
crime. In the past three years, crime on trains and public transport has
decreased to 48% in the first year, 21% in the second year and 30% in the
third year. This shows that where communities are working in unison,
shoulder to shoulder with our law-enforcement agencies, we will continue to
make a dent against crime.

Today, we can say that, in the past four years of piloting Bambanani or the
High-flyer project, these projects have in fact made an impact in our
communities. Today, we can say that those untouchable gang lords are being
touched and some of them will face their day in court.

We have decided that 15 areas in the Western Cape where most contact crime
takes place should receive high priority status. In these areas drugs,
gangsterism and organised crime have become the order of the day.
Restructuring and the deployment of the most experienced police as foot
soldiers in the front trenches of crime ensures that we are making progress
in these areas. We are now accelerating the sector policing programmes in
those 15 priority areas in the province.

As this programme delivers on high-flyers, our justice system would of
course be expected to rise to this challenge and prosecute these criminals.
We can say that we are proud to have seen and noticed that, in terms of the
Prevention of Organised Crime Act, some of those criminals - nine of them –
have collectively received 124 years and 6 months in prison. This is what
we see happening in terms of fighting the untouchables in crime.

As we continue to arrest the top high-flyers, I think the most challenging
thing we need to raise here is that we will continue to see the backlog and
an increase in our need for correction places. I think it is going to be a
challenge that will require of us in the justice system to rise to the
challenge of prosecution.

As we move forward and roll out this programme fast, through the
willingness demonstrated by our communities and our people, we will see
crime decreasing even more and more. I am aware that the integrated
agencies are hard at work in dealing with case backlogs in the province. We
are happy that our Defence Force remains committed to complementing our
policemen and women in the fight against crime.

We are working with Business Against Crime and business communities in the
fight against crime. By pooling our resources, we are sure that we can look
forward to a successful Fifa 2010 Soccer World Cup. Pooling together
private security forces in terms of 30 000 private security personnel,
16 000 volunteers and 22 000 police officers will make the Western Cape and
the games much safer.

In conclusion, we are ready to ensure that our people have peace of mind
and, in fact, over the years, our law-enforcement agencies have
demonstrated that. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Chairperson, Cabinet
colleagues who are here with us, chairperson and members of the select
committee, members of the NCOP, the leadership of the justice, crime-
prevention and security cluster, ladies and gentlemen, with your
indulgence, I would like to step a little bit back and recall what the
President said in his 2004 state of the nation address, and I quote:


   For too long our country contained within it and represented much that is
   ugly and repulsive in human society. It was a place in which to be born
   black was to inherit a lifelong curse. It was a place in which to be born
   white was to carry a permanent burden of fear and hidden rage. It was a
   place in which to live in some places was to invite others to prey on you
   or to condemn oneself to prey on others, guaranteed neighbours who could
   not but fall victim to alcohol and drug stupors that would dull the pain
   of living, who knew that their lives would not be normal without murder
   in their midst, and rape and brutal personal wars without a cause.

I stand here today, two days before our national commemoration of the 1976
students uprising that ushered in a new era in the struggle for the
democratisation of our country. Today, amongst us in this august House are
leaders and cadres of that revolution who, through their political activism
and resistance to apartheid education, defined a new path that helped to
shape the current democratic system that we enjoy today.

I must, in the same vein, allude to the fact that when we look back we see
many reasons for celebration in Correctional Services against an
environment that sometimes militates against the attainment of our goals. I
should also acknowledge that we have standing challenges, some of them
brought about by the fact that we are managing people who have wronged
society and who are sometimes called social outcasts.

I can confidently proclaim that, under the able leadership of hon Minister
Balfour, we are on course to meet this nation’s expectations as the
Department of Correctional Services. I also wish to use this platform and
opportunity to salute the gallant women and men of the 1976 youth
generation. Some of them, as I said, occupy seats in this House and the
National Assembly today.

Underpinning our whole programme of the Department of Correctional Services
is the offender rehabilitation path, ORP, which we are committed to
implement with much greater vigour this year. Key to the ORP is to ensure
that we completely move away from the penal system of retribution and
punishment to that of rehabilitation and social reintegration. In keeping
with that direction, we have finalised the model for giving practical
meaning to the new policy direction or the offender rehabilitation path.
The programme’s nine phases seek to re-engineer our offender management
approach to be needs-based and informed by an offender’s life cycle, as
each stage demands different interventions by the department and other
players in government and civil society.

The offender rehabilitation path does not only assist the offender to adapt
to the corrections environment but also brings together the agents that
will give meaning to the six service delivery areas that the department has
identified in relation to offenders, namely: security, facility,
corrections, development, well-being and social reintegration.
Interventions regarding service delivery in these areas are based on
thorough assessments in terms of security, risks and needs of offenders.

During the past financial year, 102 000 offenders participated in sports,
arts and cultural programmes. We will however continue to strive to improve
the numbers of beneficiary offenders in all our programmes. The Department
of Correctional Services has also passed the target it set for the past
financial year as it reached 17 818 offenders with its 48 psychologists
against the target of 15 500 offenders. This trend was maintained in terms
of the provision of spiritual care through 145 582 sessions instead of a
targeted 162 500 as well as 86 571 social work sessions.
Our department is very concerned about the health and welfare of both its
staff and the offenders who are in its custody. Hence we have decided to
source the assistance of two researchers from the Human Sciences Research
Council to capture, analyse and tabulate health information collected
during our health needs assessment campaign, in order to provide the
department with an overview of the current status of health resources
programmes and services to our members and offenders. This will assist the
department with proper planning and the appropriate allocation of resources
in order to improve the quality of health care rendered to the offender
population as well as our members.

Regarding our HIV and Aids programme, we are committed to accelerating the
facilitation of access to antiretroviral treatment for offenders by
identifying correctional sentences that meet the minimum criteria for
accreditation as comprehensive, prevention, care, support and treatment
sentences.

During the reporting period, nine correctional sentences were credited by
the National Department of Health. During the period of October to December
2006, a total number of 1 600 offenders were receiving antiretroviral
treatment and a large number were also on pretreatment medication. With
regard to HIV and Aids prevention programmes, 1 159 offenders and officials
were trained as peer educators to strengthen the prevention initiatives. A
total of 47 438 offenders were exposed to various HIV and Aids awareness
programmes.

Regarding rehabilitation and social reintegration, one major challenge that
faces us in any correctional system, and indeed in the world, is to ensure
that as many offenders as possible are productively engaged in programmes
aimed at turning them into law-abiding and socially responsible
individuals. In that regard, it gives me great pleasure to report to this
House that we have fulfilled an undertaking that we made last year, that is
to finalise a policy on compulsory rehabilitation programmes for all
offenders.

The implementation of a compulsory rehabilitation programme, the revision
of current programmes and the possible implementation of new programmes is
a phased-in process which will commence in this financial year, starting
with the centres of excellence, and it will be expanded to include all
correctional centres. However, as the hon Minister said earlier, we do face
the challenge of scarce skills in particular professions such as social
workers and psychologists who are the key drivers behind our rehabilitation
programme.

Hon members, I still want to emphasise the fact that the constitutional
stipulation prohibits the admission of children into correctional
facilities, except when it is the last resort. Chapter 2, clause 28 of the
Bill of Rights is clear on this constitutional imperative. It says:
   Every child has the right not to be detained except as a measure of last
   resort ...

and also says every child has the right to be -


   ... kept separately from detained persons over the age of 18 years;
   and treated in a manner, and kept in conditions, that take into account
   the child’s age.

The Department of Correctional Services is indeed vigilant in monitoring
and managing the reduction of children in our facilities. The Department of
Correctional Services has, in addition, undertaken a baseline audit on its
facilities, services and programmes to address the needs of vulnerable
groups, including children. Subsequently, an integrated action plan has
been developed by the department to address the needs of these vulnerable
groups. The implementation of this action plan will commence in this
financial year, 2007-2008.

Our concern, however, is the emerging worrying trends of not just
aggressive and violent offenders but the increase of offenders incarcerated
for sexual offences. That has gone up to 4,12% over the past six years
which is 15% of the total offender population. Indeed, this changing
profile of our offenders does not indicate the safety and security
challenges concerning vulnerable women and children in our communities, and
also not the safety of our officials, which we regard as paramount as well.
In a short period of time, the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons, under the
leadership of Judge Nathan Erasmus, in consultation with various role-
players, including the Department of Correctional Services, initiated a
number of strategic changes to the work of the judicial inspectorate.

Chairperson, allow me to specifically and respectfully remind the hon
members of the House that the establishment of the Judicial Inspectorate of
Prisons forms part of this government’s ongoing transformation process,
which is aimed at transforming the old inherited prison service into the
Department of Correctional Services, which is focused and equipped to
ensure that inmates are kept under humane conditions, and that they are
treated with human dignity and are rehabilitated so that when they are
released from custody they can occupy their rightful place in society.

I wish to align myself with the hon Minister in terms of using this
platform to celebrate and commend the work done by the National Council on
Correctional Services, NCCS. Under the leadership of Judge Siraj Desai, the
NCCS has immensely contributed to improving the confidence of our judiciary
in its community corrections function. The NCCS facilitated greater and
better interaction between the Department of Correctional Services, the
judiciary and the community. The NCCS also successfully drove the setting
up of the Parole Review Board that started meeting in May 2006. It has
adjudicated on a number of appeals and identified weakness in the roll-out
of the correctional supervision and parole system. Currently, interventions
are under way to address these weaknesses.

I may also take the opportunity to thank the hon chairperson for his able
leadership, as well as the select committee for the way in which they have
worked with the department in pointing out the challenges and for assisting
us to address them. I also want to thank the hon chairperson, Kgoshi
Mokoena, and the select committee.

Lastly, I can also without fear of contradiction say that we are firmly on
course in building an ideal correctional system that cares for both victims
and perpetrators of crime. Let me conclude by calling all of us in this
House and beyond to join a national partnership to correct, rehabilitate
and to reintegrate offenders for a safer and more secure South Africa. I do
believe that Correctional Services can indeed be a place of new beginnings
in this age of hope.

I would also like to take the opportunity to congratulate the newly
appointed Commissioner of Correctional Services, Mr Petersen, in absentia.
He is inheriting a very capable team that we are confident will steer us to
where we want to go. I am convinced that, under your stewardship, Mr
Petersen, we will continue on the path that we have started to tread since
2004 in building Correctional Services that is in line with our White
Paper; and that, through the White Paper, we can unlock the potential of
every offender in our custody and every staff member or official to be the
best that they can be, and to make the Department of Correctional Services
a place of new beginnings. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr A T MANYOSI: Madam Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, I would like to preface my input on the Budget Vote of the
Department of Safety and Security with a brief comparison of the police
activities in the undemocratic system of the past and the current
democratic dispensation. The practices of the members of a police service
are determined partly by the function of that institution in society,
partly by its internal organisation and subculture, and partly by the legal
framework that authorises or limits police activities.

In the past, in South Africa, the controls on the use of police powers
within the law, and the restraints on the abuse of those powers outside the
law were weakened by political, legal and institutional factors. The most
important of these was the absence of political accountability by the
police to the majority of the population in whose name they performed their
duties, and who were subjected to the way in which they exercised their
powers.

For black South Africans then, the absence of effective political channels
to influence policing priorities and policies, at either national or local
level, profoundly affected their attitude towards the police. As the DA
indicated earlier, we are now able to hear about an increase and decrease
in the incidence of crime. These incidents were there before but it was
hidden because, in most cases, the crimes were committed by members of the
police against the population – the black majority of this country.

It therefore became incumbent upon this government to introduce a radical
review of the policing practice in South Africa by way of legislative
measures, in line with the dictates of the Freedom Charter and the
Constitution on equality before the law and to give meaning to it. As part
of addressing the critical challenge of accountability of the Police
Service to the people of SA, community police forums and community safety
forums have to be in place, capacitated and functional in all police areas.
At present their capacity and functionality, however, are not adequate, and
enabling resources and facilities are required for that purpose. No
effective policing can take place without co-operation and partnership with
the citizens.

The primary function of the Department of Safety and Security is the
prevention and combating of crime, to ensure the safety and security of our
people and their properties. For this to be achieved requires the
strengthening of the police stations by way of providing adequate resources
in the form of police vehicles, provision of facilities and the enhancement
of the functioning of police stations. Generally, the working conditions of
members of the Police Service, including accommodation, have to be improved
to ensure motivated personnel who are content with their welfare, and
confident of their ability and capacity to deal with, prevent and combat
crime.

As much as we require the police to ensure the protection and promotion of
the human dignity of our people, their dignity too should be taken care of.
This includes the hospital guards and the police reservists. Also of
extreme importance is further continuous capacity-building through training
and education that takes into account the fact that we come from a police
state, and therefore such training and education should include good
conduct and self-respect, the rule of law, equality before the law, and
conducting proper investigations.

Training on proper investigation of cases must be emphasised, and would
reduce instances where cases would be postponed due to poor or incomplete
investigation. I must emphasise that the role of the police is to protect
the people, not to oppress them. Evidence abounds that members of our
Police Service are dedicated, determined and devoted to deliver safety and
security services optimally to the citizens of our country, and they must
be adequately assisted as far as possible, in terms of resources, to fulfil
their constitutional and legislative mandate.

For maximum output and outcomes, it is of the utmost importance that the
wheels of justice are sufficiently and consistently well-oiled to achieve
the goals and mandate of our justice system and therefore inspire
confidence in the ability of our government to ensure a peaceful and just
society, and compliance with the rule of law.

One of the legacies we inherited from the apartheid system is the
inaccessibility of justice. As in all capitalist countries, justice in
South Africa has been for a chosen few, the rich, to the exclusion of the
poor and indigent who, due to their circumstances, often fall foul of the
law.

The Department of Justice has the mammoth task to overhaul the whole legal
system which developed under centuries and centuries of colonialism that
continues to perpetuate the imbalances in the distribution of wealth. The
new legal system has to be designed in a manner that borrows that which is
good from the indigenous traditions, customs and modes of conflict
resolution in order for it to be truly South African.

It is against this background that we applaud and support the budget
allocations that take care of these historical facts with regard to, inter
alia, the laws that need to be changed, repealed or, at best, amended. The
budget of the Department of Justice recognises the fact that, in order to
truly provide access to justice, as the Minister put it in her budget
speech, it is necessary to change the old apartheid-drawn jurisdictional
areas of the lower courts which limit access to justice; and to acknowledge
that most of the magistrates’ courts in rural and former black townships
exercise limited jurisdiction, have no staff or budgets of their own and
are dependent on the main courts, in the former white areas, to deliver
essential justice services. These courts have to be overhauled in terms of
their inadequate services and functioning.

The budget also takes into account that, in our country, like in any
capitalist state, the cost of legal services imposes a great restraint on
the poor. Furthermore, the demographic distribution, recruitment and
training of lawyers generally put them at a great distance, geographically
and socially, from the wretched of our land. The budget therefore ensures
that the state takes the responsibility to ensure the promotion and
upholding of human rights, on the basis of true equality before the law.
Through an increased legal aid funding, it seeks to enable the department
to develop a suitable legal aid system to ensure that opportunities for
securing justice are not denied any citizen by reason of poverty or any
other social disability. With the present appropriation, service delivery
improvements and increases to its legal capacity will be achieved by the
Legal Aid Board justice centres around the country.

There has been a deafening outcry about the inaccessibility of the services
of the Master of the High Court, but there must now be a sigh of relief
that the department has initiated a programme called Operation Sesifikile
to expand the services of the office of the Master of the High Court to
rural and other remote areas in order to reach the vulnerable members of
society. Indeed, untold hardship has been experienced by beneficiaries in
this regard, and the status quo has to change.

Some of the vexing issues that have been widely raised by our courts
pertain to lack of resources, shortage of staff, equipment and the general
condition of court infrastructure. On the face of it, the present budget
allocation will go a long way to alleviate this situation through an
increase in the number of courts, magistrates and prosecutors as well as
the improvement of the infrastructure.

Whilst the Department of Public Works is not part of the cluster, it is
critical to the provision and maintenance of the infrastructure for our
courts and other accommodation needs for the cluster and therefore has to
be constantly engaged to rise to the challenge of its mandate. We are
assured that active engagements with the latter department are under way to
address the issue of dilapidated buildings and general infrastructure. I
thank you. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MECs, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, the ID took note of the efforts of the hon
Minister of Safety and Security and the department, hence my speech is
based only on Safety and Security and not on the whole cluster.

We support this Budget Vote, as I noted that efforts have been put in, but
there are still some grey areas. I recall that a year ago a young lady was
placed and locked up with men in a cell in Keimoes in the Northern Cape
province by members of the SA Police Service. This woman was raped by a man
in the same cell at knife-point. She was beaten with a belt. These articles
are not supposed to enter the cell, but they did enter this one. This is
the kind of service delivery members of the public must endure, and then it
is expected of opposition parties to remain silent.

No, hon Chairperson, we cannot remain silent. [Interjections.] These are
not party-political issues but community issues. This case appeared in
court last week, after one year. The young lady is still traumatised
because she received only one counselling session. It is under these
circumstances that the state loses cases. How do we expect such a person to
perform in court? The one SAPS member is still working and the other one
committed suicide.

My question to the hon Minister, through the Chairperson, is: What is going
to happen in this case to the member of the SAPS? What has been done to him
to date? If it so happens that this woman has a complaint that needs to be
attended to at this police station and this SAPS member is on duty, is she
going to receive the service she deserves?

The ID requests the hon Minister to investigate this case. As leaders in
this country we are all subject to accountability. This sort of action
deserves the severest kind of discipline owing to its purposeful nature. By
this I mean it was not an accident; it was cruelty.

The ID trusts that the Minister will to see to it that justice prevails. An
injury to one woman is an injury to all women. These elements in the
Department of Safety and Security need to be removed for they discredit the
department, the government and the country as a whole. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr B H CELE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, I was worried that you were
giving me four minutes as if I am an “identity party” member. Chairperson
and hon Ministers, hon Minister Balfour requested me to smile. I was asking
myself if I do need to smile, because I do have this philosophy that gives
me sleepless nights. As a member of this government, under the ANC and at
all levels, I would love to ensure that you don’t fall in the trap.

Whenever people speak and get on this podium ...

An HON MEMBER: In this House.
Mr B H CELE (KwaZulu-Natal): ... in this House, at this time, they make a
call for building more prisons. [Laughter.] I find it wrong for South
Africans to make a call for building more prisons each time there is a
problem related to crime. I would expect people to make calls for building
more schools, technical colleges, play parks for kids and cinemas.
[Applause.] I hope, as a ruling party, we will not fall into the trap of
more prisons, more prisons and more prisons. Even those that they built
could not forever accommodate everybody, including some of us. I am not
very much into that, but I would say we welcome those five prisons.
However, if those had been universities or colleges, they would have given
more comfort to some of us. So, that’s a call.

I’m not going to deal with other departments, I will come back to Safety
and Security. Anyway, I listened to the DA. It would have been awkward to
hear a different tune coming from the DA down here. So, what that hon
member is saying is what I’m used to hearing: We are not supporting.
Anyway, if the hon member supports, they will lose their status of
opposition. But even if they do lose it, they will still get their pay and
it is thus not much of a problem. [Laughter.]

It is again a question of safety and security, and a question of our people
living in peace and safety. I know it is a chain that begins with the
police as the frontline and ends up with Correctional Services at the rear
of the whole system.
The involvement of the communities - I’ve said this before - will be
important. Unfortunately, police in the frontline are very much
disadvantaged because they get a lot of bashing. They arrest you and when
you escape from the police cells people ask what it is that the police are
doing. You get bail and people ask what it is that the police are doing.
You get parole and people ask what it is that the police are doing. So,
they have a serious problem. It is on that score that I say it would be
proper one day to have a structure where all of us would be accountable to
the communities.

I hope we will decipher the independence of the judiciary that we are
calling for so much. Sometimes it is really overemphasised and you get
scared when it looks as if it is not providing the service to the people
that it is supposed to provide. I hope that this independence is not
independence away from the communities. They must be accountable to
communities. They must be independent from us, but when it comes to
communities, even the justice system must be accountable to the
communities. They must come, answer and explain themselves. They cannot
just stay put in their towers forever, and when you touch them and you ask
a question they say: “Sorry, you are infringing on our independence”. It
should be acting on behalf of the people. And then people must one day be
told what this independence is, when it comes to them.

I hope structures like community safety forums will be established one day
and we will all sit there and answer – the Departments of Justice and
Constitutional Development, Correctional Services, and Safety and Security.
Anyway, police are forever exposed to that. We hope that that will happen.

Safety and Security – it has been proven, and it is so – cannot function
outside the comfort of communities. It is on that score that in KwaZulu-
Natal, as a province, we have put aside quite a bigger chunk of resources
for the facilitation of relationships between the structures, especially
the police and the communities.

For this year, we have budgeted R20 million; R35 million for next year; and
R50 million for the following year for the facilitation of relationships,
including what we term “communities in dialogue”, especially in the rural
areas under the authority of amakhosi. Before trouble starts, or when we
suspect that trouble is going to start, we should go there beforehand and
engage the communities. In quite a few communities trouble has been avoided
because of that kind of engagement. We believe that would ease the pressure
on the police, who would have reacted by arresting people, but instead they
have engaged communities.

The other major approach is that we are putting a lot of emphasis on the
social mobilisation of communities against crime, especially targeting the
market of thieves. Minister, KwaZulu-Natal will be coming to you with the
request that everybody and anybody who buys stolen goods should be arrested
along with the person who is selling these stolen goods. [Applause.] We
believe that the market for stolen goods is making things worse, because if
thieves steal the first TV, and then the second TV and nobody buys it, then
they are not going to steal the third one. They steal the third one because
the first two have already been bought. So, the market that is among the
communities must be stopped and the communities must understand very well
that if you are in the market of thieves, if you are in the market of
crime, definitely, you have to suffer like other people who commit such
crimes. So, that’s a call we want to make.

We will be working very closely with the Department of Education because we
are worried about the crime rate at schools, and it is getting worse and
worse. Indeed, we cannot later on say: “After all, those people belong in
prison”. We will be working with Correctional Services and Social
Development in order to establish centres for kids who are not supposed to
be in these institutions, so that they could be removed. Also, it puts
pressure on the police to ask what they are doing with the street kids.
Those kids do not belong with the police and in prisons, they belong in the
comfort of their homes. That is why Social Development should play a very
significant role.

We know that money is budgeted for this, and we know that money has not
been used effectively in terms of accommodating those children who are in
conflict with the law. So, we will motivate that steps be taken to deal
with this and we hope we will work together on this issue.

Having said the above, we will forever support this Budget Vote. We wish
that this budget could be bigger than what it is now, but that does not
stop us from supporting it. Otherwise, you would be saying we must go home
and sit back until we get a big enough budget. I’ve heard that time and
again. So let’s use what we have. Even in biblical terms, it is said you
need to use what you have – the talents that have been given to you. If you
get more talents at a later stage, that’s fine. As a matter of fact, this
thing of not supporting the Budget Vote because it is not enough is even
unbiblical. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

Ms J MOFOKENG (Gauteng): Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Minister, MECs, hon
members, distinguished guests, Deputy Minister for Safety and Security,
Gauteng, as a smart province, supports the Budget Vote. I feel honoured to
have this opportunity to brief the House on the Gauteng safety strategy.

The Gauteng government recognises that the crime challenges facing our
province are as a result of a complex interplay of historical and social
factors. As has been repeatedly stated, this means that there can be no
once-off or quick-fix solution to the crime challenges. Not only do we have
to strengthen our ability to tackle serious violent crimes in the short
term, but we need to address the factors that contribute to making people
take part in crime, in the long term.

After an extensive process that looked carefully at the nature of the
challenges and the lessons of the previous national strategy such as the
National Crime Prevention strategy, Gauteng has developed a comprehensive
strategy framework to guide and mobilise the resources of Gauteng to
improve safety by reducing crime.

In August 2006, the provincial government adopted the framework known as
the Gauteng safety strategy and the vision of the strategy is, I quote:


   A globally competitive Gauteng city-region characterised by confident
   people, households and communities enjoying a high quality of life
   because they live, work and travel in a law-governed society free from
   fear, violence and crime.

The strategy is based on the following four pillars: improving the quality
of police services through enhanced oversight; promoting social crime-
prevention initiatives throughout government departments; improving the
institutional arrangements for government to better understand, respond to
and co-ordinate crime prevention initiatives; and mobilising and supporting
increased community participation against crime.

The first pillar is about improving the quality of the police services.
This is aimed at guiding the provincial government in contributing towards
improving the quality of policing in Gauteng. As a national organisation,
the SA Police Service receives its budget from the national Minister and it
is under the direct command of the national commissioner. However, the
Constitution provides for the provincial government to play an executive
role through the monitoring of police performance and conduct. Where the
provincial governments identify shortcomings, they can engage with the
national Minister to rectify shortcomings through policing and budget
decisions.

In line with these constitutional provisions, the Gauteng department of
community safety will continue to monitor the police’s performance in
tackling these crimes closely by establishing the Gauteng crime and police
performance monitoring system, which will allow for the quick
identification of stations that perform poorly to ensure targeted and
decisive interventions, where necessary.

The system will be based on information generated by the SA Police Service
Crime Information Analysis Centre and the station performance chart system.
This information will allow the government to identify stations that are
performing well, and those that are performing well will be recognised and
supported. Those that are struggling will be carefully assessed to
establish the specific challenges they face.
Concerning the improved police strategy and targeting, this project is
under way to assist the SAPS in developing strategic partnerships to tackle
specific types of violent crime such as house robberies. Regarding the
tackling of police corruption, the department will be carefully monitoring
the implementation of the SA Police Service’s prevention of corruption and
fraud strategy in Gauteng. This strategy is in the process of being
finalised by the SAPS.

The second pillar is about social crime prevention. The main intervention
under this pillar will be in the form of tackling violence against women
and children, and the Gauteng schools safety plan. Regarding tackling
violence against women and children, we have Ikhaya Lethemba, which is a
victim empowerment centre.

This Ikhaya Lethemba is a flagship one-stop centre for victims of violence,
and it is supported by a network of police station-based victim empowerment
centres. This victim empowerment programme is the subprogramme of the
safety promotion programme of the department of community safety. The aim
of these programmes is to assist victims of crimes and violence, with a
special focus on domestic violence.

During the past financial year, 867 victims of crime received professional
services in Ikhaya Lethemba ranging from counselling, medical assessment
and police and prosecutorial services. Domestic violence continues to be a
crime that undermines the quality of life of too many women and children.
Children who grow up in violent homes are at a higher risk of a range of
negative social problems, including further risks of becoming perpetrators
of victims of violence. Ikhaya Lethemba, therefore, seeks to protect women
and children through assisting with protection orders and finding shelters
from abusive spouses.

Furthermore, the centre assists victims with obtaining protection orders
and providing skills training to improve self-reliance. The police station
victim empowerment units, beyond the support that is provided to those
victims who go to Ikhaya Lethemba, also provide support to victims through
the victim empowerment centres in the police stations.

The department of community safety has worked with the SA Police Service’s
family and child sexual offences unit to assist them during the initial
period of police restructuring that took place in August last year.

Concerning the Gauteng safety programme, the department is to support the
implementation of a provincial safety plan programme developed for the
national Department of Education. We hope that, with the new programme that
is called Hlayiseka [be safe], we are going to be able to tackle crimes at
schools. The establishment of a pool of provincial implementers comprising
educators and officials and key departments such as community safety, SAPS,
Social Development, Transport and Health will be part of the strategy.
The third pillar is about strengthening institutional arrangements for
effective crime reduction. Regarding this, we will be dealing further with
the necessity of establishing a criminal justice co-ordinating committee.
The MEC has actually started to do that. The establishment of the Gauteng
crime-prevention resource centre and the Gauteng crime and safety
integrated information management system has taken place. This also
includes a focus on real-time traffic safety and road safety strategy.

The last pillar is about encouraging community participation. The launch of
the Gauteng safety strategy and Take-Charge campaign took place on 30 March
2007 at the Freedom Square, in Kliptown. This event was historic in the
sense that it represented a large gathering of people, over 11 000 strong,
representing a cross-section of all communities in the province and united
in the common purpose of reducing crime in Gauteng.

The department continues to call upon people to take charge of the campaign
against crime. We welcome initiatives such as that launched by Primedia and
the national Minister of Safety and Security last week. The new crime
reporting system is a good example of what the private sector can do
working together with people in identifying and arresting criminals.

In conclusion, the department will launch a volunteer patrol programme with
100 patrollers. This programme will be integrally linked to our community
policing forums and will be rolled out in the new financial year with 2 100
patrollers to support policing in 26 areas.

The department has also been granted R6 million for management of
volunteers. To date, 800 patrollers have already been screened and we are
in the process of exploring the possibility of training our volunteers at
accredited institutions in Gauteng in order to assist them to understand
the framework within which they operate and for them to become marketable.
I thank you.

Mr Z C NTULI: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MECs of the
peace and stability cluster, hon members, comrades and friends ...

... siwuKhongolose sithi kungakuhle ukuthi mhlawumbe ke sicwaninge ukuthi
kwenziwa yini ukuthi ubugebengu bamanje bube nesihluku nokubulala. Siyazi
khona ukuthi sesivuna izithelo zobandlululo, lapho khona abantu babehliswa
isithunzi. Singajabula uma uphiko lwezobunhloli obumayelana nobugebengu
lungase lukwazi ukusisiza ngokuthi lusazise kusenesikhathi ukuze sikwazi
ukuzivimba lezi zehlakalo zingakenzeki, ukuze futhi kuthi uma sizilungisa
sikwazi ukukhipha umnyombo wethumba.

Sengathi kungaba nenye futhi indlela yokuqoqa izibhamu ezingekho
emthethweni. Siyazi ukuthi kwake kwaba noshwele. Sengathi lokho kungaphinda
futhi, kodwa manje sithi-ke ukushintsha kancane njengokuthi uma umuntu
esiletha isibhamu singahlolwa ukuthi sake sasebenza yini, bese kuthi labo
abangazilethi sibathathele izinyathelo ezinzima. Kokunye futhi kufuneka
kube nomvuzo onikwa labo ababikayo ukuze bakwazi ukuza ngaphambili - asisho
ukuthi bayampimpa, bayabika. Kufuneka kube nomvuzwano esibanika wona uma
bebike laba bantu abanezibhamu ezingekho emthethweni.

Enkulumeni kaMongameli wezwe yalo nyaka, wakubeka kwacaca ukuthi iqhaza
lomphakathi libalulekile kakhulu uma kuliwa nobugebengu. Amaphoyisa wodwa
ngeke akwazi ukuqeda ubugebengu ngaphandle kokulekelelwa umphakathi.
Yingakho siwuKhongolose sithi izinhlaka ezifana nama-CPF zibalulekile futhi
kumele zinikwe amandla athe xaxa.

Futhi, empeleni kungangcono uma ama-CPF engaphenduka abe ama-community
safety forums, ama-CSF, ukuze ahlonipheke futhi abe namazinyo, alume. Phela
ama-CSF izakhiwo ezizohlanganisa iminyango kahulumeni eminingi njenge-SAPS,
uMnyango wezobulungiswa, uMnyango Wezokuhlunyeleliswa Kwezimilo, uMnyango
Wezasekhaya kanye neminye iMinyango.

Lapha-ke, Phini likaNgqongqoshe wezokuphepha, sidinga umthetho ozogunyazwa
yiPhalamende ukuze kwenzeke lokhu kusungulwa kwama-CSF, khona kuzothi uma
sesinawo ama-CSF akwazi ukulandela umuntu ngesikhathi eboshwa,
nangesikhathi ethetha icala, nangesikhathi esegwetshiwe eseya ezikhindini
noma futhi esephuma, ukuze umphakathi ukwazi ukumemukela.

Ekuqaleni kukaMashi kulo nyaka, siyikomiti lePhalamende le-NCOP lezokuthula
siye savakashela KwaZulu-Natali lapho sizitholele khona ukuthi lokhu
kukhalaza kokushoda kwezimoto akusafani naseminyakeni edlule. Sezikhona
izimoto eziteshini zamaphoyisa. Into esiyibonile ongathi iseyinkinga
ukuphathwa nokusingathwa kwalezi zimoto. Ake ngenze isilinganiso
ngendatshana emfishane, Ndosi.

Ngike ngashayelwa ucingo umuntu wakwaSwayimani ethi kukhona abafuna
ukumhlasela ngoba bethi uyathakatha. Ngibe sengishayela ucingo eWartburg
ngathi, “Hheyi, kukhona umuntu othi ongase ahlaselwe. Ake niphuthume
ningamaphoyisa, niyomvikela.” Iphoyisa engilithole lapho lithe, “Hhayi,
izimoto azikho, iyodwa ekhona.” Ngenhlanhla ngibe sengishayela ukhomishina
uNgidi. Ube esethi yena mangishayele ukhomishina wesiteshi, u-Canday. Emuva
kokukhuluma noCanday, isidumo nje wabe esengishayela lo muntu obethe
uyavinjezelwa esethi sekufike izimoto zamaphoyisa ezisiyisikhombisa.
Kusobala ukuthi inkinga ilaphaya ekutheni siziphatha kanjani lezi zimoto.

Ngidlule-ke ngize ekuvikelweni kofakazi. Saphatheka kabi - kodwa ngiyazi
ukuthi kwakungakabi yisikhathi senu Phini likaNgqongqoshe - ngesikhathi
kuhlaselwa umntwana, ongudadewabo weSilo esiphethe manje, uZwelithini,
kanye nendlunkulu yakhe. Sezwa ukuthi abenza lokho kuze kube yimanje
basagcwele amathafa ngoba ofakazi bonke babulawa, icala lingakaqulwa. Labe
seliyahoxiswa ngoba bengasekho ofakazi. Iyona leyo nto eyenza sithi
lubalulekile uhlelo lokuvikelwa kofakazi nokuthi kufuneka lukhombise ukuba
namazinyo ukuze abantu bangesabi ukuza ngaphambili.

Saphinda futhi savakashela nakoMbumbulu. Sengathi laphaya ezindaweni
zasemakhaya zingaba khona iziteshi zamaphoyisa ezinhle ezikwazi nokuthi
zigcine abantu abasalindele ukuyothetha amacala. Lezi ziteshi kufanele zibe
seduze kwezinkantolo ngoba sabona umuntu eMbumbulu esuka ngale ephelezelwa
iphoyisa ngezinyawo. Sengathi kungazanywa ukuthi kulungiswe lokho.

Uma siza lapha kwezobulungiswa, ngizothanda ukusho ukuthi sesike
savakashela izifundazwe eziningi lapho besifike sithole khona ukuthi
eBhodini Yosizo Lwezomthetho sengathi kusetshenziswa abantu abangavuthiwe
kahle, abasaphuma esikoleni impela, kuthiwe abamele abantu. Uma usuthola,
uye uzwe kuthiwa uma sebeya kobamela baze babacele bathi, “Vuma icala ukuze
isigwebo sithambe.” E-Chartsworth waze waphahluka umshushisi wathi,
“Sisebenzisana kahle impela neBhodi Yesizo Lwezomthetho ngoba yenza ukuthi
abantu basheshise, bavume amacala.” Sabona ukuthi hheyi, kunzima!

Okunye esakuthola ukuthi sengathi iBhodi Yezosizo Lwezomthetho igxila
kakhulu emacaleni obugebengu, hhayi emacaleni amademeshe. Singajabula
ukuthi basebenze kuyo yonke into ngoba phela siye sithi senzela ukuthi
abantu bakwazi ukuthola ezobulungiswa.
Okunye futhi okudinga ukulungiswa ukuze abantu bathole ezobulungiswa yile
ndaba yemingcele emidala yokuhlukaniswa kwezinkantolo. Le nto yenza ukuthi
umuntu athi ehlala ngapha kodwa icala balithethe kwenye indawo ekude.
Okusho ukuthi imingcele kuseyileya emidala yobandlululo, eyayihambelana
nokuthi lezi zinkantolo ngezabamhlophe, leziya ngezabantu abamnyama noma
amakhaladi. Sengathi leyo nto singayibuka ngeso elibukhali.

Nakulokhu kolimi, uma sikhuluma ngokuthola ubulungiswa, sengathi
lungathathelwa izinyathelo udaba lolimi olukhulunywayo. Kwenza umuntu
aphatheke kabi ukufica abantu bonke bengamaZulu enkantolo kodwa uthole
ukuthi bayatolikelana, omunye ukhuluma olunye ulimi omunye atolike. Uye
uzibuze uthi, “Ngoba laba bantu bonke bawuhlanga olulodwa, yini omunye
atolike uma omunye ezokhuluma?”

Kodwa angidlule-ke ngize kwezokuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo. Baba uNgconde,
sengathi singayisheshisa leyo mbiko yekhomishini kaJali ukuze sibe
nomnyakazo esiwenzayo khona sizothola imiphumela, ikakhulukazi ekuqedeni
inkohlakalo.

Sengigcina-ke, okubalulekile lapha kwezokuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo ukuthi
singajabula ukuthi ojele abafundisa intsha lapha ejele nabo babekwe
ezingeni lothisha, noma bahole njengothisha. Sezwa ukuthi eWestville
kwatholakala imiphumela kamatikuletsheni eko-100% kanye namalengiso, kodwa
uthole ukuthi lowo muntu ubekwa ezingeni likajele kanti uyabadlula abanye
othisha abasezikoleni.
Sengigcina, sengathi imali ingenyuka kuyo yonke le Minyango ngoba luselude
ukhalo futhi ziseningi izinto ezisilele ngemuva eziqhamuka kuhulumeni
wangaphambilini. Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[... as the ANC we are saying it would be good if we could investigate the
reasons behind the cruelty and murder in crimes committed these days. But
we know that we are now sadly reaping the fruits of apartheid where
people’s integrity was degraded. We would be grateful if the Crime
Intelligence Unit could forewarn us of these timeously so that we are able
to prevent them from happening. And it would also be proper to deal with
the root cause of it all.
I wish there could be another way of collecting unlawful firearms. We know
that there was an amnesty and I wish that could be repeated, but with a
slight change, for instance that if a person submits a gun, it should not
be tested to see whether it was used somewhere. And drastic steps should be
taken against those who refuse to submit theirs. And another thing is that
there should be a reward for reporting crime. And people reporting criminal
activities should not be labelled as sellouts, but rather as crime
reporters. There must be a small reward for reporting those who have
unlawful firearms.

The President in his state of the nation address this year stated very
clearly that the public has a very important role to play in fighting
crime. Police alone, without help from the public, cannot win the fight
against crime. That is why we as the ANC are saying that structures like
the community policing forums, CPFs, are important and they should be given
more powers.

And in fact, it would be best if these CPFs are transformed into the
community safety forums - the CSFs, so that they can be respected, and have
the authority to act. The CSFs are structures that can join together many
government departments like the SAPS, the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development, the Department of Correctional Services, the
Department of Home Affairs as well as other departments.

In order for this to work, hon Deputy Minister of Safety and Security, we
need an Act that will be passed by Parliament which will pave the way for
the establishment of the CSFs. Once these are in place, they can be used to
monitor the offenders from the time of their arrest, trial and after
sentencing if they are found guilty, and even when they are released from
jail, the same procedure can be followed so that the community can accept
them.

As the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, we visited
KwaZulu-Natal in March this year where we found that the shortage of police
vehicles is addressed adequately unlike in the past years. Police vehicles
are now available at police stations. We however noted that the management
of these vehicles is still a problem. Hon Ndosi, let me clarify this by
relating a short story.

Somebody from Swayimani called me one day to say that there were people who
were about to attack him because they suspected him of being a witch. I
then called Wartburg police and informed them of the allegations and I told
them that there was somebody who was saying he was on the verge of being
attacked. I asked them to quickly rush to him and protect him in their
capacity as police. The police officer who answered the phone said: “No, we
do not have vehicles, there is only one here”. Fortunately, I called
Commissioner Ngidi. And he then said I must call the Station Commissioner,
Canday. Minutes after talking to Canday, the person who was about to be
attacked called me and told me that seven police vehicles had arrived. This
shows that the problem is with the way these vehicles are managed.

Let me come to the issue of the protection of witnesses. We felt bad – but
I am aware that it was before your tenure, Deputy Minister – when the
princess, the sister to the reigning Zulu King Zwelithini, and her
household were attacked. We heard that the culprits are still at large
because all the witnesses were killed before the trial. The case was then
withdrawn because the witnesses were no longer available. That is why we
say that the witness protection programme is important and must show
effectiveness so that people don’t have to be afraid to come forward as
witnesses.

Again, we visited places like Mbumbulu. We wish that rural areas could have
formal police stations that could keep awaiting-trial prisoners. These
stations should be near the magistrates’ courts, because in Mbumbulu we saw
a prisoner coming from afar escorted by only one policeman on foot. We hope
that can be corrected.

When it comes to justice, I would like to indicate that we have visited
many provinces where we found that the Legal Aid Board seems to use
inexperienced people who are fresh from school and then told to represent
people. We also heard that, when the people they are representing appear
before courts, these inexperienced attorneys ask them to plead guilty so as
to get lenient sentences. In Chatsworth, a prosecutor blurted out: “Here we
work very well with the Legal Aid Board because it causes people to be
quick to plead guilty.” We realised that, yes, it is really tough!

The other thing that we found was that the Legal Aid Board seems to be
concentrating mainly on criminal cases and not on civil cases. We would be
grateful if they attended to everything since we are saying that we enable
people to receive justice.

The other aspect that still needs to be corrected for people to receive
justice is this issue of old boundaries which divide magistrates’ courts.
This creates chaos because you find that a person lives in a certain area
yet his case is heard in another place which is far away. And these are the
same old apartheid boundaries, which were designed to be used by whites and
others by black people or coloureds. Let us look at this thing with a
critical eye.

We also need to look at the language issue. When we speak about receiving
justice we request that the question of the language used should be looked
at. It makes one feel bad to go into a court of law and find that all the
people involved are Zulus, but you find that they interpret for one
another; the one speaks a foreign language and the other interprets. You
see this and you ask yourself what the need is for an interpretation since
all people belong to the same ethnic group?

But let me move on and speak about Correctional Services. Hon Ngconde, we
wish that the report of the Jali Commission could be speeded up so that we
can get the results and fight corruption.

What is important here in Correctional Services is that we would be
grateful if the correctional officers who act as teachers at correctional
centres could be put on the same level as teachers, and be paid like
teachers. We heard that Westville Correctional Centre got a 100% pass rate
and distinctions in certain subjects. And yet you find that these people
who work as teachers in these centres are put on the level of ordinary
correctional officers whereas their performance exceeds that of some
teachers at our schools.

In conclusion, I hope that budget allocations to all these departments will
be increased because there is still a lot to be done resulting from the
previous regime. Thank you, Chairperson.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I just want to bring to
your attention that there is a request that will not change what is taking
place, but that sensitises hon members to the fact that the Ministers in
our midst are expected to join the Presidency at a function where President
Kabila will be hosted. I am just cautioning members that, as we proceed, we
should take that into account.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Ministers and MECs, as high
rates of crime continue to plague South Africa, it could be argued that the
peace and security cluster is the most important of all the clusters. It is
therefore fitting that all the individual departments are covered in a
single debate today.

Angiqondile ukuthi eminye iMinyango ayibalulekile. [I don’t mean to say
that other departments are not important.] [Interjections.]

The 2007-08 national Budget provides 35% more funds for crime prevention,
including recruitment of 30 000 extra police officers, leading up to 2010.
The SA Police Service cannot really complain about underfunding although
every state department always wants more money. The SAPS has other more
pressing problems, including improving the training of field personnel and
investigating officers, and acquiring more and better equipped vehicles and
radios.

The SAPS budget does provide for capital spending on a new police station
but the IFP feels that more new stations are needed to increase the
footprint of the police in the community. These new stations must be large
enough to enable officers to work in proper conditions and not to be
squashed on top of each other.

Maintenance of existing police stations leaves a lot to be desired. On more
than one oversight visit members witnessed a lack of regular maintenance of
facilities at police stations which were in a state of disrepair. The SAPS
must take drastic action to improve the situation.

The same lack of maintenance can be seen at courts around the country.
Inadequate facilities for hearings and other judicial processes are the
order of the day. We desperately need a large number of new courts and
improved facilities for the judicial process.

The continuing problems at Correctional Services give a cause for great
concern. Some of these problems are not created by the department, such as
the large number of awaiting-trial detainees, but the fact remains that
prison overcrowding continues to plague the efforts of Correctional
Services to rehabilitate offenders and to provide inmates with a humane and
safe place of incarceration.

The delay in this new prison-building programme will have obvious
consequences regarding overcrowding while special remissions of sentences
can only ever be an interim step to alleviate the pressure.

The fact that children are still being detained in South African jails is
deplorable and we urgently need places of safety where they can be helped.
The IFP is very concerned that escapes from the so-called maximum security
prison are continuing. Yes, the number has come down, but the fact that
there are still escapes concerns us. We know that the department has in
fact improved physical security in prisons; and the question must therefore
be asked: If physical security is improving, what role is being played by
corrupt prison officials in these escapes?

The original idea behind the establishment of the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD, to act as a watchdog over the SAPS was a good idea, but
the fact that it has to rely heavily on the police and is dependent on the
police for co-operation in its investigations against police officers mean
that its mandate has been compromised. The IFP proposes that we review the
mandate of the ICD to give it more powers and to make it less dependent on
the police. It will only become effective if it is truly independent.
The last issue I want to touch on is border control. We know that the SAPS
took over border control from the Defence Force. However, indications are
that the police cannot cope with this function. The stream of illegal
aliens crossing over the northern borders with impunity is testimony to
this. South Africa needs more effective border control, especially along
our borders with Zimbabwe and Mozambique. For that task, we need to deploy
the National Defence Force in sufficient numbers to secure our country’s
borders ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr M A MZIZI: Kanti sesiyaphela njalo! I-IFP iyazesekela izabiwomali zayo
yonke le Minyango ngoba siyayidinga imali. [Oh! Is it already expiring! The
IFP supports all the Budget Votes for all these departments because we need
money.]

Ms T MADIKANE (Northern Cape): Hon Chair, hon Ministers, hon Deputy
Ministers, hon MEC, hon members of the National Council of Provinces,
distinguished guests, it is an honour and privilege for me to participate
in this debate today, but in the interest of time, I’m going to skip the
issues that have already been raised.

This is happening at a time when preparations to launch the anticrime mass
mobilisation campaign in the province are under way. This campaign is based
on the premise that it’s only when all the different sectors in society are
working in concert that we shall succeed in the fight against crime.

The levels of contact crime in the province are still unacceptably high and
violent crimes are committed against the most vulnerable and defenceless
people in our society, in other words the elderly, women and children. This
is attributed, to a large extent, to substance abuse.

In most instances, people who are experiencing crime at a certain point
forget to look at the broader picture. The fact that crime levels are still
high does not necessarily mean that they are not declining. We therefore
forge links with other departments as well as with civil society at large
to embark on campaigns and interventions aimed at changing the attitudes
and behaviour of people and creating an awareness of the dangers of
substance abuse.

We have made great progress in relation to intergovernmental collaboration
and integration. We make use of integrated development plan champions to
engage and assist municipalities with the development of integrated
community safety plans.

To date, we have formulated a working plan focusing, in the main, on the 22
crime weight stations in the province. This has been done in collaboration
with the safety volunteers that are employed in line with the Expanded
Public Works Programme guidelines, the police as well as the community
development workers. This serves as the backbone of the Northern Cape
anticrime mass mobilisation campaign.

Partnership policing is an essential element of sector policing. The
utilisation of existing partnerships, as well as the establishment of new
partnerships, especially at local government level, is vital. Community
involvement in preventing and combating crime will also be enhanced by the
rejuvenation of the community safety forums in the various municipalities
in the province.

The quality of monitoring and oversight of the police continues to improve,
following the implementation of the monitoring tool and police
accountability meetings held with communities and facilitated by the
departmental officials. In other words, when issues are picked up, for
example when there is a breakdown in terms of relations, then
accountability meetings are called to deal with those particular issues.

The recent restructuring of the SA Police Service had a profound effect on
delivering support to station personnel. This process has improved our
services to our clients, that is the community, as well in building
capacity in the identified accounting stations.

The continued transformation of SAPS will be closely monitored in the
province, especially since the setbacks that have been observed in this
regard have resulted in unintended consequences regarding the restructuring
process, as was mentioned by the chair of the portfolio committee in the
National Assembly.

The community outreach programme that is championed by the provincial
commissioner is being rolled out, particularly to areas with high crime
levels. This is giving our communities another avenue to voice their
concerns.

There is also a programme that is being rolled out in partnership with the
Department of Education to all police stations in the province, that is the
concept of having a junior station commissioner and a junior branch
commander. This project is intended to enhance and strengthen the campaign
against crime.

We are giving special attention to the youth and children in order to build
resilience and resistance to crime. We need to mention that this is serving
as a best practice as another province is also implementing it now.

Rape and domestic violence are still a problem for the Northern Cape. In a
third of the rape cases the charges get withdrawn and this has a negative
impact on the prevalence of this crime, as nothing seems to be deterring
the offenders from repeating the crime. Hence there is currently research
being done in order to identify the root causes of these tendencies.

In conclusion, I would like to thank those involved for the support that we
get from all the justice, crime-prevention and security cluster
departments, because we all recognise that it is only through working
together, in collaboration, that we are able to make an impact and make
some inroads to defeating crime. Also, a word of gratitude goes to the
members of the select and portfolio committees for their vigilance and
consistency in doing oversight on the work that government does. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon member. I think the
hon member is exemplary; she only used half the time allocated to her.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, we
celebrated democracy as a country, but it seems as if we have lost our
soul. [Interjections.] By that I mean in all of what we are discussing
today it is clear that there is sickness within our families. We need to
get the family units together and we need to get the churches to help us to
do that. Even in the prisons we need to go on a real drive to get the
churches to do some work within the prisons, not just the odd ones that ask
to come in there.

I agree that we must not be alarmists, but we must be realistic and
pragmatic. Desperate times call for desperate measures. Somehow, I know
that people would say no, but in some cases we need to bring in the Defence
Force to flush out the gangsters.
We applaud the Ministers’ initiatives to visit various European Union
countries to quell investor fears and provide some insight on how
government is planning to tackle the crime wave sweeping South Africa. We
are happy to hear that there is better co-ordination in the cluster. We
were worried but we are happy to hear what has been mentioned.

Whether South Africa is slipping into anarchy, however, is a matter of
perception. The utterances and response measures put in place do not always
give us much confidence that the government has the ability to deal with
the crime wave.

Police complain that they arrest people today, and tomorrow they are let
free and these are high-profile gangsters. Somehow, we need to look at
that. The rail police programme operating in the Western Cape has led to a
reduction in crime on trains, as visible patrolling has proved very
effective. This project must continue and be expanded on all the routes.
There needs to be zero tolerance.
We need more trained police personnel at police stations that can deal with
reported rape cases. At present, they are stationed at some stations but
most of the stations do not have personnel with such skills.

The Department of Correctional Services continues to have major challenges,
especially regarding corrupt warders. [Interjections.] Can you protect me,
Chair? Whether it is prisons management to provision of antiretroviral
drugs in prisons, the demonstrated lack of management and leadership has
resulted in underperformance.

A recent report on the state of Pollsmoor Prison paints a bleak picture.
The fact that 60 prisoners can share a cell, some sleeping on the floor and
subjected to daily sexual abuse which often results in them contracting
HIV/Aids is unacceptable. It is desirable that the first-time, awaiting-
trial prisoners be kept separate from serving convicts. We heard and we are
happy that that is going to happen.

In addition, there needs to be effective juvenile rehabilitation
programmes. When the youth leave prison, they need to have decent chances
of finding gainful employment. With the presence of HIV, it becomes a death
sentence when you mix people up like that.

What is very disappointing is that the department knows about the
conditions in Pollsmoor, but has done very little about it. Our prisons are
not rehabilitative in nature, but actually make inmates more hardened and
drug addicts. Thus far, only lip service has been paid to these critical
issues. We need co-operatives that will involve prisoners in something
whilst they are in prison; something that they can carry on with when they
leave prison.

The department of justice has done very well in transforming the judiciary
...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I am afraid your time
has expired.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Thank you, Chair.

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, let me join my chairperson in thanking the
Ministers and Deputy Ministers for a job well done. Then I must take a cue
from my comrade, Mr Sibiya, and say: From this podium, this afternoon, you
will hear a few hallucinations but don’t worry, the vast majority of South
Africans out there and the vast majority of South Africans in here support
your Vote. [Interjections.] Thank you.

The need to build more facilities, as mentioned in the 2007 state of the
nation address, was beyond doubt a reference to conditions in Correctional
Services. The construction of new prisons has been identified in the state
of the nation address as a core priority of government for 2007-08. It is
the duty of the Department of Correctional Services to make sure that
prisoners are provided with adequate opportunities inside prison to develop
their skills and become future law-abiding citizens.

Over the years the ANC has championed the prisoners’ rights and needs under
the cruel and inhumane sentencing regime of apartheid and they still do
today. Those struggles resulted in the writing of the 1996 Constitution,
which relates directly to this debate and guarantees the right to
conditions of detention that are consistent with human dignity, including
exercise and the provision, at state expense, of adequate accommodation and
nutrition.

New facilities are needed to ensure that offenders are provided with their
basic human rights and are treated with dignity. It must be noted that new
facilities provide better opportunities and are adequate enough to
facilitate rehabilitation programmes. They are designed to facilitate
development and reintegration of inmates.

In these new facilities it is possible for learning to take place. Most of
the old prisons are not designed to promote the greater rehabilitation
process. [Interjections.] Yes, thank you, Minister. They were designed to
inflict pain and punishment. The annual report of Correctional Services
states that new facilities require good infrastructure to strengthen safe
custody, humane conditions, adequate conditions for corrective services and
care and development.

The process continues concerning public-private partnership in maintaining,
upgrading and constructing prisons. Private sector-driven management and
construction of facilities could hinder the rehabilitation process and a
sense of accountability could be minimum, compared to state or public
sector-driven processes.

It is possible for the department to reclaim the initiative of correctional
facilities in accordance with the purpose of punishment and the
responsibility and power of the state to punish. In this regard, the
Department of Correctional Services should develop its own capacity for its
own resources and management and devolution of functions from the
Department of Public Works. There could be development of medium-term
facilities and a management plan.

There is no doubt about the fact that the building of new facilities could
substantially contribute to the reduction of overcrowding in order to
promote rehabilitation goals. Another view is that the building of new
facilities should be strategically located in new areas, in accordance with
job creation. I must thank the Minister and Deputy Minister for visiting
the Karoo, especially Beaufort West where I come from. It’s a rural
presidential node and we are asking you to look favourably on the Karoo
maybe to have a new facility there. This will assist in job creation.

There must be ongoing engagement in the process of building new-generation
facilities. However, building more prisons is not a long-term solution to
the problem of prison overcrowding, but it does contribute to accommodating
those found guilty by the courts, so that they can undergo rehabilitation
in order to change their behaviour.

It is possible to sufficiently explore various options to imprisonment in
order to reduce the prison population. Courts should apply alternative
sentencing options to cases of varying degrees of gravity. Some of these
options are connected to the socioeconomic conditions of communities and
opportunities for potential offenders and former offenders alike to live in
dignity in order not to commit crime.

Courts must be accessible to the communities they serve. This includes the
geographical location of the courts and specialised courts. Facilities need
to be upgraded and be user-friendly to victims and the capacity needs to be
looked into, in terms of human resources. Of significance is the need to
retain skills and enhance the capacity of court officials to perform their
duties. This also relates to payment of reasonable wages.

Tans het Korrektiewe Dienste ’n baie negatiewe beeld in die gemeenskap. Die
media maak gebeure sensasioneel en daardeur word so baie positiewe aspekte
van Korrektiewe Dienste buite rekening gelaat.

’n AGB LID: Vertel hulle!

Mnr N J MACK: Wanneer ’n enkele negatiewe gebeurtenis weergegee word asof
dit die daaglikse gebruik binne Korrektiewe Dienste is, maak sulke
omstandighede die lojale lede negatief en hulle voel dat dit wat hulle elke
dag doen nie raakgesien word nie. Binne Korrektiewe Dienste vind daar
gereeld veranderinge plaas. Die probleem is nie die veranderings as sulks
nie, maar die wyse waarop dit bekend gemaak word.

Die proses van demilitarisering kan hier as voorbeeld gebruik word. Daar
was weggedoen met militêre range om sodoende die burokratiese bestuurstyl
van die verlede te vervang met ’n meer demokratiese bestuurstyl. Die fokus
op veilige bewaking van oortreders is ook verskuif na meer klem op
aanhoudingsomstandighede en rehabilitasie van oortreders. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Currently, Correctional Services has a very negative image in the
community. The media sensationalises events and because of that so many
positive aspects of Correctional Services are not taken into account.

An HON MEMBER: Tell them!

Mr N J MACK: When a single negative event is portrayed as if it is daily
practice within Correctional Services, these circumstances make the loyal
members despondent and they feel that the service they provide daily goes
unnoticed. Many changes are regularly affected within Correctional
Services. The problem is not the changes as such, but the manner in which
it is communicated.

The process of demilitarisation can be used here as an example. Military
ranks have been abolished and in this way the old bureaucratic management
style of the past could be replaced with a more democratic management
style. The focus on the safe custody of offenders has also shifted to that
of placing far more emphasis on the conditions in detention and
rehabilitation of offenders.]

Successful social reintegration will contribute to crime prevention and
such crime prevention should entail visible policing. Indeed, visible
policing entails visibility of the police on the streets and that requires
significant resources at the level of police stations, foot patrols,
vehicle patrols, horse patrols and motorbike or motorcycle patrols.

Law and order mechanisms such as policing the streets require ongoing
training of the law-enforcement agencies. Police accountability systems are
particularly relevant in the democratic South Africa, because of our
historical practices of unaccountability and brutal policing. During the
apartheid era the police were central to the enforcement of inequitable and
racist laws and therefore had a poor relationship with most South African
communities. The advent of democracy in South Africa saw the demise of
apartheid institutions and ushered in democratic structures built around
explicit values of good governance, transparency and accountability.

The challenge of effective policing accountability, however, is universal
and confronts all democracies around the world. Given the complexities of
police work, the difficult conditions in which police officers have to work
and the huge powers they wield, it is necessary to have both internal and
external accountability systems. Internal accountability mechanisms should
form part of the day-to-day management and functioning of the police
organisation, while external oversight bodies such as the ICD are critical
for ensuring transparency and public legitimacy through ensuring that the
police act in accordance with the social norms and legal frameworks.

The ICD is a specific civilian-run state structure independent of the SAPS
that is responsible for investigating all cases of deaths as a result of
police action or while in custody. Moreover, it may investigate any other
allegation of criminality or misconduct against individual police officials
brought to it by a member of the public or at its own discretion.

These are challenges that require to be dealt with in accordance with the
available resources. In conclusion, there is no doubt that there really is
a great need for more resources. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Comrade Chairperson, hon Minister, hon
Deputy Minister, MECs, hon Members of Parliament, in two days’ time the
country will be commemorating an important day in our history, the 31st
anniversary of June 16. This day marks the acceleration of our fight for
freedom and it also brought the day of our liberation from racial
oppression closer. I mention June 16 because of the important role that our
youth played in an endeavour to transform our country from a society that
was racially exclusive to one that aims to be representative of all its
people.

Among our senior officers, we have many colonels and generals who are from
the June 1976 generation. We hope that the present youth that joined the SA
National Defence Force, SANDF, will emulate their example and lead a fully
representative Defence Force in the future.

The Department of Defence has grappled with the challenges of
transformation since 1994, especially concerning representivity among its
uniformed staff. However, it is encouraging that we can today state that
the issue of representivity is steadily but surely getting resolved.
General representivity since 1994 has changed remarkably, and women make up
18% of the total strength of the SANDF.

The present gender composition of the Military Skills Development System,
MSDS, personnel gives us some encouragement for the future. Of the total
strength of 5 166 maritime systems division soldiers, 1 536 or 30% are
women. It means we are beginning to break this stereotype of seeing the
military careers as being for men only. If this trend continues, by 2009 we
shall be close to achieving our target.

The challenge that we need to deal with in the MSDS, as far as
representivity is concerned, is to attract and recruit a sizable number of
young men and women. Representation is at present unacceptably low, at 6%.
Our recruitment division is busy devising strategies to overcome this
challenge.

There is also another problem where some irresponsible people, especially
elderly people, would go around telling children that the Defence Force is
for blacks only. Chairperson, let me take this opportunity to call on the
South African youth, both black and white, to join the SANDF. This will
ensure that the future of the SANDF does not become an all-black affair but
reflects the demographics of the country at all levels.

The challenge that existed over the years with regard to middle management
in the military, unfortunately, still exists. The majority of members in
the ranks of lieutenant colonel and colonel are mostly white, and of course
male. The Department of Defence hopes that, through the introduction of the
member exit mechanism, MEM, and fast-tracking of targeted individuals
within the department, it will eventually overcome this challenge. This
mechanism which is voluntary, allows the department to exercise discretion
to retain personnel who possess essential skills and experience.

The unfortunate part regarding Defence is that it is not like other
departments. We cannot advertise a post of a colonel. A colonel must be
promoted from a rank of lieutenant colonel. Therefore, we have to make sure
that we have more black lieutenant colonels and more black warrant officers
who will go up to take the posts and push those white colonels to the rank
of generals. There is no other way to do it.

I am pleased to inform the House that two of the submarines that we
procured for the SA Navy as part of the defence strategic package have been
delivered and form part of our fleet at Simonstown dockyard. As we acquire
this new equipment, we train young people to be in a position to operate
it. To this end, a large number of black sailors have since been trained to
address one of the complaints which was raised by somebody about the Navy.
One of the developments coming out of this training is the ascendancy of
Bubele Kitie Mhlana, who is popularly known as “Bravo” to the captaincy of
the SAS Isandlwana. The process of qualifying as a naval commander of a
frigate is long and arduous and demands both considerable intellectual
growth and development. The command of a frigate is limited to those who
truly excel. Bravo Mhlana has joined the exclusive club by passing the
required test to become the first African commander of a frigate. We are
proud with these strides that we are making in the transformation of the
SANDF.

Whilst the SA Navy has concentrated largely on its capital renewal
programmes during the past years, the renewal of its human resource
component has not lagged far behind. Through the MSDS, the SA Navy has
provided on average 600 young men and women per year the opportunity to
complete the two-year Military Skills Development Programme. Nearly 60% of
these youngsters were subsequently afforded the opportunity to migrate into
the core career service system. Today, they are serving their country as
proud members of the SA Navy. The remaining 40% is assisted to find
relevant employment and they are also being incorporated into the SA Navy
Reserves.

The MSDS has to some extent started to improve our representivity in the
SANDF, especially among junior officers. This system has contributed
immensely in improving the age profile of the regular force, particularly
among the privates and noncommissioned officers.

You will realise that, recently, we have been recruiting at a rate of 4 000
soldiers per annum. You will also realise that we recruit from the ages
between 19 and 22 years of age, because in the Defence Force we do not
employ old people. In the Defence Force, once you are above 22 years, you
are an elderly person and a senior person that must be protected by
soldiers.

The SA Air Force has in the past few years embarked on improving
representivity among its ranks by recruiting more trainers and trainees.
This is producing good results from Langebaanweg Central Flying School.

In addition, we have devised a strategy to counter the exodus of our pilots
and technicians by introducing an incentive scheme to retain them. This
would be implemented from the beginning of the present financial year. The
Ministry has engaged the CEO and President of the South African Airways to
explore ways of encouraging SAA pilots to join the reserve force. The
benefit of this is that SANDF will continue to enjoy the expertise of those
who separate from SAA to join the South African Air Force. This is one of
the biggest challenges. It is a pity that I do not have enough time.

One of the biggest challenges is that we are losing our pilots and
technicians – they are stolen. The training of pilots and technicians is
very expensive and it takes time. What the private sector does now ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Minister, you can round up now.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: What I would say to the committees is this:
Help us to get more money. We are losing a lot of money by training these
technicians and pilots and then we lose them. If we were to have more
money, their incentives could be increased and in that way we can keep them
in Defence. Thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Chairperson. I will only have time to
discuss a matter in connection with Correctional Services. The National
Institute for Crime Prevention and Reintegration of Offenders, Nicro, made
a controversial call the other day for inmates to be offered paid work in
businesses set up within prisons. This is a proposal which can have far-
reaching consequences. Executive director Solomons referred to it as a
profit-orientated employment practice within prison, as part of the
reintegration process.

Although Nicro intends at this stage to focus only on petty crimes and
minor offences, it excludes offenders who commit serious crimes right now
and, as they put it, leave the door wide open to pursue this later. Nicro
has further suggested that prisoners be paid, not market-related wages but
then, at least, a minimum wage, with part of it being paid to the
prisoners’ families.

Nicro remarked that, when examining the number of offenders who return to
crime, rehabilitation so far has not been very successful. In spite of the
good intentions of this proposal, and we must accept that, it surely is not
going to work. Criminals will be better off than the many law-abiding
unemployed. Once used to receiving a wage in prison along with three meals
a day, accommodation and recreation, however humble it may be, a prisoner
who was engaged in such a programme as envisaged by Nicro once outside,
again unemployed and often with only one meal a day, if any at all, with
scanty accommodation, if any, will be tempted to go back to prison and
become a habitual criminal.

The idea that Nicro has to extend the policy later to offenders who commit
serious crimes as well, may just pass the test of no discrimination. If
prisoner A has the right to be employed and receive remuneration, why not
prisoner B or prisoner C? This will put an extra burden on courts to
incorporate this so-called privilege to be employed and earn a wage in the
sentencing procedure – in other words when punishment is handed down. For
the unemployed that may not be punishment, but a relief and a reason to be
lured back to prison.

The model, in spite of its good intentions, is not going to achieve its
objectives; not to the extent that people will not be committing crime
again, and it will not assist in crime prevention but will rather end up in
crime encouragement. Other measures will have to be found by Nicro, as one
of the partners of Correctional Services, otherwise the slogan “Crime does
not pay” will become “Crime does pay.” I thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MECs, officials and
colleagues ...
... ilungu elihloniphekile le-DA, uMnu Worth, yindoda elunge kakhulu
ngokwakhe kodwa uyalahlekiswa, uyadukiswa. Bathi ngeSipedi: Ba a mo
gapeletša ... ukuthi makakhulume izinto okungafanele azikhulume. Ekomidini
uyakuvuma konke esikushoyo, asixhase isabiwomali. Kodwa ekugcineni
okwenzekayo ukuthi uma esesuka laphaya, ufike athole umyalelo kozakwabo
abeseMkhandlwini Kazwelonke bese eguquka, ekhuluma into esingayazi thina
lapha.

Uma sixoxa naye namanje sizothola ukuthi into ayikhulumayo ayilona iqiniso.
Uthe uma ekhuluma lapha abantu ababubiki ubugebengu. Uye waqhubeka, yena
ngomlomo wakhe, wathi kunokusalela emuva emacaleni asezinkantolo.
Niyayithola-ke le nkulumo ukuthi iyaziphikisa? Kusho ukuthi naye akazizwa
ukuthi uthini uma ekhuluma, ukhuluma ngoba usuke ebhalelwe phansi,
engayibukanga inkulumo yakhe ukuthi iqonde ukuthini.

Uye waqhubeka wathi yena uthanda ukuthi iMinyango le isebenzise amaphoyisa
azimele, kodwa uphinde wakhala futhi ngokuthi iMinyango isebenzisa imali
eningi, isebenzisa amaphoyisa amaningi azimele. Ubethini kahle hle lo
mnumzane? Asimuzwanga kahle. Bathi ngesiZulu uyahubhuza nje, ukhuluma into
angazizwa naye ukuthi uthini. Wenza sengathi yindoda elele, okusho ukuthi
uyaphupha.

Ngeke-ke ngikhulume ngalo mama waseNyakatho Kapa we-ID ngoba akahambi
mihlangano yekomidi. Engahambi namihlangano yekomidi nje, akabuzi nakuMnu
Fielding avela esifundazweni esisodwa naye, yena-ke ohamba imihlangano
yekomidi ngokuzinikela futhi ohlale ekhona njalo. Akabuzi futhi, kwazise
nokuthi ungumakhelwane wakhe ngoba bahlezi ndawonye ngokwezihlalo zabo.

Usuka azokhuluma izinto angazazi lapha, engezi nakithi ukuzocela athi: Cha,
ngicela ningichushise lapha, ngiyalahleka. Akakhulumi nosihlalo wethu,
akasho nokuthi, “Ngicela sihlalo uzongisiza lapha.” Naye uzama ukufeza
izinjongo zomholi wakhe, ukuthi naye azohubhuza, akhulume izinto
esingazizwa; uyinkinga-ke.

Maqondana nale ndoda ye-UIF, ngithi kuyo: Cha, baba, ngeke ngikwazi
nokukuphendula. Wena uyindoda okufanele ngiyiyeke ngoba phela okukhulumile
akudingi ukuphendulwa ngoba nawe uyazazi futhi uzizwile ukuthi
awukhulumanga kahle, ushaye eceleni.

Engizokusho ukuthi uKhongolose usethathe igxathu lezinyathelo ezinqala
nezikahle ngokuthi ahlanganise oNgqongqoshe neMinyango ngaphansi kwe-
criminal justice cluster. Lokhu kuyabonisa ukuthi sizama ukuhlanganisa,
silwe izimpi zokubuchitha ubugebengu, siyinto eyodwa, kusukela esigungwini
seKhabhinethi kuya nakhona kwiziphathimandla, izifundazwe nasemazingeni
ezindawo. Siyakujabulela lokho, sikubona kuyinto ekahle. Sithi nihamba
ngezinyathelo ezikahle.

Okufanele nikulungise, noma kunjalo, yilokhu olulandelayo. Okokuqala,
kuzodingeka ukuthi nakhe uhlelo oluzolandelwa lokuthi oNgqongqoshe
bezifundazwe mabathathe umsebenzi wezepotiliki bawubeke emahlombe abo
maqondana ne-criminal justice cluster, bangabi yinto nje encengwayo
nencengelwayo bengenawo amandla okubabamba iqhaza laphaya ngoba kwezinye
izifundazwe uthola ukuthi umuntu ongusihlalo yijaji, uma kuhlangene le
Minyango. ONgqongqoshe bezifundazwe abanalo izwi elizwakalayo kahle.
Maqondana nale nto, niyazi-ke nani ukuthi izifundazwe yizona eziphethe
ezifundeni zazo.

Uma umuntu ekhuluma ngendaba yokuthi umnotho awuthuthuke, makutshalwe
izimali, kusemqoka futhi ukuthi abuke ukuthi ngeke kube khona ukutshalwa
kwezimali uma bengakwazi ukuthi babe namaqhinga okulwa nobugebengu. Ngaleyo
ndlela masinikeze amandla ezifundazweni okuthi zikwazi ukuphatha i-criminal
justice cluster.

Okunye okufanele kwenzeke ukuthi nasemazingeni ezindawo, amalungu  amakomidi
osodolobha abhekene  nezokuphepha  nawo  mawanikezwe  amandla  okuphatha  i-
criminal justice cluster emazingeni ezindawo,  ukwenzela  ukuthi  ubugebengu
sikwazi ukulwa nabo,  nokwenzela  ukuthi  kube  khona  isigcawu  sokuxhumana
ezinhlakeni zikahulumeni lapho  oNgqonqgoshe  bezifundazwe  bezohlela  khona
imihlangano. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... the hon member of the DA, hon Worth, is a  very  kind  man  but  he  is
misled. In Sepedi they say, he is being forced to say things that he is  not
supposed to say. In the committee he agrees with everything that we say  and
he supports the budget. But what actually happens in the end  is  that  when
he leaves the committee, he gets orders from his colleagues in the  National
Assembly and he then changes his mind, and comes here to say things that  we
do not know.

If we can talk to him now we will discover that what he is saying is
incorrect. When he spoke here, he said that people don’t report crime, yet
he continued, of his own volition and said that there is a backlog of cases
in courts. It is clear that this speech is self-contradictory. This means
that he doesn’t understand himself when he is speaking. He simply reads a
speech which has been written for him without understanding it.

Hon Worth also said that the departments should use private security  firms,
and in the same breath  he  complained  about  the  spending  spree  of  the
departments on private security firms. What was this man really  saying?  We
did not understand him. In isiZulu, when a person speaks as he did,  we  say
he is talking in his sleep. He did not even understand himself. He did  like
a man who talks in his sleep, which means that he was dreaming.

The least said about the hon member of the ID from the Northern Cape, the
better because she does not attend committee meetings. On top of not
attending committee meetings, she doesn’t even ask hon Fielding, who is
from the same province as she is, who attends committee meetings regularly,
about the things discussed in committee meetings. She doesn’t ask anything
from hon Fielding, and yet even inside the House she sits next to him.

The member comes here and she talks  about  things  that  she  doesn’t  know
about. She doesn’t even come to us and asks us to  help  her  where  she  is
lost. She doesn’t bother to speak to our  chairperson,  and  say:  “Can  the
chairperson help me here please?” She  too,  is  also  trying  to  push  the
agenda of her leader; she talks in her sleep. She talks  about  things  that
we don’t even understand. That is a problem.

To the hon member of the UIF, I say: Hon member, I will not respond to  your
speech. You are a member who does not have to be responded to  because  what
you said does not need any response. You also  understood  that  you  didn’t
speak well and that you missed the point.

What I am going to say is that the African National Congress did a
wonderful thing by grouping the departments and Ministries under the
criminal justice cluster. This shows that we are grouping from Cabinet to
Ministers, and provinces and local government to become one in fighting the
war against crime. And we are happy about that; we see it as a very good
thing. We say that you are on track.

There are certain areas though that you still need to address. Firstly,  you
need to come up with a programme  that  is  going  to  be  followed  by  the
provincial ministers to shoulder the  political  work  with  regard  to  the
criminal justice cluster. They need to play an active role, and not just  be
passive  participants  because  in  certain  provinces  you  find  that  the
chairperson of such clusters, if they have a meeting,  is  always  a  judge.
The provincial ministers do not have a voice. With regard to these, you  all
are aware that provinces have powers in their areas of jurisdiction.

If we speak  about  growing  the  economy  and  investment,  it  is  equally
important to realise that there would be no  investments  if  there  are  no
ways to fight crime. In that way, let us give  provinces  powers  to  manage
the criminal justice cluster.

The other thing that must happen is that in local government spheres, local
committee members dealing with the issues of safety must also be given
powers to chair the criminal justice cluster in local government. This
would help in fighting crime, and it would also assist in establishing the
communication forum in government structures where provincial ministers
would arrange meetings.]

These must be the meetings where they meet with their local government
counterparts, where report-backs and discussions take place. At a national
level, there must be a meeting of Ministers in the criminal justice cluster
where MECs for safety and security are able to give report-backs and their
accounts in these meetings. In that way you will be able to combat crime in
a co-ordinated and integrated way.

At the local level the community safety forums are structures that must be
there to ensure that co-ordination is in place. These structures must
ensure that a partnership is built, that there is a relationship based on
trust, and that there’s confidence between the community and the police. At
the same time, they must ensure that policing in general is attended to in
terms of priorities that must be dealt with, and they must ensure that
prevention programmes and combating of crime are dealt with so that we can
break the backbone of crime. They must also help to ensure that citizens
have access to the police. The police must at the same time be able to
report crime levels and trends to these community safety forums, at that
level.

One of the most fundamental things is that we must put more resources into
the revamping of intelligence so that we can deal with these matters as and
when we get the information.

Into esingayenzi ukulwa nobugebengu ngendlela eyesekelwe ekutholeni ulwazi.
Siyokhumbula, mama, ukuthi ngesikhathi sobandlululo bekuthi uma kungena
abashokobezi emphakathini, amaphoyisa asheshe azi ukuthi kukhona
umshokobezi ongenile laphaya bese eya kobopha lowo mshokobezi. Lawo mandla
okwenza lokho aseshonephi njengamanje? Masizame ukubuyela emuva, sizame
ukukulungisa-ke lokho ukuze sikwazi ukulwa nobugebengu ngaleyo ndlela.

Kwezobulungiswa, maqondana nalezi zigcawu zokuphepha  komphakathi,  engifuna
ukukusho   ukuthi   kusemqoka   ukuthi   uMnyango   wezobulungiswa    ukwazi
ukuqinisekisa ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[What we have not done yet is to fight crime on the  basis  of  information.
We will recall, Madam Chair, that during apartheid when the terrorists  were
amongst the community, the police would always be  the  first  ones  to  get
information and they would go and arrest those  terrorists.  Where  has  the
ability to do that gone to? Let us look back, and try and  address  that  to
enable us to fight crime in that way.

In justice, with regard to these community safety forums, what I want to
say is that it is important for the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development to make sure ...]

... that these structures are playing a role in ensuring that people are
educated and mobilised to understand why bail is granted; and not only
that, they must be able to arrange meetings where the judiciary can go and
report to the people. I know it may sound like something that some judges
and magistrates might be adverse to, but I want to tell you something: I
have met with judges in my province of Gauteng and they have agreed to
that; I have met with the chief magistrate and he has agreed to do that. He
has said that we must organise meetings where they can go to address the
people and be exposed to the communities. It is not only for exposure, but
they must also educate the people about the causes of crime, so that people
can avoid that. It means getting involved in preventive measures, in
relation to crime. Therefore we believe that these community safety forums
will play such roles in mobilising our communities in that respect.

The other aspect regarding Correctional Services is that we believe these
community safety forums can ensure that the rehabilitation programmes that
are being conducted can be conducted even outside prison; and it’s not only
rehabilitation that needs to be conducted but also debriefing and ensuring
that these people are integrated into our society, become part of our
society and are able to avoid repeating crime or what we call recidivism.
These matters must be addressed and Home Affairs must play a role here as
well. The community safety forums must ensure that people who are unable to
get IDs are mobilised so that they can get hold of their IDs.

Sihlalo, ngifuna ukuyisonga manje inkulumo yami ngoba isikhathi  siyabaleka,
baba. Ngithi:  Thina  singuKhongolose  siyasixhasa  isabiwomali.  Ngiyabonga
kakhulu. [Ihlombe.] [Chairperson, I want to conclude my speech  now  because
my time has expired. Chairperson, I say, we the  African  National  Congress
support this Budget Vote. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MECs, hon members and guests
- if there are any still left at this time – in responding to the debate on
behalf of the department, I want to say, it’s of course always difficult to
respond adequately because so many issues are raised and one really wants
to respond and do justice to everything that has been raised, but obviously
one can’t.

However, what we have done is that we have taken note of the issues. As the
Minister indicated at the hearings we attended the other day, should you at
any stage in the future want us to come and address these issues we would
be available to do so, or if there is a particular issue that you feel has
not been addressed, please approach the Minister’s office or mine and we
will try and answer those questions as best we can.

We also thank the committee very much for the hard work it does. Having
been a committee chairperson in the National Assembly, I have always found
that I would never envy the job of the committees in this House. One is
struggling to deal with one committee on the one side and one department on
the other side. I can only imagine what it must be like you try and deal
with four, five or six departments. It is a huge job and we must thank you
very much for what you are doing. If there is anything we ca do or any way
that we can make your work easier, please just tell us. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Are you serious?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well,
except for going home, of course. [Laughter.]

We are 13 years into our democracy and we must start looking at ourselves
in terms of what we are achieving and not just focus on what is wrong. I
know that it is easy to find problems everywhere. I mean, if we go into a
court, there is going to be a window broken; if we go to a prison, there is
going to be something that is missing; and if we go anywhere in government,
in any kind of structure, even in the private sector, there will always be
things that are wrong. Therefore we must start learning to deal with the
whole issue; not an event, but a process.

I often listen to our discussions; the way we discuss things as if we are
dealing with events. We discuss as if we are going to do something now that
is going to be an event and is going to be there forever and so on. Of
course, tomorrow it can change again.

There is one thing that we don’t do and that’s why we must be careful about
being anecdotal all the time. Some of the anecdotes that people use are
actually anecdotes that come from five years ago. These issues have been
dealt with, but things tend become something like a myth and a legend.

Now, I am not saying we must not complain about issues but what we must
start trying to learn is to analyse on a structural level. We should look
at whether a door handle is broken in one court or whether every court has
broken door handles, only then is there a structural problem. If a door
handle is broken in one court, then it just happens to be a broken handle
and not a major catastrophe - government has not fallen and there is no
anarchy.

I think what we must start doing, and must start learning and teaching
ourselves, is really to look at the structural problems. For example,
someone mentioned a good example. I think it was Kgoshi. He said the gap
between court managers and the people below them is too big. Now, that’s a
structural problem, because what it is telling us is that we have a lot of
chiefs but we don’t have the people that can do the work below the chiefs.
That is the truth. We then have to look at how we restructure and what
staff we actually employ at a certain level to deal with the issue. That is
different from a situation you encounter when you go to a court and you
find a rude, unprofessional clerk. If you find a rude and unprofessional
clerk, that is exactly what that person is: a rude and unprofessional
clerk, they are not a symptom of the system.

What I am trying to say is that, through interacting with each other, we
will be able to establish, much easier, where the structural problems are
and try to deal with them. Anywhere you go you will find that there are
always lazy people. There are always lazy politicians and hard-working
politicians, lazy judges and hard-working judges, lazy magistrates and hard-
working magistrates. All over, in life, we get that situation. The issue is
about trying to find those structural aspects.

The second issue is transformation and we must start learning. I listened
to hon Sandra Botha yesterday again trying, in a convoluted way, to say
that things have changed and that it is no longer affirmative action; it is
now transformation. Transformation is such a simple thing: It means change.
Transformation equals change and it does so in the context of the
Constitution.

We negotiated the Constitution. We analysed our past and looked at where we
wanted to go. We then, in broad principles, put that in the Constitution.
In the Constitution we said that we have this horrible thing called
apartheid – for which, today, you will find no one who voted for it. Those
who voted for it are all dead and they don’t exist anymore! In any case,
that thing was there.

I have heard that the hon Watson made some admissions in the week, which is
good and I think it is important. [Laughter.] It helps in building our
country. The solution was simply to take away this horrible thing called
apartheid which not only excluded blacks and women, oppressed and
dehumanised them, but the system was also rotten. It did not work well.

If one looks at the procedures and management of things that were followed
under apartheid, one would find that they were archaic and so on. So, not
only was there a moral problem, but there was also a general technical
problem with it.

What we are saying regarding transformation is: You take all that, not just
race and gender – though race and gender are important. You must then
change the system to a system that is more in line with the one we
described in the Constitution, which is caring, professional and provides
services to people – that’s what transformation is, nothing more and
nothing less.

It is not a figment of our imagination. Some people are now saying: I don’t
see the word “transformation” in the Constitution. But the point of
transformation – go and look at the definition – is to move from one state
to another state, and that’s all it is. In South Africa there is a
Constitution that guides us to do that.

If we in Justice engage in transformation that is not in line with the
Constitution, then people must take us to court and we must get struck down
in the courts. If the Minister of Defence does things like that, you bring
him to court. So, there is a framework with in which we do that.

One of the clauses in the Constitution is the equality clause. I must tell
you that there are many things I am very proud of in South Africa, and one
of the things that I am very proud of is the equality clause. This clause
is very unique, in constitutional terms. You will not find this equality
clause in any other country in the world, because what this equality clause
does is that it qualifies the usual equality clause which is basically your
equal opportunity clause that states: “Everyone must have equal
opportunity.” And that is what the equality clause usually is, but that
would not work in South Africa. It would not work because that would be
like running a 100-metre race with one person nicely dressed up wearing his
running shoes, etc and the other person having one of those big leg balls
tied to their legs. Would you then be able to say that we are all equal? If
the Constitution says “Let’s run that race”, who is going to win?

So, what we did with the equality clause was to say that equality in South
Africa is not just about equal opportunities. In South Africa, the
definition of equality also means that certain corrective steps should be
taken to level the playing field in order to move forward in equality. Now,
people keep asking: How long will that take? Well, it will take as long as
the Constitution stays the way it is; that’s how long it will take.
[Laughter.]

The imperative is not just a figment of the ANC’s imagination, it is a
clause in the Constitution which all the major parties voted for. I
personally know that Colin Eglin from the DA, at that stage, was very proud
of that clause and supported it fully. We now come along and say that if
there is affirmative action and so on then that is unconstitutional and
that harps on racism of the past. I say no, it’s in the Constitution.
People keep on saying that it is being abused, as Ms Botha tried to tell us
yesterday about an article she took from a newspaper which was completely
false. [Interjections.] This is the problem with you people. You cannot
take a good hiding. You must learn to know that when you are wrong then you
are wrong. And in this case, you are wrong factually and in every single
point.

However, I have to get back to the point that I was trying to make, that we
must not, as a people, be embarrassed about affirmative action policies and
so on. Where, of course, they are wrongly implemented, we must correct
them, because there will be mistakes and there will be times when they are
wrongly implemented. But regarding the vast majority of cases, I abhor the
suggestion that the vast majority of affirmative cases in this country are
illegal and bad for this country. It is wrong and the Constitution helps us
to make sure that we bring that about in the country. Until the
Constitution is changed, that is what will happen. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Chair, I would like to
thank the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Safety and Security,
Kgoshi Mokoena and members of the committee for the continuous role they
play in visiting provinces and also for being critical, in the sense that
the oversight work they are rendering assists the police in doing their
work.

May I also indicate to you, hon Worth, that on the point you raised around
matters of statistics, you can’t talk about cases which are not reported.
What do you expect the police to do? The police are not izangoma; they
cannot throw bones and say: “There are these and those crimes that have
been committed. We must go and investigate.” They can only have reported
crimes on the basis of people coming forward. So, if you know of people who
don’t report crime, assist them, as a member of this House, so that they
can come forward and report their cases and then justice can be done.

Can I also indicate to you, hon Worth, that you talked about the matter of
the ICD and the challenges faced by that organisation. We do agree with you
fully. We need to capacitate the ICD and ensure that it is able to function
adequately as per the legislation because, as we all know, the ICD was
established through an Act of Parliament. We do acknowledge that there are
a lot of weaknesses, but we are going to correct all those issues, and we
are hoping that this is going to ensure that they are able to execute their
functions in a better way.

Baba uMzizi, maqondana nendaba yabantu abangena lapha emingceleni othi wena
kumele kubuyele amasosha kuyona, ubaba uLekota ushilo ukuthi umsebenzi
wamasosha uyacaca: Kumele bavikele izwe. Abezokuvikela abasiwona
amaphoyisa. Manje ngeke thina sibuyele emuva sithathe amasosha siwenze
amaphoyisa. Asingayenzi into eyenziwa umbuso omdala, siphinde siyenze futhi
ngoba siyayazi ukuthi ayifanele. Amasosha awaqaphe ngendlela efanele,
amaphoyisa enze umsebenzi wawo.

Okwesibili engifuna ukukusho  ukuthi,  uyazi  lungu  elihloniphekile  ukuthi
khona manje sikhuphula inani lamaphoyisa, ngoba  senzela  khona  ukuthi  abe
nekhono lokubamba abantu abangena lapha.  Kuhle  ilungu  lingakhohlwa  futhi
ukuthi njengoba likhuluma ngalaba bafo baseMozambique nabaseZimbabwe,  nathi
basisiza ngezikhathi ezinzima. Manje asikwazi  ukuthi  sibaphathe  ngendlela
engafanele. Njengoba ecacisele uMnu uDe Lange, leli zwe  lethu  linemithetho
noMthethosisekelo okumele siwulandele. Asikwazi  ukuba  nonya  njengamaBhunu
akudala. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Mzizi, with regard to illegal  immigrants  entering  our  country,  and
your solution that soldiers should be deployed  at  the  border  posts,  hon
Lekota mentioned that the primary task of the Defence Force  is  clear,  and
it is to protect the country. The Defence Force is not the  Police  Service.
We therefore can not go back and allow  soldiers  to  do  the  work  of  the
police. Let us not do what was done by  the  apartheid  regime,  because  we
know that it is not supposed to happen. Let the soldiers do their  work  and
the police should also do theirs.

Secondly, what I want to say is that you are aware, hon member, that we  are
in the process of strengthening the police force, so that it  can  have  the
capacity to deal with illegal immigrants.  The  hon  member  must  also  not
forget that, as  he  was  talking  about  the  people  from  Mozambique  and
Zimbabwe respectively, they also  helped  us  during  our  difficult  times.
Therefore, we cannot treat them in  a  brutal  way.  As  the  hon  De  Lange
correctly mentioned, this country has laws  and  the  Constitution  that  we
must respect. We can’t treat them with the cruelty of the apartheid Boers.]

With regard to the matter raised by hon Moseki about the shortage of staff,
it is advisable that if you go to any police station and you are told that
they have a shortage of vehicles you should not accept that, because there
is capacity which is being built in the Police Service. We are employing
and training all the time, precisely to ensure that there is no shortage.
If you find police officers or police stations that are not doing their
job, you know exactly what to do – there is the ICD and provincial
commissioners who must take up these matters. So, let’s not allow any
police station not to be properly utilised.

With regard to police stations that do not have cells, I would like to say
that we are trying our best to improve and refurbish our police stations in
a way that they become accountable and are able to meet the requirements,
in terms of human rights. If you look at the latest police stations that
are being built, you would notice that they are all compliant. The older
ones are still a problem, but we are not going to leave them like that. We
have to ensure that our police stations are in a good condition and if they
are not, we will correct that. So, we cannot allow that situation to
continue. Part of our current budget addresses that issue.

To the hon member of the ID, I would say that the Constitution cannot allow
the abuse of women to continue. Regarding the particular case mentioned,
whether one is a policeman or policewoman, a judge or whatever, no one is
above the law in this country. For women who are raped and abused by police
or have been exposed to abuse by any police officer, we have the ICD and
provincial commissioners. In that member’s province, they are even much
better off because they have a woman who is very sensitive and who is
prepared to fight unjust habits and behaviour against women.

I am just saying to the hon member she needs to make sure that for any
abuse encountered, she doesn’t have to come to this podium, but she should
act. Let’s act and fight some of these issues because it won’t help us to
come to the podium and start talking about them. In order for us to advance
the struggle of women in South Africa, we need to help those vulnerable
women.

On the issue raised by the hon Ntuli around the insufficient fleet of
police vehicles, I would say: Don’t allow any police officer to tell you
that they don’t have enough cars. Currently, we are budgeting and we are
spending more money on fleet management in our police stations. Not only
that, we are also creating mechanisms of ensuring that those cars are being
utilised effectively. We hope that everyone in this House will know this:
They must not accept as an answer from any police officer the fact that
they have no cars available, because it’s not true. Currently, we are at a
ratio of four police officers to one car and our ideal is to have one car
to two police officers in future. So, in short, we are addressing some of
the issues you have raised and so far, we have addressed some of them.
Technology is part of the process of making sure that we are better
equipped and more efficient.

Hon Shiceka, matters of crime intelligence are matters that are being
addressed. We are training and we have capacitated our intelligence people,
but we can’t come here and say: “So far we have this number of crimes that
have been reported.” That does not work. But in the communities we are
doing that. Recently, we launched a helpline number to assist the
communities in reporting crimes. So, we have various systems of ensuring
that crime intelligence is indeed effective. However, it cannot be a public
matter because if we go public on issues of intelligence, we will be
defeating the very purpose of their strategies and what they do. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson ... [Interjections.]
Very quickly ... very quickly. I am diabetic and I am getting hungrier now,
so I need to go home. Chairperson, on a more serious note, I want to make a
call. I have just learned that the union that operates in Correctional
Services, Popcru, has its congress here in Cape Town. My call to them is
very simple: You have done very well so far in making sure that your
members do not join an illegal and wrong strike, so keep to that. Do not do
go there like everybody else does. It is an essential services department.
Do not ask your members to join a strike which they should not join. That
is the first call I want to make. I am smiling as I make this call, to show
that I am not in a fighting mood. When I am in a bad mood, I can really
fight. This time I am merely making a call: Don’t do it because your
members are going to be in trouble.

Secondly, the age of our offender population is worrying me: 26 to 27 years
of age. It is worrying. It does mean that we have to do something.
Education campaigns on “don’t do drugs” or “don’t do crime” are campaigns
that should be broadened. Every parent and every member of the public
should join in. The average age of our offender population is scary. They
should be at university or college or starting new jobs and not be in
prison. We have got parole boards that work and all I am saying to the
parole boards is: Involve the communities. Involve the victims when you
deal with the offenders who do want to get parole. To the offenders: Parole
is not a right; it is a privilege. Do not do something silly because you
want to be paroled; it is a privilege.

Something that worries me and that I should mention here, Kgoshi, is the
issue of inmate-on-inmate assaults, whether they are awaiting-trials
detainees or they are sentenced prisoners. The only thing I can say to them
is: Stop it; just stop it. Inmate-on-members assaults: Just stop it.
Regarding members-on-inmate assaults, which happened in Krugersdorp – if
you do it, you will be out of this department. Stop it. Is there anything
else? [Laughter.] Stop it. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, I will now finish the speech that I
did not finish at the beginning. [Laughter.] There are three points from
that speech that I want to make, because Kgoshi reminded me that he was
particularly concerned about them.

First of all, you will recall that we had reported that, as a result of
budget restrictions, we had reduced the flying hours for the air force. The
question is: How does that happen? When we budget we even have to budget
for the flying hours because the air force personnel must fly so many hours
per year and so many hours for training. If, however, a matter were to
arise that requires an obligation that the commander in chief orders us to
do, and we did not have the cash available, we may delay or cut down the
number of hours. In that way we can deal with an immediate issue ordered by
the commander in chief. It reduces the number of hours for that period of
time available to members of the air force. You have to move resources to
the more urgent issues. Sometimes that money does come back. In the next
budget we can make up for it, but the fact of the matter is that our budget
has been kept low continuously and we have not had the number of hours for
training and so on that should have been available.

We have raised the issue and we think we should be able, in the coming
period, to get money and make up for the hours lost. The hours that are
lost mean that, in a particular year, you were not able to train as many
young pilots as you would have had, had you not cut down.

The second issue relates to the question of qualified audits. For a number
of years now, the Auditor-General has pointed out weaknesses in the
finances of the department. Finally, this year we had a special session
where we could sit down and check what it was that resulted in this
qualified audit, year after year. It really boiled down to two things:
Firstly, it relates to the systems that we are using, especially since the
time when the Defence Secretariat was re-established. The former defence
force got rid of the Defence Secretariat in 1966 and all along, until we
came into government, there was no secretariat and that is why the armed
forces were a law unto themselves.

When the secretariat was established, a system was set in place by the
secretariat, which did not correspond and therefore did not communicate
with the system that the military had. People get used to habits and when
they get used to those habits and you want to change them, they resist. You
interfere with empires that had been set in their ways. When we had
established that, the Ministry had to give a firm and final order that only
one system – and we indicated which system – must now be brought into place
so that the Defence Secretariat can have capacity to monitor what is
happening in the military section, headed by the Chief of the SANDF. I
reported earlier on in the budget speech in the NA that we are now in a
position to say that those qualified audits would not repeat themselves in
future.

Another issue is the one that relates to the recent court case in which one
of the military trade unions took the department to court on the basis of
challenging one of the regulations. The court had ordered us to grant trade
union rights to the soldiers. They said that we may not take that away,
because the right of trade union formation is given under the Constitution
to all the workers. As the court had ordered, we had to give that right,
but regulate it and put in place regulations to say to what extent you can
enjoy that.

Among other things, in the regulations, we had to say that members of the
SANDF may not go on strike. That is one of the things that the unions
cannot do. They may also not affiliate with any federation that is not
registered under the Defence Act. You can’t have a defence force that is
politically allied. If you join Cosatu, for instance, which is allied to
the ANC, you are politically allied. It is a disaster. We did that and we
said that members of these unions have the -
   ... right to peaceful and unarmed assembly, demonstration, picketing and
   petitioning and to present petitions in their private capacity, provided
   that such right shall not be exercised whilst in uniform, or when wearing
   any part of a uniform or displaying any insignia linked to the Defence
   Force, in a manner which indicates in any other way, employment in the
   Defence Force or the Department of Defence.

That refers to clause 8(a) but the unions did not challenge that. They
challenged clause 8(b) which says that you can exercise that right,
provided that such right shall not be exercised in respect of any matter
concerning the employment relationship with the department. If you had a
grievance against the department, you should not be allowed to exercise
this right or any matter related to the department.

The court ruled that clause 8(a) is correct but that the Ministry and the
department had gone beyond permissible limits. Members of the National
Defence Force may demonstrate or picket, complain about their conditions in
the Defence Force, as long as they are not wearing their uniforms or
insignia of the National Defence Force. They may picket against us.

Clause 8(b) was expunged by the Constitutional Court but clause 8(a) was
sustained. I think the long and short of it is that the grievance
procedures that the Defence Force has must be augmented by the right of the
members of the National Defence Force to, through their own voluntary
association in a union, complain against us.

There is one final point that I would like to deal with. Earlier on this
year I addressed a summit of the NCOP. I take the opportunity to remind all
of you that I was the first Chairperson of the NCOP, together with Mr
Ngcuka. Later on, I was deputised by the current Minister of Education, Mrs
Naledi Pandor. We had the biggest fight raising the profile of this House –
even now. We continue to argue vehemently that this is the crucial House in
the running of the entire government in the country. [Applause.]

Many of you were present there when I delivered the statement. One of the
things that I said was that I have been aware since we set up the NCOP that
there are people in this country, and even in government, who regard this
House as a dumping ground for useless people and so on. There are people
who have an attitude like that towards this House. At that point I showed
them that we actually changed this from the Senate into the NCOP. We did
not want this House to be seen as the House of Lords, like in England,
which was the House of a defeated class or the feudal lords of medieval
England. We did not want a dead horse like that.

We wanted a House that is effective and alive with men and women capable of
linking national government, provincial and local government. All three
spheres of government come together in this House. I said: This is not the
House for deadwood, it is not a dumping ground and anybody with an attitude
like that has failed to understand the place of this House in our
Constitution. If there is anybody that they regard as deadwood, they must
fire them or withdraw them and bring people here who are effective.

As far as we are concerned, this is a vital cog in the running of
government. Only today I was made aware of the fact that I was the one who
said that this House has deadwood. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] I would not
have said that. I put it on record: If I thought this House was the one
with the deadwood, I would never pay attention to the House and come to
this House. I would just walk away from it. Once again, I think this is a
crucial House in the government of our country, given our Constitution as
it stands now. I think that its potential is yet to be fully recognised. We
must work hard to raise its profile at all times. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Minister. I wasn’t
sure what my reaction should be because I was about to evoke one Rule that
says: This is not relevant to the subject under discussion. Owing to the
significance and the context in which this has risen, I think it is quite
important to mention that that is how it was reported. I remember that you
got a standing ovation from members of this House regarding everything you
said. It is correct that you have clarified this.
Let me thank the hon Ministers and hon Deputy Ministers, our special
delegates, MECs and chairpersons of various committees from provinces, who
have made an effort to provide leadership in this debate to enable the NCOP
to develop its own vision and approach to oversight over departments that
fall within the criminal justice system. We appreciate that and it will
continue beyond this.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 19:15.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

    (a)     The following changes have been made to Joint Committees:
         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
         Disabled Persons:


         Appointed:    Gore, Mr V C; Mdlalose, Ms M M; Rajbally, Ms S (Alt)

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 14 June 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2006]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
         Services of the National Council of Provinces.


    (2)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 14 June 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007] (National
              Assembly – sec 77)


         (b)     Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)
         (c)     Pension Funds Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2007 (Reprint)]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)
          The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
          of the National Council of Provinces

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Protocol on Policy and Regulatory Framework for NEPAD (New
         Partnership for Africa’s Development) ICT Broadband Infrastructure
         for Eastern and Southern Africa, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol on Policy and Regulatory
         Framework for NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development) ICT
         Broadband Infrastructure for Eastern and Southern Africa.

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Government Notice No 396 published in Government Gazette No
         29864 dated 4 May 2007: Intention to declare the Highveld Priority
         Area in terms of section 18(1) of the National Environmental
         Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


    (b)     Government Notice No 438 published in Government Gazette No
         29887 dated 11 May 2007: Change of name: Greater St Lucia Wetland
         Park and Greater St Lucia Wetland Park Authority, in terms of the
         World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).

