---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 06 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-03-06
---

TUESDAY, 6 MARCH 2007
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson of the NCOP took the Chair and requested members to observe
a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I am informed that the Whippery
have agreed that there will be no notices of motion, or motions without
notice today, except for the motion on the Order Paper.


                    MATTERS RELATING TO VISIT TO GAUTENG


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I would like to move the motion
printed in the name of the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
as follows:

  That, in terms of Rule 21(2) and, in the interest of enhancing public
  participation, conducting oversight and providing a platform for
  consideration of issues affecting provinces as provided for in sections
  42(4) and 72(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996
  –


  (1) the Council resolves to, from 12 to 16 March 2007, conduct public
        hearings, hold meetings, conduct oversight visits and sit in plenary
        in the province of Gauteng on 16 March 2007, at 09:00 until the
        conclusion of business on that day, and

  (2) the Council notes that the estimated costs of effecting the change in
        venue and maintaining it for the specified period will be R2 730
        000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speakers’ list, we shall now
proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in alphabetic order
per province. Delegation heads should please indicate to the Chair whether
they vote in favour or against or abstain. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State? Vrystaat? [Interjections.] Those
operating the microphones there, can you assist us, please?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [We agree.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Mr J M SIBIYA: Steun. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Can I just request the staff to, before any sitting, please check the
systems in the House, because at times we have terrible difficulties in
operating the system in the House. I don’t know what happened with the
cards that the members used to put into the microphone, and then it used to
work. [Interjections.]

You’re still putting it in, and it’s still not working? Can I please appeal
to you on this matter, because this really disturbs the running of the
House, and the recordings at the same time? If you could please take this
up to assist the House.

Hon members, we shall now proceed to the questions as printed on the Order
Paper. Deputy President, you are very welcome in this very small House,
which is very big in terms of its work and what it is doing.

You are most welcome today in the NCOP to deal with the questions in the
NCOP.
QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                      DEPUTY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

           Review of government tender process in line with Asgisa

1.    Kgoshi L M Mokoena asked the Deputy President:

      Whether the Government will review the tendering process in order to
      enable new entrants to access government tenders in accordance with
      the objectives of the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
      South Africa (Asgisa); if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
      details?                                C322E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chair, hon members, the reply to the question is that
government is in the process of reviewing the tender process. Although the
existing tendering procedures are designed to promote SMMEs, they have not
had the desired impact, and that is why we are reviewing them.

We have, therefore, decided to set aside the procurement of certain
identified items specifically for businesses that are owned by historically
disadvantaged persons, especially SMMEs, in order to encourage the
development of entrepreneurs among historically disadvantaged black persons
and women.
The Department of Trade and Industry has been given the responsibility to
design this system and they have not yet reported back to the Cabinet with
the details. As soon as the Cabinet has received a report from the DTI and
has approved it, I will be glad to share the details with members.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any follow-up question? I don’t see
hon Kgoshi Mokoena. I am aware that they are in Durban, Kwa-Zulu-Natal this
week for oversight functions but I will allow some follow-up questions.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, with regard to the review that the Deputy President
said is taking place or is going to take place, may I ask whether special
attention is being given to the determinations of the public finance Act,
more particularly the municipal finance Act and the regulations emanating
from it and the public finance Act where management regulations prohibit
any person earning a salary from the state, municipality or state organs
from being considered in any way for tendering when it comes to state or
municipal tenders?

I am asking this, in particular, because recently there has been more and
more evidence in the papers that this is still taking place despite these
recommendations being very pertinent. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: That is not a subject for discussion in this
particular review. This is about procurement by historically disadvantaged
persons. Of course, that will take into account the appropriate regulations
to the extent that this review and the outcome thereof must not break any
rule and regulation. But, yes, it’s not a specific mandate of this review.

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, my follow-up question is: When reviewing this
tendering process, are there any programmes in place that are aiming at
empowering the previously disadvantaged, that is women and people with
disabilities so that they can be able to participate in the whole process?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, hon member.

           Initiatives under Asgisa to ensure appropriate training

     2. Mr S Shiceka asked the Deputy President:


      What initiatives are there under the Accelerated and Shared Growth
      Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa) (a) to ensure that local
      governments comply with the requirements of the relevant Sector
      Education and Training Authority and effect expenditure on the
      appropriate training and (b) to help people with disabilities benefit
      from such appropriate training?              C325E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson and hon members, there are no specific
instructions under the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa to specifically ensure that local government complies with the
requirement of the relevant Sector Education and Training Authority.
However, this work is being done as part of government’s programme of
action and as part of ongoing human resource development work. As hon
members are aware, local governments and all other employers are required
to pay 1% of employee remuneration to a Sector Education and Training
Authority.

In the case of local government it should be the local government Seta
which must then engage in workplace skills, planning and training. The
course provided must meet certain standards and requirements which are
outlined in the second phase of the National Skills Development Strategy.
If the courses do not meet these requirements or a local government does
not provide the necessary training, they forfeit the levy.

On the question of people with disabilities, the National Skills
Development Strategy provides that 4% of learners have to be persons with
disabilities. This we must monitor to ensure its implementation because as
we speak now, across the board, we are underperforming with regard to
empowerment, training and general implementation of the policies meant to
affirm disabled persons. So, in the case of local government, they do not
meet this requirement and they therefore cannot claim the levy.
Let me conclude by saying we are aware that the public sector does not
perform consistently and well, with regard to skills development. Several
of the public sector aspects are amongst the weaker elements of the
National Skills Development system. We cannot emphasise enough how
important it is for public institutions, including national departments,
provinces, municipalities and public entities, to take that to be their
responsibility very seriously.

In fact, I would like to urge you, hon members, to assist us in this
respect, to engage in your oversight work with our government entities to
ensure that they do much more in training than they currently do. Thank
you.

            Roll-out of National Youth Service Volunteer Campaign

3.    Mr V V Z Windvoël asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   With regard to an effort to expand the rollout of  the  National
           Youth Service Volunteer Campaign (details  furnished),  (a)  how
           many young people have registered for the campaign per  province
           and (b) what criteria were used  to  identify  young  people  to
           participate in the campaign;

      (2)   whether any measures were taken to ensure that young people with
           disabilities and those in child-headed households form the core
           of the beneficiaries of this campaign; if not, why not; if so,
           what measures?                               C326E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chair and hon members, hon Windvoël, I am not able to
provide an up-to-date provincial breakdown on the number of young people
who have registered for the National Youth Service Volunteer Campaign at
this stage. We have not updated this information in accordance with our
records. However, the national figure is in the region of 11 000 youths
countrywide against the 5 000 targeted in the state of the nation address
of 2006.

Provinces such as Gauteng, Eastern Cape, Free State and Western Cape
contributed greatly to this achievement. I am therefore reluctant to be
specific about the other provinces, just in case in I underrepresent them.

With regard to the criteria used to select volunteers, the National Youth
Commission and provincial heads of commissions work with the community
structures to identify young people already engaged in various community
development activities as well as those with expressed interest in
community service. In other words, hon member, in this programme we really
engage with those young people who already have a disposition towards this
kind of work. Of course, the more organised young people are, the easier it
is to bring them on board.

As government, we are very concerned that, in this case, people with
disabilities and child-headed households access all the necessary social
services and social security. We are using the NYS volunteers to assist in
this regard. I trust that hon members are ensuring that all people with
disabilities and child-headed households in their constituencies are aware
of the services they can access, on the one hand, but also to the extent
that you can assist us to recruit more young people to play a role from
youth constituencies. That also would be welcome.

Some work has been done by the National Youth Service Volunteer Campaign in
realising the social needs of people with disabilities, for example the
campaign organised special events like Christmas events in the Western
Cape, and they facilitated a project in Gauteng which involved fine arts
and presentation of Christmas gifts to the disabled people, in order to
ensure that during that time of celebration they were also able to find
some joy. However, these, as you would also agree, are not far-reaching
programmes, this is scratching the surface and much can still be done.

We are also endeavouring to ensure that the disabled youth participate
fully in the projects as volunteers themselves. This is very important to
build their social capital and confidence in their abilities to exploit
sustainable livelihoods. In this regard, I would like to urge hon members
to also assist in ensuring that this, too, happens in their constituencies
in the manner that is envisaged in the objectives of this programme.

In 2006, on World Disability Day, a national conference was held by
disabled people. They produced a very detailed report whose outcomes we
tend to use in order to close the gaps where policy implementation is
failing. Thank you.

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Ngiyabonga, Mgcinisihlalo
lohloniphekile. Ngibonga imphendvulo lesiyitfole kuSekela Mengameli.
Sitawutsandza kutsi nasewuphotfuliwe lombiko liSekela laMongameli bese
lisitfumelela wona lapha kuleNdlu Yemkhandlu Wemaprovinsi, kuze kutsi
njengemalunga lachamuka etifundzeni letehlukene sikhone kwelekelela natsi
sibe mdzibi ndzawonye kulomkhankhaso wekwetama kutsi lusha lube yincenye
yaloluhlelo loluhamba nahulumende.

Angati-ke kutsi kumbe loko kungatsatsa sikhatsi lesidze kangakanani kuze
kutsi, nakungenteka, sitsi siya kulerisese lesiya kuyo nyalo ngaMashi sibe
sesinawo lowo mbiko kuze sisitakale ngawo. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Chairperson. I thank you for
the answer we received from the Deputy President. We would like her, after
this report has been finalised by the Deputy President, to forward it to
this House, the National Council of Provinces, so that, as members from
various provinces, we will also be able to assist and participate in this
campaign of endeavouring to ensure that the youth are part of this
government’s programme.

Well, I do not know how long that will take; if it is possible, by the time
we go for recess, this March, the report may be available, so that it will
help us. Thank you.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I take it that was more of a comment than a
question, except that you wanted to know whether the report will be
available before we go into recess. I don’t want to tell the Deputy
President not to answer that, because I don’t know whether there is an
answer to it. But, if the Deputy President wants to do so, that is fine.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Sihlalo, mangilitshele ilungu elihloniphekile
impendulo ethi sengathi uMashi useduze kakhulu. [Chairperson, let me inform
the hon member that it seems as if March is too soon.]

Khawundiphe nje ithuba lokuphefumla, ndiya kubuya nengxelo epheleleyo.
Andifuni ukukunika ingxelo engaphelelanga.

Mnu D G MKONO: Mhlalingaphambili, ndiyabulela kuSekela-Mongameli ngokuthi
ayikhankanye into yokuba noko iMpuma Koloni iqhubela phambili ekuncediseni
ulutsha. Liphondo elinkqenkqeza phambili wena eliya, ndiyavuya ke ngoko xa
oko kusaziwa naphaya phezulu.

Sekela-Mongameli, sekukho ngoku oovukengceni noozungulichele abasele
bekhwaza besithi mayiphele le nkqubo yokubonelela ababevinjwe amathuba
ngaphambili. Kanti ke thina sicinga ukuba isaqhuba kakuhle. Macebo mani
urhulumente awaqulunqayo akhawulezayo ukwenzela ukuba aba bantwana
bazifumane ngokukhawuleza ezi zakhono? Ngaba ikhona na imfuneko yokuba kube
sekukho abantu abangxolayo ngoku besithi bafuna inkqubo yokubonelelwa
kwababevinjwe amathuba ngaphambili iphele? Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[If you could give me some time, I will come up with a complete report. I
don’t want to provide you with an incomplete report.

Mr D G MKONO: Chairperson, I thank the Deputy President for mentioning that
the Eastern Cape is making great strides in assisting the youth. It is a
leading province, and I‘m happy that this is known even at the level of the
Deputy President.

Deputy President, already there are people, opportunists, who, out of the
blue, are calling for the scrapping of the affirmative action programme. On
the contrary, we think that the programme is doing well. What sort of
immediate plans is government putting together, so as to ensure that
children do get these skills as soon as possible? Is it necessary for
people to start agitating for the repeal of the affirmative action
programme? [Thank you.]]
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think affirmative action is properly perceived when
we call it “a correctional action”.
Uma nje le nto esiyilungisayo ingakalungi, angazi ukuthi singayiyeka
kanjani ngoba kukhona into esiyilungisayo, okungukungabi bikho kwabantu
bethu ezindaweni okufanele ngabe bakuzo. Isibalo sabantu abamnyama
abangomama abakhubazekileyo abangaphandle kwempilo enentuthuko siningi
ngendlela engachazeki.

Uma abantu sebengaqala ukukhala bethi bona sebeyacwaswa, phela akukwazi
ukuthi kube njengoba kwakunjalo kuqala ngoba sesibaningi okufanele singene
ngaphakathi. Baningi abantu abamnyama abahleli ngaphandle abangakatholi
lutho kanti baningi nabamhlophe abangakatholi lutho. Ngicabanga ukuthi into
nje abantu abayikhalelayo ukuthi, “Nathi sesiyashayeka.” njengoba nabantu
abamnyama babevele behlale beshayeka. Abakwazi ukuthwala usizi.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[As long as what we are rectifying has not yet been rectified, I don’t
understand how we can abandon it. What we are rectifying is the absence of
our people in areas where they are supposed to be. The number of disabled
black mothers who do not lead progressive lifestyles is just too high.

People cannot start to complain now and claim that they are discriminated
against. They have to understand that things cannot remain as they were in
the past because there are many people now who have to be taken care of.
There are many black people as well as white people whose needs are still
to be met. I think what people are complaining about is that they, too,
claim that they are now suffering, just as black people have always been
suffering. These people do not know how it feels to be miserable.]

The only thing that is left now is that there is a greater distribution of
the burden and the challenges that the country is faced with.

Kunabantu abacabanga ukuthi bona kufanele njalo kube yizinto zabo ezihamba
phambili. Izibalo ziyakhombisa ukuthi iningi labantu lapha eNingizimu
Afrika abanemfundo ephakeme nenhle ngabantu abamhlophe, noma ngabe
bebancane ngesibalo. Asisho ukuthi sibafela umona ngoba siyakujabulela
nalokho, kodwa phela mabangakhali nabo, esikhundleni salokho mababambisane
nathi ukuze nabantu abamnyama babheke phambili.

Uma sibheka abantu abaphethe imisebenzi, abantu abaningi abayizimenenja,
abangama-CEO nabahlala emabhodini, yize noma bebancane, kodwa yibo abaningi
kwabahleli emabhodini. Uma sibheka i-JSE, abantu abamnyama abenzi ngisho
ama-5% kwezobunikazi. Kanti yini-ke le esikhala ngayo kahle hle?
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[There are people who think that they have to be given first preference at
all times. Statistics show that the majority of people with good tertiary
education in South Africa are white, even though they are the minority of
the population. We are in no way jealous of them; on the contrary, we are
also happy about their achievement, but they must not complain, instead
they must work with us so that black people too could also progress.

If we look at the majority of the people occupying management positions at
workplaces - many of whom are managers and CEOs, who also sit on boards of
companies – they are white, even though they are the minority of the
population. If we take the JSE, for instance, black people there do not
even constitute 5% of company ownership. What is it that we are really
complaining about?]

Njengoko le nto esithi siyayilungisa ingekalungiseki, lo msebenzi kufuneka
uye phambili kwaye kufuneka uqiniswe. Enkosi. [As the matter we set out to
address has not yet been successfully addressed, we should push ahead and
redouble our efforts. [Thank you.]]

  Expansion of youth development programmes in rural areas, and benefits of
                   this for development of second economy

4.    Mr V V Z Windvoël asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the Government has put any measures in place  to  expand
           youth development programmes in rural  areas  and  townships  to
           ensure that they are integrated into  the  set  targets  of  the
           national development programmes; if not, why not;  if  so,  what
           measures;

      (2)   (a) what direct benefits do such measures have in relation to
           the Government’s interventions to develop the second economy
           through the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
           Africa (Asgisa) and (b) what progress is made by such
           initiatives in ensuring that this vulnerable group of our
           society has access to economic opportunities for sustainable
           livelihoods within their communities?
                                        C327E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, the reply to the question is as follows:
In keeping with our commitments to extend government services to all the
young people of South Africa, government, through the Umsobomvu Youth Fund,
the Department of Labour and municipalities, has created service delivery
platforms consisting of delivery channels such as the 120 youth advisory
services that we now find around the country, the regional information
centres, the multipurpose community centres, a dedicated call centre for
young people, an sms-based system and labour centres. These are just some
of the channels that are critical to the delivery of information to the
young people.

It is our experience that most youth remain unemployed and out of school,
unless they access adequate information and guidance about careers, local
economic development, skills development opportunities, microfinance,
entrepreneurship and other interventions necessary to help secure
sustainable livelihoods. These access points have assisted us to reach out
to young people in rural areas and previously underserved and deserving
areas.

Beyond the provision of information services, I am happy to inform this
House that many government programmes such as the programme for community
development workers, the National Youth Service Programme, the Expanded
Public Works Programme and learnerships, have all reached the youth in
rural areas and townships.

In provinces like KwaZulu-Natal, we have Ithala, which provides support to
the youth in communities which the private sector has ignored for a number
of historical reasons.

The Eastern Cape has the Eastern Cape Development Corporation, which is
reaching out to previously underserved communities and other provinces.

I would like to give some examples of some of the work that the National
Youth Service Programme is doing with the rural youth. In Moses Kotane
municipality, in North West, we have trained more than 500 youths as part
of the National Youth Service Programme. The youth have built 2 621 houses
in those communities.

In the villages of Mohlaletse in Limpopo, we have trained the youth in
labour-intensive and road construction methods. Some of them are now
working with various contractors within the district municipality as part
of their exit opportunities and now they are going to be fully employed.

In the townships and rural areas of the Free State, we have trained
hundreds of young people through the National Youth Service to provide home
and community-based care.

In the Chris Hani District Municipality, working with the NGOs like
People’s Trust, we have young people serving communities that need access
to social services and poverty alleviation programmes through small-scale
agriculture.

The FET College Recapitalisation Programme is transforming what used to be
called vocational and technical colleges in rural areas and townships. We
have allocated resources to upgrade the infrastructure and learning
facilities for the sector that now enrols about half a million youth. We
have allocated resources for colleges to employ qualified lecturers using
up-to-date learning materials.

From this year onwards, government has introduced a bursary scheme for FET
college students enrolled in scarce and critical disciplines. Government
has also made bursaries available to young people who wish to pursue
careers in education, health and social work. You will remember that these
are also scarce skills for the Public Service that we have identified in
Asgisa and Jipsa. This complements the financial assistance that we already
have for students who are doing commerce, science and engineering who have
enjoyed this support over a number of years.

I’d like to remind the hon members that the President announced in his
state of the nation address last month that the government will accelerate
the training of social workers at professional and auxiliary levels. He has
also announced that resources would be allocated to provide financial
assistance for trainees in the FETs. In fact, that has already happened.

The direct benefit of these interventions relates to the provision of
relevant information and advice on careers and economic opportunities,
which young people use to choose career paths and initiate their own income-
generating activities. As we have said before, access to quality
information, education and skill development is critical to build bridges
between the first and the second economy. The examples of youth programmes
outlined above are all part of second economy interventions outlined in the
Asgisa strategy.

Whilst these interventions are at different stages of implementation, we
are already recording positive results in terms of impact. As a result of
the work of the labour centres and the youth advisory centres, young people
are now choosing careers that match the opportunities in the labour market.

I certainly make it my business to talk to young people quite often, and
I’m quite pleased that most of the time when we discuss issues of careers
they are not looking and thinking about traditional careers. Sometimes they
even ask me about things that I do not know myself, but I have to pretend,
as if I know. But I am just so impressed at the extent to which they are
venturing into things that people of my age group would maybe not have
thought of. So, something is happening there.

Rural youth also are accessing business development support services and
microfinance, thanks to some of the programmes that the Department of Trade
and Industry, DTI, and Umsobomvu are also bringing to the communities. The
number of black youths qualifying as artisans and engineers will rise
sharply because of these investments and the progress that we are making in
relation to the teaching of maths and science in underprivileged schools,
as well as with young people, therefore, proceeding to the FET sector.

Again, we can still do more. So, with all these examples that I’m giving
and the success that I’m mentioning, I’m not implying that we must rest on
our laurels - we still have to do much more. Thank you.

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Sihlalo, ngiyabonga kakhulu
ngemphendvulo yeLisekela laMengameli. Ngiyetsemba kutsi iyasakha sonkhe
lapha kuleNdlu ayakhi mine lengibute lombuto kuphela. Angati-ke nome
ngitabe sengiyakwekhama yini, Sekela laMengameli, kutsi kungaba kuhle
kakhulu nasingatfola loluhlu lwalamahhovisi ekweluleka lusha lotsi angu
120. Loko kungasisita khona sitekwati kutsi njengobe sibuyela etifundzeni
tetfu nje sikhone kutsi nasenta imisebenti lapha emiphakatsini sikhone
kutsi sibakhombise bantfu labasha kutsi naliya lihhovisi nome indlu lapho
ningakhona kutsi nisitakale khona. Ngifuna kutsi ingabe ngingabe
sengiyakwekhama yini, Sekela Mengameli, nangicela kutsi loko kungaba kuhle
sikutfole ngembili kwekutsi siye ekhefini, kurisese yanyalo ngaMashi?
Ngiyabonga.

SEKELA MENGAMELI: Sihlalo, cha, utabe awungekhami. Ngingakwati kutsi nyalo
ningakayi kurisese ngininike lowo mbiko. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs
follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, thank you very much for the
Deputy President’s answer. I hope that it capacitates us all in this House,
and not only me, who asked this question. Well, I do not know whether I
would be putting pressure on you, Deputy President, but it would be
appreciated if we could have this list of offices for youth advisory
services that you said number 120. That could help us so that we would be
able to know, as we are going back to our provinces, and to point out to
the young people that there is an office or a house where they can receive
assistance. I want to say, I wonder whether I would be putting pressure on
you, Deputy President, if I requested that it would be appreciated if we
received that before we adjourn for a break, this March recess? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, no, you will not be putting pressure on
me. I would be able, right now before you go for recess, to give you the
report.]

Rre A J L MOSEKI: Modulasetilo, ke ne ke re le nna ke tseye tšhono e, gore
re lebogela tiro e ntle e e diriwang ke kantoro ya Mopresidente mo
mananeong a. Fela re tlhagise gore go na le bokoanyana jo bo bonagalang
mabapi le go fitlhelelwa ga tlhaeletsano ke ditlhopa tse di tobilweng tsa
baagi ba kwa magaeng.

Re rata go tlhola le Motlatsa-Mporesidente gore a go ka kgonega gore ba ka
tlhama lenaane tshedimosetso le le ka kgonang go fitlhelela batho ba rona
kwa metseselegaeng, go matlafatsa tlhaeletsano gore batho ba rona ba nne le
tshedimosetso e e tlhokagalang. Ke a leboga.

MOTLATSA-MOPRESIDENTE: Ke a dumela ntate, go na le mokgwa o re ka o dirang
gore molaetsa ona, o bonwe, pele o ya kwa boikhutsong mo kgweding e.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chairperson, may I also take this opportunity to commend
the wonderful job done in these programmes by the Office of the President.
But there is a little shortfall that we would like to point out regarding
the targeted group in the rural areas who would like to access information.

We want to check with the Deputy President if it is possible to create
information booklets that our people in the rural areas can have, in order
to improve communication so that they will be able to have the necessary
information. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I agree with that, Mr Moseki. There is a system that
we can put in place so that information is delivered before you go on
recess this month.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, it’s almost a similar question.
I was approached by my constituency – young people – asking me about the
Public Works learnership programmes, which were probably introduced
somewhere in the North West province. They indicated some interest. I am in
charge of that responsibility.

Already this week I have had to phone the Director-General of Public Works
and make these enquiries. Therefore, I appreciate the fact that the Deputy
President has already said that before we rise, there will be some
brochures which will indicate where these young people should go, because
they wanted to know whether it was a once-off thing or whether they can
still join the stream at this point in time. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I take it that was just a comment?
[Interjections.] Thank you very much, hon Moatshe. Hon members, that
concludes the business of the House. Before I adjourn the House, I just
want to remind members to remain behind for about 20 minutes so that they
can be briefed about Taking Parliament to the People in Gauteng. Staff
members will be available to brief you quickly about the logistics and it
will not be a long briefing. Thank you very much.

The Council adjourned at 14:34.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                         WEDNESDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Finance Bill [B 5 - 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             77).


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


2.    Translation of Bill submitted

     (1)    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


          a) Molao o Fetotsweng wa Institjhute ya Afrika Borwa wa Dipapadi
             tse hlokang Dithethefatsi wa 2006 [B 7D – 2006] (National
             Assembly –sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Sesotho of the South African
         Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill [B 7 – 2006]
         (National Assembly – sec 75).
3.    Bill passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 27 February
2007:

         (a)      Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 30B – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Government Notice No R.146 published in Government Gazette No 29644
         dated 20 February 2007: Amendment of Treasury Regulations in terms
         of section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
         of 1999).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Draft Rules submitted by the Rules Board for Courts of Law, in
         terms of section 7(2)(c) of the Criminal Procedure Amendment Act,
         2003 (Act No 42 of 2003).

      b) Draft Rules submitted by the Rules Board for Courts of Law, in
         terms of section 79(3) of the Promotion of Access to Information
         Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
  the Instrument for the Amendment of the Constitution of the International
  Labour Organisation (ILO), 1997, dated 27 February 2007:

    The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having
    considered the Instrument for the Amendment of the Constitution of the
    International Labour Organisation (ILO) tabled in terms of section 231
    (2) of the Constitution, 1996, and the Explanatory Memorandum to the
    Instrument, referred to it, recommends that the Council approve the
    said Instrument.

Report to be considered.

                           THURSDAY, 1 MARCH 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism
     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 1 March 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (a)     South African Judicial Education Institute Bill [B 4 –
              2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 28 February 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2007] (National Assembly –
              sec 76)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
         the National Council of Provinces.


    (2)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 1 March 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     South African Airways Bill [B 35B – 2006] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.


TABLINGS:


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     The  Chairperson  of  the  National  Council  of  Provinces,   as   the
     Chairperson of the Rules Committee of the Council,  present  the  First
     Report of the Rules Committee of the  National  Council  of  Provinces,
     dated 27 February 2007, as follows:

        To amend the definition of money bills to read as follows.


          “money Bill” means a Bill to which section 77 of the Constitution
          applies;

        To amend rule 14A by insertion of the underlined words as follows.


          Functions of the House Chairperson Committees


          14A. (1) The  House  Chairperson  Committees  shall  perform  the
          following functions-


            (J) Consider and approve  committees  request  for  travel  for
            purposes of oversight.

        To insert rule 46A with the underlined words as follows.


          Reference to member by name


          46A. No member shall refer to any member by his or her first name
          or names only.


        To amend rule 103 by insertion of the underlined words and  deletion
        of the words in bold as follows.
          103.  (1)

               (2)     A committee may sit at a venue  beyond  the  seat  of
                   Parliament, or on a day that is not a working day, or  at
                   a time the Council is sitting, or during a recess of  the
                   Council, -


                   (a) only with the permission  of  the  House  Chairperson
                       Committees  [Chief  Whip  of   the   Council]   after
                       consultation with the  Chief  Whip  of  the  Council,
                       provincial whips and whips designated by parties; and


                   (b) with the approval of the Chairperson of the Council.


        To insert rule 230A with the underlined words as follows.


          Time for consideration of a Bill


          230A. (1) The Council may not consider or pass a bill  before  at
               least three working days have lapsed, since  the  committee’s
               report was tabled;


               (i)     unless it is a bill before  the  House  in  terms  of
                   rule 216 of the Joint Rules; or
               (ii)    an urgent bill before the House.


        To insert rule 230B with the underlined words as follows.


          Legislative cycle


          230B 1.      All section 76 or 74(1)(2) and (3) bills  should  be
                 dealt with in a manner that will ensure that provinces have
                 sufficient time to consider the bill and confer mandates.
               2.      Depending on the substance of the  bill,  the  period
               may not exceed four weeks.
               3.      In the event that the substance of the bill  requires
                 sufficient time beyond the four-week period, the cycle  may
                 be extended but may not exceed six weeks.


        To insert rule 231 with the underlined words as follows.


          Form of petitions

          231A.   Petitions  must  be  in  the  form  prescribed   by   the
                Chairperson of the Council  in  accordance  with  guidelines
                determined by the Subcommittee on Review of Rules.

          Language of petitions
          231B.  A petition must be in one of the official languages.


          Signing of petitions



          231C.(1)     Unless  the  Chairperson  decides  otherwise,  every
                    petition must be signed by the petitioner themselves.


               (2)     Persons unable to write must make their mark  on  the
                    petition in the presence of two witnesses, who must sign
                    the petition in that capacity.

          Lodging and approval by Chairperson of the Council

          231D.(1)     Each petition must be deposited for at least one day
                    with  the  Secretary,  who  must  submit   it   to   the
                    Chairperson of the Council for  approval  before  it  is
                    tabled in the Council.

          Tabling

          231E.  If approved the Chairperson of the Council must table  the
                 petition in the Council.

          Referral of petitions to committees

          231F.  After tabling a petition in the Council,  the  Chairperson
                 of the Council  must  refer  the  petition  to  the  Select
                 Committee on Members Legislative Proposal.
          Powers of committee

          231G. (1)    A committee to which a petition has  been  referred,
                     may refer the subject matter of  the  petition  to  the
                     Executive  or  a   particular   department   or   other
                     administrative agency for further attention, subject to
                     the approval of the Chairperson of the Council.

                (2)    A committee considering a petition may  recommend  to
                     the House any course of action it deems fit and proper.


          Petitioner and others to be informed

          231H.  The committee shall inform a petitioner of the decision or
                 other course of action with regard to a particular petition
                 and the reasons therefore.

        To amend rule 236 by insertion of the underlined words and  deletion
        of the words in bold as follows.

          Form of questions

          236. (1)     (a)
                  (c)

              (2)      Questions for oral reply are limited to four [two]
                 questions per member per day.


              (3)      A question for oral reply may not contain more than
                 five subdivisions.


              (4)      No more than six [four] questions for oral reply may
                 be put to a Minister in
                 respect of any one Government department on any particular
                 day.


        To insert rule 244 to 255 with the underlined words as follows.



          Part 3: Contempt


           • Rule 1 to be amended to include the following definition in
             the appropriate alphabetical position: “Act” means the Powers,
             Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and Provincial
             Legislatures Act, 2004
              • Adopt new rules – possibly to replace Part 3 – providing as
                follows:


          Establishment


          244.   There is a standing committee in terms of section 12(2) of
               the Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and
               Provincial Legislatures Act, 2004


          Composition


          245.(1)      The Committee consists of Council members appointed
             in such a manner that
                 (a)   the majority party has three representative; and
                 (b)   two members, each of whom must belong to a different
                     minority party,
                     represent the minority parties.
          Chairperson


          246.(1)      The Chairperson of the Council must appoint  one  of
                  the members of the Committee as  the  Chairperson  of  the
                  Committee.
             (2) If the Chairperson of the Committee is not  available  the
                  remaining members must elect  another  member  to  act  as
                  chairperson.



          Meetings


          247. The Chairperson of the Committee convenes  meetings  of  the
          Committee.



          Functions and Powers


          248.  (1)    The Chairperson of the Council may refer a matter to
                   the Disciplinary Committee.


               (2)     The Committee must enquire into and  table  a  report
                   in the House  on  its  findings  and  recommendations  in
                   respect  of  any  alleged  misconduct  or   contempt   of
                   Parliament as defined in section 13 of the  Act,  by  any
                   member, except a breach of the Code of Conduct  contained
                   in the Schedule to the Joint Rules.


               (3)      An  enquiry  by  the  Committee  must   follow   the
                   procedure contained in the Schedule to the Rules.
               (4)     The Committee must recommend an  appropriate  penalty
                   in accordance with section 12(5) of the Act if  it  found
                   that a member is guilty of misconduct or contempt.


               (5)     The Committee must consider a request referred to  it
                   in terms of section 25(2) of the Act.


               (6)     After receiving the request referred  to  in  subrule
                   (5), the Committee must, without delay, forward a copy of
                   the complaint to the member  or  witness  concerned,  and
                   thereafter consider the complaint.   In  considering  the
                   complaint the Committee may consider  verbal  or  written
                   representations by the member or witness concerned.


               (7)     After considering the complaint, the  Committee  must
                   issue an appropriate response in the A.T.C.

          Complaints by persons other than members


          255.   On receipt of a written complaint by a person, other than
               a member, regarding a statement or remark made by a member
               or a witness in or before the House or a committee, or by a
               member of the House in or before a joint sitting or joint
               committee, the Secretary must refer the complaint to the
               Chairperson of the Council.

                            MONDAY, 5 MARCH 2007
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 1 March 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (a)     Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment
              Bill [B 1 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


      1) The following member lost his seat in the National Assembly with
         effect from 14 December 2006:

         Goniwe, M T.


      2) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         death of Mr Z J Kati on 29 September 2006, has been filled with
         effect from 28 February 2007 by the nomination of Ms N M Twala.




TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Social Development

   (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for  2007
         to 2010 [RP 23-2007].


   (b)     Strategic Plan of the  National  Development  Agency  (NDA)  for
         2006/07 to 2010/11 [RP 15-2007].

2. The Minister of Safety and Security

   (a)     Report of the National Commissioner of the South African Police
         Service (SAPS) for the period of July 2006 to December 2006, in
         terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act
         No 116 of 1998).


3. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2007 to
         2010.


   COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the South
  African Red Cross Society and Legal Protection of Certain Emblems Bill
  [B25 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 27 February 2007:

    The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the  subject
    of the South African Red Cross Society and Legal Protection of  Certain
    Emblems Bill [B25 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to  it
    and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as  a  section  75  Bill,
    reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

                            TUESDAY, 6 MARCH 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 6 March 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section 77
         Bill:


         (a)     Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
              77).

TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security  Agency  for
         2007 to 2010 [RP 16-2007].


 2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         President’s Fund for 2004-2005 [RP 25-2006].


    (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         President’s Fund for 2005-2006 [RP 252-2006].


