---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-03-06
---

TUESDAY, 6 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS, AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! I have to announce that the vacancy which occurred
owing to the death of Mr Z J Kati on 29 September 2006 has been filled with
effect from 28 February 2007 by the nomination of Ms N M Twala.

                                    OATH

Ms N M Twala, accompanied by Ms E Ngaleka and Mr N B Fihla, made and
subscribed the oath, and took her seat.
                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M SWART: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of the House:

  That the House debates the practical application of the policy of the
  Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism in respect of the
  allocation of long-term fishing rights and the resulting impoverishment of
  hundreds of fishermen and their families.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give
notice that I shall move on the next sitting day of the House:

  That the House debates the 50th anniversary of the independence of Ghana
  and its significance for Africa today.

 CONDOLENCES EXTENDED TO FAMILIES WHO LOST LOVED ONES IN EASTERN CAPE FLOOD

                             (Draft resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House extends its condolences to the families who lost loved
  ones in the floods that have devastated the Eastern Cape since 3 March
  2007, and expresses the hope that they can find the strength to overcome
  this tragedy.

Agreed to.

                        CONGRATULATIONS TO ANTON HAIG

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


     1) congratulates South African golfer Anton Haig on his historic
        victory in the Johnny Walker Classic Golf tournament at Phuket,
        Thailand; and

     2) notes that Anton Haig is the youngest person ever to win this
        tournament and wishes him well in his future career.

Agreed to.

                 GHANA CELEBRATING 50 YEARS OF INDEPENDENCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


     1) notes that today, 6 March 2007, Ghana is celebrating 50 years of
        independence from Britain;

     2) further notes that Ghana’s independence gave great impetus to the
        decisive struggle for freedom and independence throughout Africa –
        freedom from colonial rule;

     3) recalls that this act asserted the ancient pride of the people of
        our continent and gave us hope and conveyed the message that the
        long interregnum of humiliation was over;

     4) further recalls that Ghana’s founding fathers recognised the
        challenge that their freedom and independence would be meaningless
        unless it is linked with the total liberation of the African
        continent;

     5) believes that the new challenges confronting us today demand of the
        people of Africa to unite in action to work for the further
        strengthening of the African Union and Nepad as we pursue the goal
        of a peaceful, democratic, prosperous, healthy and stable continent
        fully living up to its promise and potential;
     6) calls upon all humanity to celebrate together with the people of
        Ghana and to unite in the struggle for the entrenchment of the
        culture of human rights and the eradication of poverty in Africa and
        the world; and

     7) extends its congratulations to the people of Ghana on the historic
        occasion of the 50th anniversary of their independence.

Agreed to.

           SOUTH AFRICA ASSUMES PRESIDENCY OF UN SECURUTY COUNCIL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms F HAJAIG: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


     1) notes that last week, on Thursday, 1 March 2007, South Africa
        assumed the presidency of the United Nations Security Council;

     2) believes that, coming two months after our assumption of a non-
        permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, this
        responsibility is indeed an honour for our government and the people
        of our country;

     3) further believes that our country will use this opportunity to work
        with all members of the Security Council to ensure a collective
        response to the global challenges and placing the United Nations at
        the centre of the process of resolving the challenges facing
        humanity; and

     4) congratulates our government on assuming this important
        responsibility on behalf of our country and our people.

Agreed to.

                     AFRICA FORUM ON FIGHTING CORRUPTION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House –


     1) notes that last week, from 28 February to 2 March 2007, the
        government of the Republic of South Africa (RSA), the African Union
        Commission (AUC) and the United Nations Economic Commission for
        Africa (ANECA) co-hosted the Africa Forum on Fighting Corruption
        (AFFC);


     2) further notes that about 300 participants from all over Africa,
        comprising ministers, parliamentarians, anticorruption agencies,
        civil society, regional economic communities, former African heads
        of state and international organisations – including donors –
        attended the forum;

     3) recalls that the main objective of the forum was the consolidation
        of African anticorruption initiatives as Africa needs to pursue a
        common understanding of corruption within the continent and globally
        in order to advance the African agenda;

     4) further recalls that the forum is a precursor to the Global Forum V
        on Fighting Corruption and Safeguarding Integrity, which will be
        hosted by South Africa in April 2007 and that the African
        anticorruption agenda needs to be promoted at the Global Forum V on
        Fighting Corruption and Safeguarding Integrity; and

     5) calls on all South Africans, the private sector, civil society and
        all government departments to applaud, actively support and promote
        the collective efforts by African governments to consolidate
        anticorruption initiatives in all our countries.

Agreed to.

            LOCAL GOVERNMENT DEMONSTRATION AND UNLAWFUL BEHAVIOUR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr M SEFULARO (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

ANC e etse tlhoko maemo a a sa iketlang mo dikarolong dingwe tsa porofense
ya Bokone Bophirima. Re le Palamente ga re itumelele gore baeteledipele ba
megwanto e le balatedi ba bona ba ikgatholosa dikomiti tsa dikgaolo le
ditheo tse dingwe tse di tlhomilweng go ya ka Molaotheo wa naga le melao e
e tshwanang le Municipal Systems Act le Municipal Structures Act.

Re le ANC, re tshegetsa ditshwanelo tsa baagi botlhe go tshwara dikopano,
go bua ka tokologo, go ipelaetsa le go dira ditshupetso ka ntlha efe kgotsa
efe e e ba tshwenyang. Se re se nyatsang le go se kgalema ke mokgwa wa go
dirisa ditshwanelo tse tsa demokerasi go tsweletsa bosenyi, tlhaselo go
batshabi le baagi ba Aforika Borwa ba ba tswang dinageng tse dingwe, le
tshenyo ya dithotho le tsa batho ba ba senang molato.

Re kgwela mathe maiteko afe kgotsa afe a a sa yeng ka demokerasi a go
fetola dikhansele tsa bommasepala kgotsa go tlosa baemedi ba ba
tlhophilweng ka 1 Mopitlwe 2006. Re kgalema, re sa kgale mathe ganong,
botlhe ba ba tlhaselang le go tshosetsa makhanselara le ba malapa a bona.
Ka jalo, re ipelatsa go matsholo tshireletso le makgotla a bosiamisi go
sireletsa setšhaba le go otlhaya botlhe ba ba tlolang molao le go gataka
ditshwanelo tsa ba bangwe. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana
member’s statement follows.)

[The ANC is monitoring a tense situation in some parts of the North West
province. We are not happy, as Parliament, about the fact that the leaders
and the supporters of this protest ignore the ward committees and other
government structures which were established as enshrined in the
Constitution of our country, and other laws such as the Municipal Systems
and Municipal Structures Acts.

The ANC supports the rights of all citizens to exercise their freedom of
expression, to hold meetings and demonstrations about any issue on which
they need clarity. However, we condemn the abuse of democratic rights. We
would like to warn anyone who commits crime, launches attacks on refugees
and South African citizens and vandalises the property of innocent people.

We would like to condemn, in the strongest possible terms, the undemocratic
processes which are followed to replace leaders and unseat municipality
councillors who have been elected on the 1 March 2006. We would also like
to further warn strongly all those who are attacking and harassing
councillors and their families. Therefore, we are making an appeal to the
police and the justice system to protect the nation and to punish all those
who do not abide by the law and violates the rights of others. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

   AGGRESSIVE MANNER OF MINISTER JORDAN AGAINST AFRIKAANS AND NAME CHANGES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mev D VAN DER WALT (DA): Mevrou die Speaker, die aggressiewe trant van die
Minister van Kuns en Kultuur, Dr Jordan, se onlangse omstrede uitlatings
oor Afrikaanse plekname is direk teenstrydig, eerstens, met die gees van
die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika, en tweedens met die visie van sy eie
departement wat dit ten doel het om nasiebou te ontwikkel en te beskerm.

As beskermheer van bogenoemde, wanneer, vra ek die Minister, gaan hy
wegbeweeg van ’n “ons” en ’n “hulle” mentaliteit en hyself daarna streef om
na Suid-Afrikaners te verwys as “ons”? Ek verwys u weereens na die 1947
Afrikaanse vertaling van Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika, en ek haal aan:

  Ek kyk, en sien die skare voor my staan;
  Zoele en Kosa, Soeto en Sjangaan, en ek;
  ‘n blanke ... vele volkre, ja ..
  almal verenigd om Gods seën te vra
  op net een tuiste, net een vaderland,
  want die Alwyse het ons saam geplant
  en saam laat worstel in Suid-Afrika...
  seën Heer, die land wat vele volke dra.

Die Minister skuld hierdie groep mede-Suid-Afrikaners ’n verskoning vir sy
onsensitiewe en ondeurdagte uitlatings. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Ms D VAN DER WALT (DA): Madam Speaker, the aggressive tone of the recent
controversial pronouncements by the Minister of Arts and Culture, Dr Pallo
Jordan, on Afrikaans place names is in conflict, firstly, with the spirit
of the Constitution of South Africa, and secondly with the vision of his
own department, whose aim it is to enhance and protect nation-building.

I ask the Minister, as custodian of the above-mentioned department, when he
intends to move away from an attitude of “them” and “us”, and when he will
strive to refer to all South Africans as “us”? I refer once again to the
1947 Afrikaans translation of ‘Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika, and I quote:

  Ek kyk, en sien die skare voor my staan;
  Zoeloe en Kosa, Soeto en Sjangaan, en ek;
  ‘n blanke ... vele volkre, ja ..
  almal verenigd om Gods seën te vra
  op net een tuiste, net een vaderland,
  want die Alwyse het ons saam geplant
  en saam laat worstel in Suid-Afrika...
  seën Heer, die land wat vele volke dra.


The Minister owes this group of fellow South Africans an apology for his
insensitive and ill-considered pronouncements. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF GHANA’S INDEPENDENCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, if I was in the House of Commons in
Britain I would have said that my learned friend who spoke about Ghana just
shot my fox, but because this is South Africa, I will continue. [Laughter.]

Today the IFP joins President Thabo Mbeki and Foreign Affairs Minister
Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma in celebrating with the leadership and people of
Ghana their 50th anniversary of freedom and independence from British
colonial rule.

The authors of African nationalism in the 20th century in 1965 wrote that
as he was leaving the United States of America in 1945, after 10 years of
study and hardship, and as his ship passed the Statue of Liberty, Kwame
Nkrumah, with misty eyes vowed: “I shall never rest until I’ve carried your
message to Africa.” Indeed, 12 years later, on 6 March 1957, Ghana became a
free and independent country. True to his quest for a united Africa,
Nkrumah called the Conference of Independent African States, which met in
Accra, Ghana, in 1958.

Like most of his African-American contemporaries, among others Tom Boya,
Nnamdi Azikiwe, Julius Nyerere, George Padmore and W E B Du Bois, Nkruma
believed that the African personality, cultures and identities had been
traumatised and adulterated in the name of civilisation; that self-
government of a free and independent Africa would restore the collective
historical consciousness so impaired by colonial rule. Thank you.
[Applause.]

            Determination of parole AND CORRECTIONAL SUPERVISION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D V BLOEM (ANC): Madam Speaker, I wish to bring to the attention of this
House and the public at large that the parole boards, and not the Minister
of Correctional Services, have the competency and prerogative to consider
and make recommendations on parole and correctional supervision. This is in
line with the policy and legal imperatives, as outlined in the Correctional
Services Act, which states that inmates, or any person nominated to
represent them, can make a submission or an application to the department’s
Case Management Committee for parole or correctional supervision.

It is the duty of the Case Management Committee, therefore, to advise on,
or refer qualifying parole cases to the parole boards, which are
constitutional structures comprising members of the community,
representatives of justice and of safety and security. Only the parole
boards are vested with the powers to grant or decline parole, for
stipulated reasons.

It is only when a decision not in favour of the request for parole has been
made by the parole boards that inmates can write to the Minister to request
a review of the parole decision, citing valid reasons. In that instance,
the Minister will write to the parole review board for a review of the
decision. However, the review board’s decision to uphold or overturn the
earlier decision of the parole boards is final and binding. After this
process no further applications are made for another decision.

It is therefore incumbent upon us - public representatives - to educate the
public of South Africa about the pieces of legislation that this House
passes. And it is for this reason that we support the public education
campaign of the department to raise awareness about these core functions,
especially those related to the role of parole boards and the processes of
granting parole and correctional supervision.
The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your minute has expired.

Mr D V BLOEM: We also commend the Minister for ensuring that the public
knows about it. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                          MURDER OF SHELDEAN HUMAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J BICI (UDM): Madam Speaker, the UDM extends its condolences to the
parents and family, as well as the classmates, of seven-year-old Sheldean
Human, who was discovered murdered yesterday. Our thoughts and prayers are
with them during this time of bereavement.

After two weeks of trepidation and hope, the worst possible news broke
yesterday. We draw a small degree of comfort from the fact that the police
have a suspect in custody, and that he apparently confessed. Justice must
follow swiftly so that guilty persons can be locked up and the keys thrown
away.

We are horrified by the regularity of these despicable crimes against
children in our country. A democratic and caring society cannot tolerate
the presence of these predators in our midst. Yes, there are many broad
strategies against crime in general, but the question needs to be asked:
“What is the government doing specifically and efficiently to counter these
particular crimes?” Thank you.

The SPEAKER: The FF ... Plus! [Laughter.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Dankie, mevrou die Speaker, die “Plus” is
belangrik! [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika bepaal in artikel 205(3) die taak van die
Polisiediens is om misdaad te bestry en om die inwoners van die land asook
hulle eiendom te beskerm en te beveilig. Dit is hoekom mense belasting
betaal. Die regering kom egter nie sy grondwetlike plig na nie.

As ’n mens met die agb Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit daaroor praat,
sê hy jy moet ophou kla of die land verlaat. Inwoners moet hulself beveilig
en self hulle eiendom beskerm.

In dié verband het die VF Plus ook die inisiatief geneem en onder leiding
van sy Gauteng-leier, mnr Jaco Mulder, die Nasionale Burgerlike Veiligheid-
en Sekuriteitsaksie gevestig.

Hierdie artikel 21-maatskappy sonder winsbejag het ten doel om gemeenskappe
te aktiveer om saam te staan teen misdaad, om gemeenskappe te bemagtig om
misdaad op proaktiewe wyse te beveg en om slagoffers van misdaad te
ondersteun. In kort is die missie om deur middel van ’n nasionale
inisiatief burgers van die land, ook in die buiteland, te mobiliseer tot ’n
geïntegreerde veldtog vir die herstel van wet en orde.

Omdat die regering te sleg is om misdaad te bestry word die publiek gevra
om hierdie inisiatief te ondersteun, en meer inligting kan verkry word by
www.nacissa.org.za. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek dank u. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Thank you, Madam Speaker, the “Plus” is
important. [Interjections.]

The Constitution of South Africa stipulates in section 205(3) that the
tasks of the police services are to combat crime and to protect and secure
the inhabitants of the Republic and their property. That is why people pay
taxes. This government is, however, not performing its constitutional duty.

If one speaks to the hon Minister of Safety and Security about that, he
tells you to stop complaining or to leave the country. The inhabitants must
safeguard themselves and protect their property.

In this regard the FF Plus have also taken the initiative and under the
leadership of its Gauteng leader, Mr Jaco Mulder, established the National
Civil Safety and Security Action.

This non-profit seeking section 21 company aims to activate communities to
stand together against crime, to empower communities to fight crime in a
proactive manner and to support the victims of crime. In short, the mission
is to mobilise the citizens of the Republic, including those abroad,
through a national initiative into an integrated campaign for the
restoration of law and order.

Because the government is too feeble to combat crime the public is being
asked to support this initiative, and more information can be obtained at
www.nacissa.org.za.[Interjections.] I thank you. [Interjections.]]

   WISHING FATHER KIERAN CREAGH A SPEEDY RECOVERY AND SUPPORTING THE FIGHT
                                AGAINST CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY (ANC): Madam Chair, I am
deployed to the ANC parliamentary constituency office in Atteridgeville in
the Tshwane Metro, together with the hon Lulu Xingwana and the hon Richard
Ntuli. On Thursday, 1 March 2007, we were shocked to hear that Father
Kieran Creagh had been shot twice outside his house at Leratong Hospice in
Atteridgeville West.

Father Kieran, a Catholic priest from Dublin, Ireland, was instrumental in
setting up and running the hospice. He has also volunteered to be injected
with a trial HIV vaccine. In 2004 he was named Irish International
Personality of the year. On Sunday, Dr Gwen Ramokgopa, the Mayor of
Tshwane, ward councillor Antoinette Swart and I visited Father Kieran’s
father, Jim, and his brother, Paul.

The spirit of ubuntu that pervades his work was evident from the moving way
in which they described his commitment to the hospice and the community of
Atteridgeville West. The SA Police Service in Atteridgeville has given the
assurance that they, working together with the members of the community,
will leave no stone unturned to get to the bottom of this terrible crime.

We call upon all members of the community to answer the call made in the
ANC 8 January Statement to participate in an extensive mass campaign to
mobilise communities to assume leadership in the struggle for peace,
stability and safer places to live by strengthening partnerships between
communities and the police services, and between the public and private
sectors, and by intensifying the struggle against the causes of crime.

We wish Father Kieran a speedy recovery, and would like to say to the
entire Creagh family that they are in our thoughts and prayers. We pledge
our support to the patients, staff and board of Leratong Hospice during
this difficult time. [Applause.]

             BUILDING OF SCHOOL AND DESTRUCTION OF WETLAND AREA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Chairperson, the decision by the ANC-run
Nelspruit municipal Town Council to bulldoze and destroy a wetland area in
order to build a school speaks of a flagrant disregard for proper procedure
and relevant legislative requirements. Specifically, no environmental
impact assessment was undertaken and no environmental management plan was
drafted. The consequence is that the entire exercise was, in fact, illegal.

While the DA understands the necessity for relocating the school in order
to make way for the 2010 Mbombela Stadium, this incident is completely
unacceptable. Those individuals responsible must now be brought to account.
It is simply no good to impose a general and relatively small fine on the
municipality.

Both the Ministers of Local Government and Environmental Affairs must take
urgent action and find out who in particular, was responsible and what
action was taken against them specifically. If none, they must move to make
an example of them.

There is a culture, I might add, of unaccountability that has come to
define the ANC government’s management style. Too often mismanagement is
simply glossed over and dismissed. The country’s rules and regulations mean
nothing, unless there is a strong leadership to support and implement them.
Thank you. [Applause.]

             PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL MONEY LENDING BY LOAN SHARKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr C T FROLICK (ANC): Mevrou die Voorsitter, die praktyk van onwettige
geldvoorskietery in arm gemeenskappe moet kortgeknip word ten einde te
verseker dat kwesbare groepe, soos vroue en kinders, beskerm word teen
uitbuiting en finansiële verwaarlosing.

Persone wat dié praktyk toepas, of te wel die sogenaamde skoppers, wat
hulle skuldig maak aan hierdie wanbedryf, skiet gewoonlik teen
buitensporige hoë rentekoerse geld, kos of alkohol voor aan ontvangers van
maatskaplike toelae. Dit word gedoen met die voorvereiste dat so ’n persoon
se identiteitsdokument, bankkaartjie en maatskaplike toelaekaart aan die
skopper oorhandig moet word as ’n waarborg dat die lening terugbetaal sal
word.

Die gevolg is dat die ontvangers van maatskaplike toelae wat betrokke is by
hierdie wanpraktyk nie meer in besit van hul persoonlike items is nie, en
oorgelewer word aan manipulasie van die geldvoorskieter. Gevolglik kan
sulke mense nie in aanmerking kom vir die regering se
armoedeverligtingsprogramme en gratis munisipale dienste nie.
Verlede week het ’n lid van die gemeenskap ’n plastieksak vol persoonlike
dokumente, insluitende identiteitsdokumente en bankkaarte, by my
kiesafdelingkantoor kom inhandig nadat dit in ’n vullishouer gevind is. Die
samewerking van die plaaslike polisie en amptenare van die Departement van
Maatskaplike Ontwikkeling het daartoe gelei dat twee persone wie onwettig
geld voorskiet aangekeer is en eendag sal hulle in die hof verskyn op ’n
reeks aanklagte van bedrog. Die ANC doen ’n beroep op alle ontvangers van
maatskaplike toelae om die geld op ’n verantwoordelike wyse aan te wend om
hulle lewensomstandighede te verbeter, en nie die prooi te word van
gewetenlose skurke nie. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr C T FROLICK (ANC): Madam Chair, the practice of illegal money lending
in poor communities must be stopped in order to ensure that vulnerable
groups, such as women and children, are protected against exploitation and
financial neglect.

People who practice this, the so-called loan sharks, who are guilty of this
malpractice, usually advance money, food or alcohol at exorbitantly high
interest rates to the recipients of social grants. This is done on
condition that such a person’s identity document, bank card and social
grant card are handed over to the loan shark as a guarantee that the loan
will be repaid.

The result is that the recipients of social grants who are involved in this
malpractice are no longer in possession of their personal effects, and are
subject to the manipulation of these loan sharks. As a result such people
cannot qualify for the government’s poverty alleviation programmes and free
municipal services.

Last week a member of the community came to hand in a plastic bag filled
with personal documents, including identity documents and bank cards, at my
constituency office, after it had been found in a rubbish bin. The co-
operation of the local police and officials from the Department of Social
Development led to the arrest of two people who advance money illegally and
one day they will appear in court on a series of fraud charges. The ANC
calls upon all recipients of social grants to use the money in a
responsible manner to better their living conditions, and not to fall prey
to such unscrupulous thugs. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Before I call the IFP, could the DA
remain slightly quieter? Thank you.

   LANGUAGE EQUALITY AND PROTECTION IN THE CONSTITUTION – MULTILINGUALISM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Wenza kahle-ke impela. [You are absolutely doing the
right thing.] Deputy Chair, the IFP knows that the FW de Klerk Foundation
and the Premier of Western Cape have recently reached an agreement to
respect and uphold the language rights of non-English-speaking police
officers in the Western Cape.

The original case was brought by the foundation after complaints by the
Afrikaans-speaking officers. This was the result of an unconstitutional
order by the Boland Area Commissioner four years ago that only English must
be used by police officers for internal communication purposes. The IFP
welcomes this agreement but deplores the fact that the foundation had to
threaten court action before an amicable settlement could be reached.
Surely, the authorities must have known that the original order was
unconstitutional and illegal? It was also a contravention of standing
national police orders.

Furthermore, the Constitution protects South Africa’s 11 official languages
and places them on an equal footing. It also promotes multilingualism and
especially promotes indigenous languages. This constitutional protection is
not optional and open to different interpretation. It is cemented in the
Constitution. The IFP therefore calls on the government to accelerate the
promotion of multilingualism, especially the promotion of indigenous
languages in all organs of state. Thank you.

            WOMEN’S ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT WORKSHOP HELD IN LENASIA
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J NJIKELANA (ANC): Chairperson, an economic empowerment workshop which
was a joint effort between Lenasia, Palestine and Kliptown parliamentary
constituency offices and the Department of Trade and Industry was held for
280 women in Lenasia in the deep South last month. This workshop was a
follow-up to the one held at Orange Farm last year, which was attended by
349 women. The focal point was to expose women and other marginalised
sectors to government services that are aimed at empowering them
economically.

Whilst around 25 officials from various government departments participated
in last year’s workshop, the one held this year resolved to establish a
business forum for women in the deep South and develop a long-term
programme on economic empowerment that goes beyond the mere running of
workshops.

Fellow MPs, we need always to be mindful of the ANC’s commitment to the
creation of material and cultural conditions that would allow the abilities
of women to flourish and enrich the life of the nation. This was also a
response to the President’s call in his state of the nation address last
year which emphasised paying particular attention in this regard to broad-
based black economic empowerment and the development of women and the
youth.

As I stand here, I wholeheartedly salute all the women who worked with me
to make this endeavour a resounding success; the Department of Trade and
Industry, particularly Deputy Minister Elizabeth Thabethe; MPs Vadi, Dr
Ebrahim Saloojee, Mazibuko and Prof Mohamed. Ndiyabulela. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

               DEATH OF SHELDEAN HUMAN AND SAFETY OF CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Chair, the terrible death of seven-year-old Sheldean
Human is yet another sad reminder that no child in South Africa is safe
from sexual and violent predators. The DA sends its deepest condolences to
her family.

Real South Africa and E-Block Watch are declaring Friday a pink day in
remembrance of Sheldean as it was the colour she wore on the day of her
abduction. Flowers are also to be laid at the gates of Parliament.

But we must not forget the three children that are murdered every day in
our country, and that’s according to official government figures. There are
practical and affordable steps that the government, the private sector and
concerned residents can take to protect children better. The first few
hours after a child goes missing are the most crucial. It is during this
period that we need to implement targeted intervention strategies.

The DA released a policy in 2005 outlining proposals that could be used in
combating this scourge and we propose the following, firstly, that a
voluntary partnership between the police and cellphone companies be adopted
using photos and SMS messages: cellphone users in the area where the child
was reported missing would then receive the information first and the
circle would widen as time progressed; secondly, that a similar partnership
between the police and broadcasters be set up so that as soon as radio
stations in the vicinity of a reported abduction receive an alert from the
police, they will immediately broadcast all available information about the
child and the alleged abductor; thirdly, that in large shopping centres and
retail stores, procedures should be put in place to immediately alert
customers and staff to a child reported missing.

We also propose a compulsory inclusion of fingerprints on birth
certificates after the age of one year to be included on a national
database linked to the SAPS. Finally, we propose using chips and street
bags and cool drink cans to raise awareness of both children and parents
about the safety of children. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

               DOUBT CAST ON ABILITY TO HOST SOCCER WORLD CUP
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Madam Chair, late last year certain sectors of
society persisted in casting doubt on the ability of our country to meet
the guarantees to host the Fifa 2010 Soccer World Cup. At the time the
focus was on the progress made in the awarding of tenders for construction
and the upgrading of the venues earmarked to host this prestigious event.

No effort was spared in driving a concerted campaign to undermine the
sterling work done in preparation for the event, and this went so far as to
suggest that our country was at risk of losing the host status for the
event.

The confidence displayed by Fifa executive and by President Sepp Blatter in
our country’s ability to host a successful event is simply ignored by the
prophets of doom. It is thus not surprising that the hon Leon could not
resist the temptation in his weekly on-line publication self-righteously to
cast aspersions of corruption in the tender and bidding process for the
construction of the stadium in the Nelson Mandela municipality.

The Local Organising Committee, through the National Treasury, provided
technical support to municipalities to ensure that all provisions of the
Public Finance Management Act and the Local Government: Municipal Finance
Management Act were adhered to. The final decision remains the
responsibility of the municipality after meeting the requirements.

It is surprising that more often when black people get to be involved in
business, some sections of our society raise the flag of corruption, even
before establishing the facts on the ground. They are more interested in
creating negative perceptions about black people than about finding and
telling the truth. Ilo ndaba! [That is the problem.] Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Two parties did not use their
opportunity for making statements. The ANC has another opportunity.

                 COMMUNITY CENTRES AND SERVICES IN BOLUBEDU

                            (Member’s Statement)

Manana C NKUNA (ANC): Muchaviseki Mutshami wa Xitulu inkomu. Hi siku ra 3
ra n’hweti ya Nyenyankulu lembe leri, Muprimiya wa xifundzankulu xa
Limpopo, yena Tatana Sello Moloto u simekile multipurpose community centre
endhawini leyi vuriwaka Mukwakwaila, etikweni ra Hosi Mudjadji. Eku
sunguleni xikongomelo xa muako lowu a kuri ndhawu ya vutiphini hi ku
hambana hambana ka byona, ku nga ri vukorhokeri bya tiko.

Hofosi ya Palamende eka Mokwakwaila, mfuno wa xikaya kunye na Ndzawulo ya
Vuhlanganisi va endlile leswaku muako lowu wu va wa vukorhokeri bya vaaka-
tiko hi lembe ra 2005. Tindzawulo leti kumekaka eka vukorhokeri lebyi hi
ti, i Ndzawulo ya Vutisirheleli na Ndzawulo ya Swa Nhlayiso kasi
tindhzawulo leti taka kan’we hi vhiki hi leti, Ndzawulo ya Swa Mintirho,
Ndzawulo ya Makhotso, Ndzawulo ya Timhaka ta Xikaya na Ndzawulo ya Swa
Vutleketli. Tindzawulo leti ti nga ri ki kona i Ndzawulo ya Dyondzo, ya
mintirho, ya rihanyo ni ya mati.

Holobye wa xifundzankulu xa Limpopo u komberile no hlohlotela vaaka-tiko ku
tirhisa vukorhokeri lebyi. U tlhele a vula leswaku ku akiwa ka patu ra
xikontiri swi ta engetela vukorhokeri na mingingiriko eBolubedu. Inkomu.
(Translation of Xitsonga member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs C NKUNA (ANC): Thank you, hon Chairperson. On 3 March this year, the
Premier of Limpopo, hon Sello Moloto, launched a multipurpose community
centre at a place called Mukwakwaila, in the jurisdiction of Chief
Mudjadji. The initial purpose of this institution was to provide various
entertainment activities and not to provide community services.

The local Council at Mukwakwaila, the local government and the Department
of Communications turned this building into a community service centre in
2005. The Departments of Defence and of Social Services are represented in
this building, while those of Labour, Correctional Services, Home Affairs
and Transport only come once a week. The Departments of Education, Public
Works, Health and Water Affairs and Forestry are not catered for.

The Premier has asked and encouraged community members to make use of these
services. He also said that the construction of a tarred road would further
enhance service delivery as well as other activities at Bolobedu. Thank
you.]

          SUSTAINABILITY FOR ENVIROMENTAL POLICY ON GLOBAL WARMING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Chairperson, there is no doubt that, as a country, we
need to change our attitude and mindset in relation to the natural
environment. Our resources are running out fast. Water, land and air
pollution is on the increase. The drastic impact of global warming and
climate change is there for all to see, and its effect continues to
threaten the very survival of both animal and human life. Put plainly, we
are living on borrowed time unless we put the issue of climate change high
on the country’s agenda. Surely it can’t be business as usual?

The DA therefore calls on government to formulate and implement a
vigorously green sustainable policy, actively seeking the co-operation of
all relevant stakeholders, including the private and government sectors.
[Applause.]


     DETERMINATION OF PAROLE AND CORRECTIONAL SUPERVISION AND GOVERNMENT
                         COMMITTED TO FIGHTING CRIME


                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I am rising on two
matters. One, on the issue of parole and correctional supervision. I do
want to thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee for assisting in
spreading the message of parole and correctional systems to all the people
of our country, and for the call he made on all of us as public
representatives to assist communities to understand this new system of
correction and rehabilitation.

It is a new system that was accepted by our Cabinet in 2005, and therefore
we call upon those families to assist their offenders or inmates to
understand how it works – that it doesn’t work via the Minister, but via
the case management systems, which they know of. It goes to parole boards
and thereafter to the Parole Review Board. Should you not be happy with the
decision, you can then write to the Minister who will, in turn, write to
the review board. The Minister does not interfere in that.

As Minister, I will try to adhere to these systems and processes, and there
will be no back door or nonprocedural requests directed to me. The
integrity of this department must be protected by me and by all who work in
it. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

With regard to the second matter, there is no doubt that the government of
South Africa, the ANC, is committed to fighting crime and to bringing about
safe and peaceful as well as stable communities. We therefore ask
communities to work in partnership with our Police Service to intensify the
struggle against the causes of crime and crime itself.

Therefore, our thoughts and prayers go to Father Kieran, to Sheldean and
her family, and to all the families that are affected by crime. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                                NAME CHANGES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Chairperson, the issue of name
changes has been on the agenda in South Africa since 1998, when the
relevant legislation was passed. Since then a number of changes of place
names have been executed. During my incumbency, I have agreed to a number
of changes to place names as well.

Why this should be seen as an issue impacting negatively on national
cohesion or nation-building still eludes me. The terms that were used by
the hon speaker on the other side of the House: insensitivity, violation of
the spirit of the Constitution, etc, I think, are absolutely inappropriate.
Let us understand that sensitivity is not only sensitivity about the
feelings and the pride of one section of our community. Every place that is
occupied by human beings in South Africa had a name before Jan van Riebeeck
landed here at the Cape in 1652 – every place - including Cape Town itself.
[Applause.] Every river had a name; every mountain had a name. We don’t use
those names anymore. They are not even on the maps, because those who came
with Van Riebeeck and afterwards obliterated those names without one gram
of sensitivity to the people who were here before. So, please, do not
lecture us on sensitivity - please! [Applause.] Please don’t lecture us on
that.

Reconciliation means a two-way street, not a one-way street, which seems to
be what the hon member proceeds from. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                               CLIMATE CHANGE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Madam Chair, hon members, I just want to say
about the issue of climate change that, indeed, there might be a need for
engagement, particularly with the Ministry of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, together with the department.

There have been processes in which an interdepartmental committee,
including researchers from other institutions, as well as academia, have
looked at the South African situation with regard to climate change, at the
global situation and therefore at the mechanisms we as a country can put in
place in order to mitigate the situation, and also at working with other
countries in managing this important issue that has been mentioned by the
hon member.

I will say that if there is a further detail that is required, I think it
would be proper that maybe the Committee on Environment with those who are
interested may engage on this discussion to look at how far South Africa
has gone in managing, as well as having foresight into, what might be
required in terms of policy or regulation to ensure that we can meet this
challenge, all of us.


              MICROLENDERS WHO DEMAND PIN NUMBERS FROM CLIENTS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Chairperson, I
want to respond to the statement that was made by the hon Frolick. The
practice of microlenders’ holding identity cards and bank cards and
demanding pin numbers from clients has actually been an offence and has
been a prohibited practice for a number of years. I am glad that in the
particular case he mentioned, action was taken against the perpetrators.

I just want to take this opportunity to urge members who come across these
practices in their constituencies to approach the police, the Micro Finance
Regulatory Council, the National Credit Regulator - when that body is up
and running - or to approach the department through us. This is because we
are actually determined to stamp out all practices which prey on vulnerable
poor people at the expense of unscrupulous moneylenders. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF MEDIATION COMMITTEE ON FOODSTUFFS, COSMETICS AND
                        DISINFECTANTS AMENDMENT BILL

There was no debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

              FOODSTUFFS, COSMETICS AND DISINFECTANTS AMENDMENT

                           (Consideration of Bill)

The HOUSE CHAIPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I now call the co-chairperson of the
Mediation Committee.

Mr L V J NGCULU: Chairperson, the Bill itself was presented to the Chamber
and thus referred to the Mediation Committee on the basis of some of the
concerns arising from some amendments relating to some specific clauses
and/or definitions of the Bill itself.

I won’t take much time of this House in terms of going back to the objects
and other related matters of the Bill, suffice perhaps to say in particular
here that the amendments that were actually proposed by the portfolio
committee to the House, especially around the species of mollusc, were
actually referred to the NCOP. In the NCOP amendments, I think, they made
certain amendments that in practice might have tended to create problems in
the implementation of the Bill.

In that regard therefore the Portfolio Committee on Health heard certain
suggestions around these issues and could not technically agree with the
amendments of the NCOP. Our own view in particular was around the
definition of the mollusc. I don’t really want to go into the detail of the
scientific definitions of the mollusc for the purposes of this House,
because it may not be of great interest in this regard.

But in terms of our own view as a portfolio committee, having met with the
Mediation Committee on 21 February 2007, we agreed that in fact the
proposal of the portfolio committee on the definition of the mollusc was
more limited in terms of the definition of the species itself rather than
presenting examples - because if you make examples in the law of
interpretation it means you exclude others.

We felt it better to make the definition in the strictest sense of the
definition, without reference to the amendments in this regard. In this
regard, therefore, those amendments of the portfolio committee were
accepted, and I think we would like to thank in particular our Acting Chief
Whip who assisted greatly in terms of accepting this. We also would like to
thank the parliamentary law advisers and the state law advisers in this
regard. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

The House adjourned at 14:50.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                            MONDAY, 5 MARCH 2007



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 1 March 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (a)     Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment
              Bill [B 1 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


      1) The following member lost his seat in the National Assembly with
         effect from 14 December 2006:

         Goniwe, M T.


      2) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         death of Mr Z J Kati on 29 September 2006, has been filled with
         effect from 28 February 2007 by the nomination of Ms N M Twala.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Social Development

   (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for  2007
         to 2010 [RP 23-2007].


   (b)     Strategic Plan of the  National  Development  Agency  (NDA)  for
         2006/07 to 2010/11 [RP 15-2007].

2. The Minister of Safety and Security

   (a)     Report of the National Commissioner of the South African Police
         Service (SAPS) for the period of July 2006 to December 2006, in
         terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act
         No 116 of 1998).


3. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2007 to
         2010.



National Assembly


1.    The Speaker


   (a)      Report of Public Protector in terms of section 8(1) of the
         Public Protector Act, 1994 (Act No 23 of 1994), on a complaint by
         Mr L Khumalo.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice  and  Constitutional
         Development for consideration.

   (b)      Report of the Public Service Commission on Managing Conflicts of
        Interest in the Public Service – 2006.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the International Labour
  Conference (ILO), dated 27 February 2007:


    The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having been represented by a multi-
    party delegation at the International Labour Conference, reports as
    follows:

     1. Background

        The Committee resolved to send a multi-party delegation to attend
        the annual International Labour Conference (ILC) in Geneva.  Ms
        Kasienyane (ANC), Mr BM Mkongi (ANC) and Ms H Weber (DA)
        accompanied by the Committee Secretary, Ms P Jayiya, attended the
        Conference from 12-16 June 2006.  The delegation attended meetings
        of the Africa group, tripartite alliance, proceedings in Committees
        and plenaries.


      2.    Introduction


      The report gives a synopsis of the proceedings of the 95th Session of
      the International Labour Organisation (ILO) which took place in Geneva
      from 31 May to 16 June 2006.  The agenda consisted of standing items
      and items placed on the agenda by the Conference of the Governing
      Body, items that were dealt with by various Committees, the reports of
      the Director-General of the ILO, a summary of the activities of the
      Africa group, a summary of discussions in Committees, and instruments
      that were adopted at the Conference.

      Standing items


      *     Report of the Chairperson of the Governing Body and the Director-
           General


      *     Global report under the follow-up to the ILO Declaration on the
           Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work


      *     Programme, budget and other questions


      *     Information and reports on the application of Conventions and
           Recommendations
      Agenda:
      *     The occupational safety and health- standard setting, second
           discussion with a view to adopt a Convention and a
           Recommendation.


      *     The employment relationship-standard setting, single discussion
           with a view to adopt a Recommendation


      *     The role of the ILO in technical co-operation- general
           discussion



      3.    Official opening

           The official opening took place on 31 May in Palais des  Nations
           and was addressed by Mr Trotman  (Worker  Vice-President).   The
           following people were elected as officials of the  95th  session
           of the Conference:


           President:  Minister Khalil, Minister of Labour:Jordaan
           Worker:     Sir Trotman, Barbados
           Employer:   Mr Fuernes, Argentina
           Having outlined the procedures and identified other officers at
           the meeting, the Chairperson suspended the plenary until Monday,
           6 June 2006.






      4.    AFRICA GROUP



           The Africa Group met daily under  the  co-ordination  of  Kenya.
           These meetings discussed the continent’s common position in  the
           various  committees,  and  progress  and  feedbacks  on   agreed
           interventions.  During the  discussions  of  the  Africa  group,
           amendments were discussed and agreed  to  before  submission  to
           committees.  The spokesperson of different  committees  provided
           written reports of their presentations  so  that  members  could
           familiarise themselves with the document.   Member  states  that
           would appear before the Standards  Committee  were  expected  to
           provide written submissions so that other member states could be
           able to support them.
           The representation of the African group in Committees was agreed
           as follows:

           Committee on Finance and Administration:     Senegal
           Committee on Employment Relations:           South Africa
           Committee on Occupational Safety and Health: Uganda
           Committee on Technical Cooperation:          Morroco
           Committee on the Application of Standards:   Nigeria


           The group had an honour of being addressed by President Johnson-
           Sirleaf of Liberia.

      5.    Governing Body Membership


           The Governing Body is the executive council of the ILO that
           takes decisions on policy and establishes the programme and
           budget of the 178 member states of the ILO.  This body meets
           three times annually in Geneva.


           The Governing Body elected Minister Mdladlana as Chairperson for
           the 2006/07 session.  Sir Leroy Trotman, General Secretary of
           the Barbados Worker’s Union and spokesperson of the Workers’
           group, was elected as Workers’ Vice-Chairperson.  Mr Daniel
           Funes de Rioja, President of the Social Policy Department of the
           Argentine Industrial Union, and Chairperson of the Employers’
           group was re-elected as Employer Vice-Chairperson.
           The Governing Body also approved the Report of the ILO Committee
           on Freedom of Association and examined 102 cases.

           Reports of the Director-General and Governing Body


      Report on the changing patterns in the world of work


      The report on changing patterns in the world of work provided a
      synthesis of the global context in which the ILO was advancing the
      decent work agenda.  It also provided an integrated view of the
      multiple changes and processes in the world of work and how the ILO
      tools could be used, shaped and adapted to address these changes.


      The report was aimed at putting experiences and knowledge about work
      in the global perspective.  It acknowledged the centrality of work as
      a source of dignity and fulfilment in people’s lives.  Whilst work is
      recognised as diverse, the report alluded to the dignity of work
      having been devalued and thought as simply a factor of production.
      However, that connects with the reality of the ILO’s mandate.  The
      report stimulated a debate around issues that will contribute to the
      achievement of the strategic objective of making decent work a global
      and national reality.


      The report acknowledged changes brought about by the liberalisation of
      trade and capital flows resulting in more workers and employers
      competing in a global market.


      The report related to the significance of human rights as an anchor of
      values at work.  It argued that the management of change in the
      workplace will depend on the quality of work organisation. It called
      for the balance of the need for flexibility and security which
      required a strong based approach to the governance of labour markets
      that foster social dialogue.


      The item on the creation of work was part of the report.  It
      emphasised the importance of investment and enterprise development and
      skills development in the creation of work.


      The Director-General commended the manner in which tripartism had
      contributed to explaining and promoting the decent work agenda.  He
      reiterated that although tripartism was not perfect in every country,
      the decent work programmes would progressively become the main
      instrument for co-operation by member states.  He acknowledged that
      the ILO was faced with a challenge of stepping up its efforts in
      translating the global political support into policies that make
      decent work a national reality.  He also suggested that if the decent
      work agenda had a connection with politics, there was a need for the
      ILO to assist governments and social partners to align this approach
      to policies and translate it into meaningful change in people’s lives.


      The ILO is working with multilateral, regional and individual
      development co-operation agencies, including the International
      Monetory Fund and the World Bank, to systematically integrate the
      objectives of productive employment and decent work in their policy
      dialogue .

      The Director-General pointed out that while the international
      community was analysing and giving support to the decent work agenda,
      the ILO had continued its regular business of discussing, negotiating
      and agreeing on action on some key policy approaches to make that
      agenda happen.  In order to respond to the challenges that might be
      faced, there would be a need to strengthen the capacity of the ILO.
      There should be a global commitment and recognition of the role that
      tripartism played in stabilising societies, ensuring consensus
      building, as well as having good industrial relations.

      Global Report under the follow-up to the ILO Declaration on
      Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work

      The Director-General of the ILO, as part of the follow-up to the
      Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, adopted by
      the Conference at its 86th Session in 1998, is expected to table a
      report annually that provides a global picture that relates to one of
      the four categories of the fundamental principles and rights.


      This year’s global report focused on the effective abolition of child
      labour in member states that have ratified and those that have not
      ratified the relevant fundamental ILO Conventions, namely the Minimum
      Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138) and the Worst Forms of Child Labour
      Convention, 1999 (No. 182).


      The report indicated that the involvement of children in work had
      declined, especially in the areas of harmful work.  The highest
      incidences were, however, still found in Sub-Saharan Africa.
      According to the report, in 2004 it was estimated that out of 317
      million economically active children in the world, 218 million were
      child labourers.  Of these, 126 million were engaged in harzardous
      work.


      The report also focused on the different policy choices governments
      made to address child labour and why certain countries have managed to
      reach a critical threshold in achieving universal education and the
      elimination of child labour.  It concurred that coherence in policies
      such as poverty alleviation, provision of quality education, social
      protection measures, including the protection of worker rights, were
      important to eliminate child labour.


      The report pointed out that co-operation between employers and workers
      was critical in the fight against child labour.  Corporate social
      responsibility and capacity building were also identified as important
      elements in addressing child labour.


      Mainstreaming of child labour issues was highlighted as one of the
      interventions in dealing with child labour.  The focus was on gender
      mainstreaming, i.e to promote gender equality and get children back to
      school.


      What emerged from the report was that although there was a high rate
      of activity in policy formulation and the adoption of plans of action,
      limited attention was given to the most vulnerable children and even
      less to the situation of girls.  It was also felt that very few
      governments were giving attention to forced and bonded labour.  Less
      action was reported on improving legislation against the use,
      procuring or offering of children for illicit activities.


      The value of Time Bound Programme (TBP) measures was discussed
      thoroughly in the report.   The TBP is a tool that was developed to
      deal effectively with the worst forms of child labour.  The
      effectiveness of the TBP could be achieved through the empowerment of
      key agencies and institutions, governments, organised business and
      labour, and non-governmental organisations (NGOs).




   6. Summary of discussions in Committees


      Committee on Freedom of Association


      Special attention was drawn to the cases of Cambodia, Djibouti and
      Zimbabwe because of their serious and urgent nature.


      With respect to Cambodia, the Committee urged the government to take
      measures to ensure that trade union rights of workers were respected,
      and that trade unionists were able to exercise their activities in a
      climate that was free from intimidation.


      In the case of Djibouti, the Committee requested the government to
      take measures concerning the reinstatement of trade union officials
      and workers who were dismissed following a strike, and to launch an
      independent inquiry into allegations of harassment and unfair
      dismissal of trade union officials.


      In the case of Zimbabwe, the Committee reiterated its deep concern
      about the general trade union climate in Zimbabwe.  It requested the
      government to accept a direct contact mission.


      The Committee also drew the attention of the Governing Body to the
      case of the Islamic Republic of Iran.  It urged the government to
      institute an independent inquiry into allegations of interrogation,
      threats and harassment by the Ministry of Intelligence against trade
      unionists and to keep it informed of the outcome.


      Committee on Application of Standards


      This Committee is a standing Conference Committee whose terms of
      reference are defined in article 7 of the Standing Orders of the
      Conference.  Its mandate is to report on the extent to which member
      states fulfill their standards-related obligations.

      The work of this Committee is based on the report of the Committee of
      Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations, which
      is composed of legal experts from different regions of the world.

      Part of the general discussions in this Committee included examining
      the General Survey of the Committee of Experts concerning the
      following:

      *     Labour Inspection Convention, 1947 (No. 81);
      *     The Protocol of 1995 to the Labour Convention, 1947 (No. 81);
      *     Labour Inspection Recommendation, 1947 (No. 81);
      *     Labour Inspection (Agriculture) Convention, 1969 (No. 129);
      *     Labour Inspection (Mining and Transport) Recommendation, 1947
           (No.82); and
      *     Labour Inspection (Agriculture) Recommendation, 1969 (No. 133).



      The Committee elected its officers as follows:
      Chairperson:                      Mr Sergio Paixao Pardo (Government
                       member, Brazil);
      Vice Chairpersons:     Mr Edward E Potter (Employer member, US);
                             Mr Luc Cortebeeck (Worker member, Belgium); and
      Reporter:              Ms Carine Parra (Government member, France).

      The Committee’s work during this session involved the examination of
      individual cases.  Twenty-Five governments were invited to discuss the
      implementation of the law and practice of specific ratified
      Conventions.  Of these, five were African countries.  In addition to
      fundamental Conventions, several technical Conventions such as those
      relating to indigenous people, asbestos, wages, vocational
      rehabilitation and employment of disabled persons, were covered.
      These Conventions were of great importance to achieve decent work in
      the context of the poverty reduction strategy.

      The Committee requested the Office to adopt all possible measures to
      improve the situation and solve problems mentioned by governments.  It
      further suggested that particular attention be given to countries that
      were registered at the Conference.


      Committee on Occupational Safety and Health


      The 93rd Session of the Conference decided, by resolution adopted on
      15 June 2005, to place on the agenda of its 95th Session an item
      entitled ‘Occupational safety and health“ for the second discussion,
      with a view to adopt a Convention and a Recommendation.

      The Committee, however, during the 95th session discussed Report IV
      (2A) on the Promotional framework for safety and health which was
      drafted on the basis of contributions from governments, employers and
      workers organizations.  It also focussed on Report IV (2B) which
      contained the texts of the proposed Convention and Recommendation
      These were linked to other relevant ILO occupational safety and health
      instruments, particularly the Occupational Safety and Health
      Convention, 1981 (No. 155).  The Convention further called for member
      states to consider steps that could be taken at national level to
      ratify and implement some key ILO occupational safety and health
      instruments.


      The Conference adopted a resolution concerning asbestos which aimed to
      help prevent the unnecessary asbestos diseases and deaths in the
      future. This resolution reaffirmed the ILO’s longstanding policy on
      the protection of workers from cancer-causing substances.


      Committee on Employment Relationship


      The Conference dealt with this important subject for the second time
      in three years.  The aim was to examine the increasingly frequent
      situations in which it was difficult to establish the existence of an
      employment relationship.  The Conference considered the possible
      adoption of an international labour recommendation on the basis of a
      draft.  The main lines were drawn from the debate, general discussion
      and conclusions on the employment relationship which took place at the
      91st session of the ILC in 2003.  The draft encouraged member states,
      in consultation with the social partners, to formulate and adopt a
      national policy that aimed to guarantee effective protection for
      workers carrying out their work in the context of an employment
      relationship.


      The Conference dealt with two reports as a basis for this item.  The
      first report, namely The employment relationship, Report V (I)
      International Labour Conference , 95th Conference, 2006, which
      contained a general presentation and a comparative analysis of the
      question, as well as a questionnaire to which governments were asked
      to give reasoned replies, in consultation with the representative
      organisations of employers and workers.  The second report which
      consisted of Report V(2A) and Report (2B) included summaries of
      replies received and Office commentaries, and the proposed
      Recommendation to be submitted for discussion respectively.


      The Recommendation, however, addressed the key issue in the world of
      work, and employment relations as the foundation on which most labour
      standards were built.  The Recommendation recognizes that there were
      threats to the employment relationship which arose from different
      sources such as disguised and ambiguous employment, multiple and
      contractual arrangements and develops helpful responses to such
      threats.


      The Recommendation provides for criteria, indicators and mechanisms to
      determine the existence of an employment relationship.  It also
      addresses the gender dimension of the employment relationship and the
      challenges faced by women, as well as the cross-border movement of
      workers.  The instrument also recognizes that laws and regulations, as
      well as their interpretation, should be compatible with objectives of
      decent work.  The Recommendation laid a solid basis for future work by
      the ILO through guidance it gives to member states.


      Committee on Technical Co-operation


      Since 1999, significant changes took place in the approach and
      modalities for the development and implementation of ILO programmes
      and activities.  The 2006 report of the Conference dealt with how the
      recent changes had affected ILO technical cooperation, and outlined
      the current developments in international development policies and
      programmes with a view to assist the Conference in making its views
      known on the role of technical cooperation in promoting the ILO decent
      work agenda.
      The report dealt with trends in technical cooperation, reviewed the
      substantive work conducted under strategic objectives and raised cross-
      cutting issues of mainstreaming tripatism and gender equality.
      Subsequently, in reviewing the programming framework for technical
      cooperation, the report described the integration of technical
      cooperation into the system of strategic planning and budgeting,
      discussed reform in the United Nations (UN) system aimed at
      harmonizing activities and creating synergies and partnerships,
      assessing the needs of constituents, and described Decent Work Country
      Programmes.


      The Committee adopted conclusions that will lead the ILO’s work in the
      coming years, and recognized that technical co-operation was at the
      core of the ILO’s work.  The conclusions identified priorities for
      action and challenges ahead of the ILO. The Conference reiterated that
      decent work country programmes would require an active involvement of
      social partners and the mobilization of financial and human resources
      for their operation. Tripartism and social dialogue were recognized as
      fundamental pillars in the design, implementation and evaluation of
      technical co-operation activities and in the realization of the decent
      work agenda.  In the area of public-private partnerships, the
      conclusions clearly stated that the Governing Body should establish
      and monitor the implementation of clear guidelines and criteria for
      such partnerships.


      Finance Committee


      This Committee is responsible for discussing and concluding the budget
      of the ILC.  The items discussed during the 95th session included  the
      following:


      *     The status of the collection of contributions;
      *     The assessment of the contributions of new member states;
      *     The scale of assessment of contributions to the budget;
      *     The composition of the Administrative Tribunal on the ILO; and
      *     The programme and budget proposal for 2006/7.

   7. Instruments adopted

      The Conference adopted the following instruments:


      • The Promotional Framework for Occupational Safety and Health
        Convention, 2006 (No. 187);


      • The Promotional Framework for Occupational Safety and Health
        Recommendation, 2006 (No. 197); and


      • The Employment Relationship Recommendation, 2006 (No. 198).

      The Committee notes the following resolutions of the Conference:


      • Employment Relationships;
      • Resolution on asbestos; and
      • Occupational Health and Safety

      With respect to employment relationships the Committee resolved the
      following:


        1) The Committee should commission a study, with the assistance of
           DOL, on the impact of labour brokers in South Africa.
        2) The Committee should invite DOL to present to it all the
           instruments that were adopted in the 95th International Labour
           Conference.
        3) The budget of the Committee should be increased to allow for
           more members to attend the International Labour Conference.


Report to be considered.

2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government on
  an International Oversight Visit to Kerala, India, dated 27 February 2007:

  The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
  undertaken an international oversight visit to Kerala, India, reports as
  follows:


  A.  INTRODUCTION


     1. The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
        undertook a major study tour of municipalities from 20 to 30
        January 2003 covering 41 municipalities, 3 metro sub-councils, 7
        MECs and provincial departments, 4 ward committee and public
        meetings, 3 urban and rural nodes, and 3 Planning and
        Implementation Management Support Centres (PIMS). In several
        districts, the local municipality representatives not only raised
        issues about the districts to which they belong, but also the
        specific challenges and other issues relating specifically to their
        respective local municipalities.  Several, in fact, gave full
        reports on the conditions in their local municipalities.
     2. Flowing from the study tour of 2003,  a  report  and  supplementary
        report was produced and adopted by Parliament (See ATC No 53 – 2003
        dated 13 May 2003 and ATC No 69 – 2003 dated 6 June 2003).  One  of
        the main challenges emanating from the report was  that  of  public
        participation. The Committee felt that public participation and the
        involvement of residents in matters  of  local  government  was  of
        strategic significance. More importantly it  is  at  the  heart  of
        strengthening our system of local government and  requires  further
        study. Current mechanisms  were  partly  drawn  from  international
        experience and therefore we thought Kerala in India, being  thought
        of as one of the pioneers in this field,  would  yield  interesting
        lessons.

3. Kerala was specifically chosen because there are a number of features  of
  the Kerala  system  of  government  that  are  either  similar  to  those
  obtaining in South Africa, or which have a  bearing  on  possible  future
  developments  here.  The  Committee’s  goal  was  to  study  the  various
  dimensions  of  the   decentralised   and   participatory   developmental
  initiatives in Kerala. The Committee was keen to understand the different
  models of participatory development programmes currently  being  explored
  in Kerala - where huge leaps have been made in the devolution  of  powers
  and funds to local bodies.

4. Those who participated in the  tour  were:  Mr  Solomon  Lechesa  Tsenoli
  (Chairperson, African National Congress), Mr Mpho Morepye Sephwe  Lekgoro
  (African National Congress),  Mr  Isaac  Dank  Mogase  (African  National
  Congress), Mr Willem  Phillips  Doman  (Democratic  Alliance),  Mr  Peter
  Francis Smith (Inkatha Freedom Party) and Mr  Llewellyn  Alexander  Brown
  (Committee Secretary).

5. The central  government  and  the  regions  (provinces)  of  Kerala  were
  visited.  These  included  visits  to  the  Kerala  Institute  of   Local
  Administration (Kila), Thrissur, Cochin, Varkala, Thiruvananthapuram, the
  Velookkkara Village Panchayat, the  Thycattuseery  Block  Panchayat,  the
  Perumbalam Village  Panchayat,  the  Kudumbashree  Units,  the  Municipal
  Corporation of Cochin, the Ernkulam District Panchayat and sessions  with
  the Ministers of Local Government and Finance. Meetings involved a  range
  of stakeholders including  regional  parliamentarians,  local  government
  councilors, government officials,  academics  and  elected  and  official
  functionaries. All relevant institutions and role  players  were  readily
  available to share their experiences with us in meetings supplemented  by
  books and journals.

6. The study tour was facilitated by the South African  High  Commission  in
  New Delhi in conjunction with the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs.  The
  Committee records its appreciation to the Commission and  Department  and
  in particular Ms M L Minnie, Acting High Commissioner, Dr  S  George  the
  programme coordinator and Ms Lynne Abrahams of the Parliamentary Research
  Unit for the valuable research  material  she  was  able  to  supply  the
  delegation prior to the  departure.  The  Committee  is  also  especially
  grateful to its secretary, Mr L Brown, for the enormous amount of work he
  did to ensure the success of the study tour.


  B.  OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY TOUR

      Apart from all of the above mentioned - the main objectives of the
      study tour were:


               • To interact with key policy makers behind the system of
                 public participation.
               • To interact with implementers and practitioners.
               • To examine the systems institutional, financial, regulatory
                 framework that underpins public participation.
               • To examine the history and other contextually relevant
                 issues that support public participation.


  C.  BACKGROUND ON KERALA

      1.    Kerala is one of India’s  25  states,  situated  in  the  south-
         western tip of the
         country, with the capital Thiruvananthapuram. Critical to Kerala’s
         governance model is the state’s political and social  history.  It
         was formed in 1956, by integrating the  Malayalam-speaking  states
         of Travancore and Cochin and  the  British  province  of  Malabar.
         Kerala’s  coastal  area  and  its   somewhat   isolated   location
         contributed to the  State’s  very  specific  climatic,  religious,
         socio-political and economic characteristics. Its location allowed
         Kerala since very early to maintain contact with foreign cultures,
         and kept it little affected by the many wars that  took  place  in
         India (Pillai, 1994). Kerala’s contact with  foreign  cultures  in
         the past is still reflected in its  unique  pattern  of  religious
         affiliations, the most heterogeneous in  India  with  57%  Hindus,
         21.5% Christians, 21% Muslims and the  remaining  0.5%  Buddhists,
         animists and others (Pillai, 1994). Kerala  combines  this  unique
         social structure in one of the most densely populated  regions  in
         the world.
         Kerala's experience  challenges  conventional  business  arguments
         that for poor regions to progress they must  first  have  economic
         growth. Kerala has taken a different path. Rather than waiting  to
         increase the  State's  wealth,  popular  movements  and  left-wing
         governments have redistributed a significant level of the existing
         wealth. As a result the State has  achieved  a  broad-based  basic
         living standard


      2. Kerala's unemployment runs about 25%. A quarter of the  State  GDP
         actually comes from remittances of Keralans working abroad.  While
         this testifies to the high education levels achieved it also makes
         Kerala quite vulnerable to external events.  As  in  much  of  the
         developing   world,   corporate   practices   have   savaged   the
         environment.  Industrial  fishing  methods  have  destroyed   fish
         stocks. Kerala has experienced major deforestation -  leading  the
         State to nationalise much of what remains. Villages have sued Coca
         Cola for destroying their water table  through  a  bottling  plant
         that extracts 1.5 million litres a  day.  Green  revolution  crops
         have drastically reduced biodiversity  in  coconut,  bananas,  and
         other plants leaving  farmers  highly  vulnerable  to  changes  in
         climate and pest conditions. Eighty-five percent  of  the  State's
         cultivatable land focuses on rice and just ten cash crops. It  has
         a population of around 32 million.


      3. According to the census of 1991, the rate of literacy in Kerala is
         94.59%. This literacy  rate  is  more  than  double  that  of  the
         country. This is attributed to the fact that  throughout  much  of
         the 20th century, Kerala’s people organised to  bring  about  near
         first world levels of literacy, life expectancy, birth  rates  and
         infant mortality, an effective public food distribution system,  a
         land reform that  undercut  the  exploitation  of  the  privileged
         castes, and an agricultural labourers’ act  that  codified  wages,
         working conditions, and benefits.

      4. The Kerala Model therefore means that across the State  one  finds
         an educated population that has experienced major  social  reforms
         in recent times.


  D.  POLITICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURES


      1. India had a 3-tier system of government with the centre being the
         national government, the State and the Village Assembly at the
         micro level. Other intermediary government levels (District and
         Block) involved in development planning processes have since been
         introduced.


      2. Previously, government structures tended to consolidate power and
         authority at the centre, however recent constitutional amendments
         in India have decentralised power and authority to the grassroots,
         especially political power. Sectoral committees at village level
         have been created to cater for general administration, education,
         health and social welfare, construction and development, and those
         receive their mandates from the Wards (the lowest but most
         important units of development planning in the villages).

      3. The main aim of devolution of the planning process was explained
         as attempting to reduce bureaucracy and to allow people to take
         responsibility for development. Nevertheless, villages are still
         dependent on the higher levels of government for financial
         support. The national government provides a development framework
         and guidelines, and is generally responsible for ensuring that
         development happens and that the needs of the people are met.
         Finances are therefore mobilised at the centre and allocated down
         to the state, districts, and eventually to the blocks.

      4. Decentralisation aims to strengthen and promote democracy to
         enable local participation in development processes as well as
         providing transparent, accountable and responsive governance. Thus
         the salient features of the 73rd Amendment included the following:
            • To provide a 3-tier system of Panchayat Raj;
            • To hold Panchayat elections regularly every 5 years;
            •  To  provide  reservation  of  seats  for  Scheduled  Castes,
              Scheduled Tribes and  women  (not  less  than  33%  of  total
              seats);
            •  To  appoint  State  Finance  Commissions  (SFCs)   to   make
              recommendations  regarding  the  financial  powers   of   the
              Panchayats, and
            • To constitute District Planning Committees to  prepare  draft
              development plans for districts.


  5.  The new decentralised governance model is  structured  to  provide  an
         enabling environment for ordinary people  to  participate  in  the
         planning processes, especially the  disadvantaged  groups  of  the
         Indian society living in rural areas.  Schedules 73  and  74  made
         allowance for what is known as the Reservation Clause. The  states
         (provinces) have gone a long way in  decentralisation  though  the
         Reservation Clause – reports received suggested a  deep  level  of
         mobilisation (politically and socially).  This clause provides for
         inclusion and representation of women  and  lower  castes  in  the
         political  structures.   The  representation  is  aimed  at  being
         proportional to the percentage population  of  Panchayats  at  all
         levels.  In terms of the Reservation Clause, 30% of the seats  and
         positions should be reserved for women and 10% for Other  Backward
         Castes (OBC)


  E.  STRUCTURE OF PANCHAYATS


      The Panchayat is an India political system that groups  five  villages
      in a quincunx (four peripheral villages around a  central  one).  Each
      had appointed tasks  and  responsibilities,  such  as  cart-making  or
      basket-weaving. The  central  village,  usually  the  largest  of  the
      Panchayat, traditionally handled food storage and meeting  places  for
      the officials, as well as their residence.
      1.    Village Panchayat - A Village Panchayat consists of between 1000
           – 5000 voters and 10 – 20 members serving 10 to 20 wards. Voters
           in the Village Panchayat elect one member per  ward  to  form  a
           Village Panchayat Committee. This Committee is led by an elected
           Sarpanch  or  Village  Head.  In  addition  to  this  committee,
           residents of each village form committees  to  deal  with  local
           issues – these committees are coordinated by a Village Assembly.
           The Village Assembly is the lowest form of local government.


      2.    Block Panchayat – A Block Panchayat  is  composed  of  10  –  25
           Village Panchayats. Each Village Panchayat elects one member  to
           represent  it  on  the  Block  Panchayat  Committee.  The  Block
           Panchayat Committee is headed by  a  president  elected  by  the
           committee members.

      3.    District Panchayat – A District Panchayat  consists  of  10  –25
           Block Panchayat. Each  Block  Panchayat  elects  one  member  to
           represent it on the District Panchayat Committee. This committee
           is headed by a CEO, who must be an appointed government official
           (rather that an elected politician).

      4.    Gram Swaraj - Provides for village self-rule that  is  expressed
           through the Village Panchayat. The political  representation  at
           the Village Panchayat level is one way in which communities  can
           express their development needs.

      In addition to the general functions prescribed by  the  Constitution,
      the Village Panchayat also has the power to raise its own  revenue  by
      imposing local taxes, conduct social audit of programmes  and  schemes
      implemented  in  the  village,  review,  monitor  and  evaluate  local
      development plans and ensure that regular  Village  Assembly  meetings
      are held.
  F.  VILLAGE ASSEMBLY (GRAM SABHA)

      1.    At the village level, the concept  of  village  self-rule  (Gram
          Swaraj)  is  expressed  through  the  “Gram  Sabha”  or   Village
          Assembly. Each village has a Village Assembly which  is  composed
          of  7  standing  committees,  namely   for   Education,   Health,
          Agriculture, Public Property, Infrastructure, Security and Social
          Justice. The specific roles and  functions  of  these  committees
          include:

               • Ownership of minor forest produce;
               • Approval of development plans;
               • Selection of beneficiaries under various programmes;
               • Consultation on land acquisition;
               • Management of minor water bodies;
               • Control of mineral leases;
               • Regulation/control of sale of intoxicants;
               • Prevent alienation of land and restore unlawfully alienated
                 land;
               • Management of village markets;
               •  Control  institutions  and  functionaries  in  all  social
                 sectors.

      2.    Each committee may have up  to  12  members  and  must  elect  a
          president. The presidents of  these  seven  committees  plus  the
          Village Sarpanch form the Village Development  Committee  of  the
          Village Assembly. This committee is responsible for  coordinating
          development plans and priorities at village  level.  The  Village
          Panchayat Committee in turn,  consolidates  the  plans  from  the
          various villages under its jurisdiction, in the form of an annual
          development plan.
      3.     The  Panchayats  substantially  remain  only  as   implementing
          agencies and suppliers of inputs of government-conceived schemes.
          Resources such as budgets  and  staff  largely  remain  with  the
          government, and funds are provided to Panchayats tied to specific
          schemes.


  G.  THE PLANNING PROCESS


      1.    Village Panchayat Level
           Each village elects a Village Assembly to facilitate the village
           level planning process. The Village Assembly (Gram Swaraj) is  a
           statutory body that can sue and be sued.  The  Village  Assembly
           prepares  plans  at  the  village  level  through  its  7   sub-
           committees. The Assembly meets every month with a quorum  of  at
           least one third being women. Decisions are unanimously  reached.
           The planning process has the following essential features:


              • Planning at the village  level  starts  with  ward  meetings
                (usually attended  exclusively  by  male  household  heads).
                During these meetings issues are raised and priorities set;
              • Those priorities are then submitted to the Village  Assembly
                for adjudication;
              •  Sub-committees  of  the  Village  Assembly   consider   the
                priorities and submit ideas for  solutions  to  the  Village
                Development committee;
              • The Village Development  Committee  sends  its  consolidated
                plans/priorities to the Village Panchayat.;
              • The Village Panchayat assesses priorities, discusses options
                and  develops  an  integrated  annual  plan  for  the  whole
                Panchayat;
              • The approved plan of  the  Panchayat  with  budget  is  then
                forwarded to the Block Panchayat and then to the District.

           The Block Panchayat cannot alter  the  plans  submitted  by  the
           Village Panchayat. The Block only exercises  a  monitoring  role
           over the  Village  Panchayat.  The  Village  Assembly  sometimes
           receives direct projects or programmes from the Block  Panchayat
           for approval  and  implementation.  In  such  cases  it  is  the
           responsibility of the Block Panchayat to ensure that  funds  are
           made available for the execution of the projects or programmes.

      2.    Block Panchayat Level
           The Block Panchayat receives plans forwarded by the Village
           Panchayats under its jurisdiction. It then does an assessment on
           all and consolidates them into an integrated annual plan for the
           Block. Projects and Programmes that are beyond the jurisdiction
           of the Block are forwarded to the district for approval. It is
           the duty of the Block Panchayat to ensure that funds are made
           available for the execution of the projects and programmes
           approved by the Village Assemblies.

      3.    District Panchayat Level
           At the district level, the  District  Planning  Committee  (DPC)
           embodies all  the  plans  from  the  Block  Panchayats  into  an
           integrated  annual  plan  for  the  district.  These  plans  are
           prepared based on inputs from the Village Panchayats  and  Block
           Panchayats. The approved plans  including  departmental  budgets
           are sent to the State Planning Commission (SPC) for approval.

      4.    State Government Level
           At the State Government  level,  district  plans  are  received,
           discussed and voted  upon  by  the  State  Planning  Commission.
           However, 30% of the State funds by-pass the District and  Blocks
           and go directly to the various Village  Assemblies  for  project
           implementation.


      5.    National Government Level
           At the National Government level there is a National Planning
           Commission (NPC), which is responsible for overall national
           planning functions. It receives plans and proposals from all
           State Governments, and considers them for funding.

   H. DECENTRALISATION AND LOCAL GOVERNANCE


      1. The democratic decentralisation process  in  Kerala  has  received
         national and international attention. The political will shown  by
         the successive governments have been helpful in  transforming  the
         local bodies into institutions of local self-governance. This  has
         contributed to enhancing the  capacity  of  local  governments  to
         broaden and deepen the democratic process at the local level.


      2. The core objective of decentralisation was to:
                     • to promote local economic development  by  increasing
                       production and productivity of agriculture
                     • move towards greater social justice and reduction  in
                       gender disparities
                     • improve governance i.r.o responsiveness, transparency
                       and management
                     • achieve improved efficiency of resources
      3. Some of the challenges that  decentralised  governance  in  Kerala
         faces included:
                   • the values generated  have  not  been  translated  into
                     local governance and they are not yet institutionalised
                   • local governments have not internalised the concept  of
                     self-governance
                   • lack of capacity to  develop  comprehensive  plans  and
                     strategies for sustainable local economic development
                   • redeployment of staff to local  governments  are  still
                     incomplete and local governments do not have sufficient
                     staff  to   carry   out   the   mandatory   development
                     responsibilities


      4. In Kerala,  a  third  of  the  plan  fund  is  devolved  to  local
         governments for local level planning and separate  guidelines  are
         issued by the government for the utilisation of the funds in  core
         sectors. Local government should earmark at least 30  percent  for
         the productive sector.


      5. The State  Government  has  taken  initiative  in  promoting  best
         performance local governments through awards, certificates,  prize
         money and additional plan assistance. These awards  are  given  to
         three tier local governments at  both  state  level  and  district
         level.

  I.  KUDUMBASHREE MODEL (STATE POVERTY ERADICATION MISSION)

      1.    The State Poverty Eradication Mission was launched in Kerala  in
         1998 with the  explicit  mission  to  eradicate  absolute  poverty
         within  a  period  of  ten  years.   Kudumbashree,   which   means
         “prosperity for the family”, also works in  partnership  with  The
         National Bank for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  (NABARD),
         commercial banks and international agencies such as UNICEF.


      1. Kudumbashree fosters community organisation through the  formation
         of Neighbourhood Groups (NHGs), each which consists of between 15-
         20 women from families that  fall  below  the  poverty  line.  The
         number of NHGs formed through the Kudumbashree  totals  more  than
         7800 in the urban areas, while in the rural areas 105  604  groups
         has been formed, covering just fewer than 2 million families.


      3.    Each of these  NHGs  makes  use  of  five  volunteer  organisers
         consisting   of   a   Community   Health   Volunteer,    Community
         Infrastructure Volunteer, Income Generation  Volunteer,  Secretary
         and President. NHGs form  a  federation  at  the  level  of  local
         government wards, and these are in turn organised  into  Community
         Development Societies (CDS). CDSs are registered  with  the  State
         government as non-profit organisations.


      4.    NHGs act as Thrift and Credit Societies  (T&CSs)  in  which  the
         members each contribute small amounts weekly as  savings.  Members
         are free to bring whatever amount they have as savings  and  there
         is no compulsion on their contribution. Before  the  formation  of
         thrift societies, the only access for credit to the poor women  in
         the State was  the  local  moneylenders,  who  lend  money  at  an
         exorbitant rate of interest. At the same time, the formal  banking
         system and its services were  almost  inaccessible  to  the  poor.
         Thrift societies pave the way for  women  to  build  up  a  credit
         record (albeit informal), because they not  only  save,  but  also
         lend to each other from the communal savings.


      5.    In its early stages, the money saved by the  thrift  society  is
         used mainly for daily necessities such as food or  fuel;  however,
         it is the first step towards using the savings to start up income-
         generating  projects.  These  informal  NHG  banks  are   run   on
         transparent principles agreed on by the group, and members of  the
         group receive training from NABARD on accounting practices.


      6.    One of Kudumbashree’s core strategies is directly linking  self-
         help  groups  with  financial  resources,   training   and   other
         resources. At the more advanced stage of  the  NHG’s  development,
         the money saved by the women is deposited in a nearby  bank  in  a
         joint account operated jointly by the President and  Secretary  of
         the NHG. Once a Neighbourhood Group has participated in their  own
         small savings scheme for at least six months, they  are  assessed.
         Upon positive assessment, they are eligible for a government grant
         of 25 000 rupees. The Group uses this money  to  secure  materials
         for  income-generating  projects  that  range   from   traditional
         handloom  weaving  to  wood  carving  to  computer  assembly   and
         maintenance.


  J.  POVERTY REDUCTION


      1. Kerala has considerable achievements  in  the  coverage  of  basic
         minimum services. However,  the  poorest  of  the  poor  have  not
         benefited significantly from the anti-poverty programmes.
      2. As an initial step the  destitute  have  to  be  identified  using
         criteria developed by Kudumbashree.  All  families  qualifying  at
         least seven out of the following nine criteria may  be  listed  as
         destitute families:
                     • Kutcha house.
                     • No access to safe drinking water.
                     • No access to sanitary latrines.
                     • Illiterate adult in the family.
                     • Family having not more than one earning member.
                     • Family getting barely two meals a day or less.
                     • Presence of children below the age  of  five  in  the
                       family.
                     • Alcoholic or drug addict in the family.
                     • Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe family.


      3. In addition to  the  above,  the  short  listed  families  may  be
         verified with reference to  the  following  factors  at  the  next
         stage. All the short listed families having at least  one  of  the
         criteria mentioned below would qualify to be  called  a  destitute
         family:


                     •  Having  no  landed  property  to  create  their  own
                       dwelling place.
                     • Spending nighttime in public places or streets.
                     • Unwed mothers,  single  parents  or  those  separated
                       women living in distress.
                     • Young widows who are economically poor or  women  who
                       have passed the age of marriage and remain unmarried.


                     •  Those  subject  to  severe,  chronic  and  incurable
                       diseases or physically and mentally challenged.
                     • No healthy member below the age of sixty to win bread
                       for the family.
                     • Beggars who resort to beggary as a vocation.
                     • Women subject to atrocities.


      4. Once the list of destitute families has been drawn up by the  NHGs
         they would visit individual families to  draw  a  profile  of  the
         family. The list of identified families is placed before the Grama
         Sabha for approval.


      5. Once the list is finalised the trained  volunteers  interact  with
         these families and  prepare  family-based  micro-plans  to  assist
         families until they are no longer destitute and a tracking  system
         is put in place to monitor progress.



  K.  OBSERVATIONS


      1. Municipalities in Kerala enjoyed extensive competence over a
         number of matters that are in South Africa the prime competence of
         provinces and/or the national government. This was particularly
         applicable with respect to social services such as housing and
         welfare. Kerala’s political leadership expressly subscribed to the
         principle of subsidiarity in structuring its decentralisation
         programme.


      2. The Kerala system also has three categories (city, urban and
         village), but there is no typology within each category. Moreover,
         the rural system is three-tiered rather than two-tiered (as in
         South Africa). The system appears to work.

      3. In Kerala the state had devolved not only its powers and budget,
         but also its staff. This resulted in capacity being present in
         even the poorest and weakest municipalities.


      4. The manner in which Community Based Organisations (CBOs) are
         integrated into the governance system is striking. Indeed, it is
         sometimes almost a misnomer that they are termed CBOs because they
         are seemingly local welfare organs of state rather than autonomous
         organs of civil society. Be that as it may, the system clearly
         delivers.

      5. The relationship between the state (province) and municipalities
         seems healthy in as much as the state cannot interfere
         unilaterally in municipalities as long as the latter execute its
         function properly.  It is praiseworthy that the state have to
         consult the Municipal Ombudsman before it can interfere.

      6. As far as planning is concerned, it is admirable that India
         follows the approach from bottom up – starting at the local
         village level. It is noteworthy that they plan in five year
         cycles.

      7. The emphasis on woman participation and upliftment was
         outstanding.  Because of the history of India, there is a
         concentrated effort to mainstream women and women issues.  One
         third of positions on Panchayats (councils) are reserved for
         women.

      8. Weekly meetings with a structured agenda are held and all money
         matters are dealt with at these meetings. An interesting project
         of their municipalities was to provide for computer literacy for
         one member per family to enable all families to derive benefit
         from it. As far as officials are concerned the politicians
         expressed that the two main concerns were corruption and lack of
         execution of the policies of the council. One overall impression
         is the thrust for decentralization in governance of India.

      9. The success in Kerala lay in the high levels of literacy, long
         history of social and political mobilisation and a thorough land
         reform programme


  L.  RECOMMENDATIONS


  The Committee would like to urge the Minister and Department to ensure the
  following:

      1. That  municipalities  should  have  more  input  on  public  works
         buildings and programs of government.

      2. That municipalities  should  be  encouraged  to  strengthen  their
         consultation process  and  reporting  back  to  communities  on  a
         regular basis and encourage participation by communities on issues
         of basic services especially housing and sanitation.

      3. That municipalities reinforce the need for concentrated efforts to
         encourage the upliftment and support for  effective  participation
         of women in matters that affect them. There was a  need  to  focus
         more sharply on women in the fight against poverty.

      4. That municipalities investigate  the  utility  for  improving  our
         system of participation as per the Kerala model.  Powers  of  ward
         committees is a key issue.

      5. That municipalities focus attention on the poor  and  marginalised
         groups as demonstrated  by  the  10%  quota  on  projects  towards
         scheduled tribes.

      6. That municipalities examine innovative ways in which  capacity  at
         local level can be improved  using  provincial  staff  (mentoring,
         secondment, deployment etc).

      7. That delivery partnerships between institutions of  civil  society
         and government are strengthened.

      8. That the creation of  a  relationship  and  partnership  with  the
         Department of Local Self  Government  in  Kerala  and  the  Kerala
         Institute of  Local  Administration  in  India  because  of  their
         particular experience be explored.


Report to be considered.


                            TUESDAY, 6 MARCH 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 6 March 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section 77
         Bill:


         (a)     Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
              77).


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Social Development

   (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security  Agency  for
         2007 to 2010 [RP 16-2007].


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

   (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         President’s Fund for 2004-2005 [RP 25-2006].


   (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         President’s Fund for 2005-2006 [RP 252-2006].


National Assembly

The Speaker

     a) The President of the Republic submitted the following letter  dated
        16 February 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly  informing
        Members of the Assembly of the  employment  of  the  South  African
        National Defence Force in The Kingdom of Lesotho:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH  AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE  FORCE  IN  THE
        KINGDOM OF LESOTHO, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE  INTERNATIONAL
        OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE KINGDOM  OF
        LESOTHO


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force  (SANDF)
        personnel  to  the  Kingdom  of  Lesotho,  in  fulfilment  of   the
        international obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the Kingdom of Lesotho, in support of the general  elections  which
        will take place on 17 February 2007.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of twenty (20)  SANDF  members  are  employed  as  from  15
        January  to  20  February  2007  to  assist  in  distribution   and
        collection  of  electoral  material  and  transportation  of  party
        representative.  The  Independent  Electoral  Commission  (IEC)  of
        Lesotho will be responsible for cost of the employment.  The  total
        estimated cost to be borne by the IEC of Lesotho for the deployment
        is R 2, 233, 900.00.


        I will communicate this report  to  the  members  of  the  National
        Council of Provinces and the  Chairperson  of  the  Joint  Standing
        Committee on Defence, and  wish  to  request  that  you  bring  the
        contents hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        signed

        T M MBEKI



