---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 October 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-10-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____


The House met at 14:03.
The Acting Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

 ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G R MORGAN: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

 That the House –


    1) notes that the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has
       announced that the wild abalone fishery will be closed as from 1
       November 2007;


   2) debates the decision of the Minister;

   3) notes the social relief measures that he intends instituting; and


   4) notes the plan by government to curb the poaching of abalone.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Madam Acting Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend
moving the following motion on the next sitting day:

 That this House debates the use, value and appropriateness of restricted
 access for residential areas and communities.

                      CONGRATULATIONS TO BAFANA BAFANA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without
notice:

 That the House congratulates the national soccer team, “Bafana Bafana”, on
 winning the Cosafa Cup Final.

Agreed to.

             SYMPATHY TO THE BEREAVED FAMILY OF ABDURAGMAN AMLAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without notice:

 That the House-


    1) notes that Abduragman Amlay, 21 years of age, was hijacked from a
       garage and murdered on 23 October 2007 in the Western Cape;


    2) further notes that one suspect has been caught and three remain at
       large;

    3) conveys its deepest sympathy to the bereaved family and friends of
       this young victim of crime; and

    4) further conveys the need for us to address the crime situation in
       South Africa that claims victims every minute.

Agreed to.

                    CONGRATULATIONS TO CITY OF CAPE TOWN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without notice:

 That the House –


    1) notes that Cape Town was ranked the best city out of the country’s
       283 municipalities according to the Municipal Productivity Index
       launched by Municipal IQ on Wednesday, 17 October 2007;


    2) further notes that it won this award because of the way in which the
       municipality dealt with poverty, the level of access to basic
       services, its economic activity and infrastructure and because its
       citizens are well qualified;

    3) recalls that in July this year Cape Town was ranked by USA’s Travel
       and Leisure magazine as the number one city in Africa and the Middle
       East and claimed tenth spot in the “best city in the world”
       category; and

    4) congratulates both the city administration and the residents of Cape
       Town for making it a world class city and a top tourist destination.

Agreed to.

                               SPECIAL SITTING

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move without
notice:

 That notwithstanding the hours of sitting of the House as provided for in
 Rule 23(2), the House on Tuesday, 30 October 2007, sits at 12:00 in order
 to pay tribute to the Springbok Rugby Team.

Agreed to.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order! I am a little disappointed. It is very easy for
me to call an ordinary member to order, but when the leaders are doing it,
it becomes very difficult. It is the Chief Whip and the Deputy Chief Whip.

Deputy Chief Whip of the DA, I have just agreed that we should have lunch
with the Springboks, but if you go on like this, I think I might have to
withdraw that.

                   EXTENSION OF THE DEADLINE FOR REPORTING

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move:


 That the House extends the deadlines for reporting by the Ad Hoc Committee
 on Matters Relating to Ex-Mineworkers Union from 31 October 2007 to 22
 November 2007.

          TAXPAYERS’ MONEY MISUSED ON ILLEGAL INVESTIGATIONS BY DA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER (ANC): Madam Acting Speaker, the people of South
Africa laid down their lives to live in peace and in a secure environment.
Our laws ensure our right to privacy. The DA in the City of Cape Town has
broken the law by using taxpayers’ money to spy on their political
opponents. [Interjections.]

In their desperate attempt to hold on to power at all cost, they have hired
private investigators to monitor and tap private conversations of the
opponents and coalition partners. This is reminiscent of the Watergate
scandal. Mayor Helen Zille has misused council funds to pay for an illegal
investigation that was initiated by the DA for narrow party-political
interests.

It is unacceptable that a council could engage in espionage against its own
councillors. It is an abuse of power and a knife held on the very throat of
democracy. Mayor Helen Zille and Speaker of the council, Dirk Smit who
colluded with her, must resign. [Applause.]

                       VEHICLE CLEARANCE CERTIFICATES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, in reply to a question, it has
emerged ... [Interjections.] Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The ACTING SPEAKER: I am protecting you from your own party.

Mr E W TRENT: I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Laughter.] Can I come to the
Springboks’ lunch now?

The ACTING SPEAKER: We may have to consider that, now that someone is no
longer coming. [Laughter.]

Mr E W TRENT (DA): Madam Speaker, in reply to a parliamentary question, it
has emerged that the SA Police Service does not keep data on corruption in
relation to the issuing of vehicle clearance certificates. No central
database is available relating to investigations into irregularities. There
is no collective data available on the number and nature of civil actions
taken against our Police Service for issuing vehicle clearance certificates
for stolen vehicles.

There appears to be very little co-ordination and no records are kept about
corruption, and investigations into it are not carried out. If the Police
Service is serious about the theft and hijacking of vehicles, then surely,
proper systems should be in place to ensure that all loopholes are closed?
Loopholes are an incentive for people to steal vehicles. As long as there
are few measures to prevent, track and investigate all incidents of
corruption in the system, stolen vehicles will continue to be sold to the
unsuspecting public.

Last year, 86 298 vehicles and motorcycles were reported stolen. In
addition, how can a state be held liable for fraudulent certificates if
there are no systems in place to determine the deliberate and intentional
issuing of fraudulent certificates? [Time expired.]

            SOUTH AFRICAN CITIZENS LIVE IN FEAR OF VIOLENT CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Speaker, it is an indisputable fact that South African
citizens live for the most part in fear of violent crime and in the
knowledge that their safety and security are in peril, each and every day
of their lives. The IFP has repeatedly highlighted this national crisis and
continues to lament various national and international research surveys
which show that South Africa is one of the most violent and dangerous
societies in the world.
The damage done to our national economy as a result of all manner of
criminal behaviour, which is now obviously systemic and endemic throughout
our society, is incalculable. The human suffering is a tragedy of immense
proportions.

Therefore, the IFP salutes the bravery, hard work and sacrifice of the
majority of law-enforcement personnel and encourage increased remuneration
for them. We urge government to prioritise increasing professionalism and
high levels of training throughout the criminal justice system. We urge
citizens to be proactive in supporting community police forums and other
self-help community safety initiatives; to immediately and factually report
corruption and instances of unprofessional behaviour of police officers and
officials of the Department of Correctional Services and Justice and
Constitutional Development; to propose that the funds currently allocated
to the civilian secretariat designed to help the police in the nine
provinces be redirected to finance, recruit and train more police
personnel, and build and equip more police stations, and to actively
campaign against the politicisation of the SAPS by making appointment of
staff to key positions, individuals ... [Time expired.] I thank you.

            EUROPE HAS DUTY-FREE ACCESS TO SOUTH AFRICAN MARKETS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof B TUROK (ANC): Madam Speaker, I have a bottle of cucumbers here, which
has nothing to do with the Springbok lunch, but a great deal to do with
South African trade. This bottle comes from Poland. It is sold for R10 in
South African shops. The same bottle of South African cucumbers is sold for
R21. Why is this so? The answer is that Europe has duty-free access to
South African markets, but South Africans who want to export to Europe have
to pay a high duty.

In addition to that, these farmers are clearly subsidised by the European
Union and so they can penetrate our markets at this rate. I think it is a
disgrace. Fortunately, the Department of Trade and Industry, particularly
the Deputy Minister, Rob Davies, has been most proactive in fighting for a
better deal between South Africa and Europe. However, I will ask that this
House support the Ministry to ensure that this kind of thing does not
undermine our agricultural sector because there are almost 27 000 people
working in the industry, half of whom are permanent workers. The result of
this kind of thing will be huge job losses, which we cannot afford. I thank
you. [Applause.] The cucumbers are available for you, Madam.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Thank you. [Laughter.] I was going to ask for them
because every time an hon member brings any food, it ends up coming this
way. [Laughter.]

       IEC CONFERENCE ON STATE OF ELECTORAL DEMOCRACY IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G T MADIKIZA (UDM): Speaker, the Independent Electoral Commission, IEC,
in the celebration of its 10th anniversary, hosted a conference on the
state of electoral democracy in South Africa. Over 20 political parties as
well as representatives from business, labour, academics and civil society
participated. The progress of our democracy since 1994 was noted. However,
the participants also acknowledged that there are many challenges facing
our democracy. One of the challenges was the funding of political parties.

There was a unanimous agreement by all those present that our democracy
could be easily mortgaged if we don’t ensure that there are rules for the
funding of political parties, especially from corporate donors. Public
funding must be improved to promote democracy. The UDM is therefore happy
to inform the nation that all these challenges will be addressed when the
political parties meet to compile their own reports, concretise it and take
the matter forward with the relevant authorities. I thank you. [Applause.]

            UNTOWARD PRESSURE EXERTED BY EXECUTIVE ON LEGISLATURE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (FF Plus): Speaker, vroeër die week het ’n vergadering
plaasgevind van komitee-voorsitters saam met die voormalige hoofsweep, mnr
Max Sisulu. Tydens die vergadering is kritiek uitgespreek teen die
onbehoorlike druk wat deur die uitvoerende gesag op die wetgewende gesag
uitgevoer word. Daar is gesê dat die wetgewende gesag genegeer word;
onderskat word; en geminag word.

Vandag, in hierdie Vergadering, is daar ’n besluit deur geforseer waar
besluit is dat die Kinderwet wat vandag bespreek sou word nie meer bespreek
en aanvaar gaan word nie. Is dit toevallig dat hierdie besluit deurgevoer
word skaars twee dae nadat die wetgewende gesag, in die vorm van die
Maatskaplike Ontwikkelingkomitee, sy rug styf gemaak het en nie ’n wet
aanvaar het in die vorm wat die uitvoerende gesag op hom afgedwing het nie?
Ons sal graag ’n antwoord in hierdie verband van die betrokke Minister wil
kry en ons sal wil weet van hierdie Vergadering: hoe gaan ons verseker dat
die wetgewende gesag in Suid-Afrika weer ernstig opgeneem word tot voordeel
van die mense van die land? Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES (FF Plus): Deputy Speaker, earlier this week there was a
meeting of the committee chairpersons and the former chief whip, Mr Max
Sisulu. During this meeting the undue pressure put on the legislative
authority by the executive authority was criticised. It was said that the
legislative authority is disregarded, underestimated and undermined.

Today, in this Assembly, a decision was forced down:  the Children’s Bill
that was to be discussed today would no longer be discussed nor accepted.
Is it coincidental that this decision was made only two days after the
legislative authority – in the form of the Social Development Committee –
stiffened its resolve not to accept a law in the form that the executive
authority had forced on it? We would like to get an answer from the
relevant Minister on this matter, and we want to know from this Assembly:
How will we ensure that the legislative authority in South Africa is taken
seriously again in order to serve the people of this country? I thank you.]


                MOBILE UNIT FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT IN LIMPOPO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Manana C NKUNA (ANC): Muchaviseki Museketeri wa Xipikara, vutomi byi
antswela tolo endhawini ya Mukwakwaila eLimpopo. Xivangelo ku ri leswaku ku
vekeriwile muchini wo pfuna vaaka-tiko hi ku endla swikombelo swa midende
leyi aviwaka hi mfumo hi ku hambana-hambana ka yona. Loko swikombelo swi
endliwile, ndzavisiso wu thlela wu endliwa kwalaho siku rolero, kasi kahle
a va fanele ku yimela ndzavisiso lowu va nga si nghenisiwa emuchinini lowu.
Vaaka-tiko va Mukwakwaila a va ha fambi tendzo to ya eGiyani, eKgapane
kumbe eTzaneen ku ya tsarisa. Hinkwaswo swi endliwa swilaveko leswi wi
endliwa ko kwalaho.

Hi lava ku tlangela mfumo wa ANC, hi ku tirhisa Sassa, ku endla leswaku
vanhu va kota ku kuma swikombelo swa vona hi ku olova. Hi kombela nakambe
muaka-tiko un’wana na un’wana loyi a faneleke ku kuma midende leyi a ya
tsarisa kwale holweni ya Mukwakwaila laha a nag ta suka a swi tiva leswaku
wa denda kumbe e-e. Mundzhuku u ta antswela namunthla eka Mukwakwaila.
Inkomu, Museketeri wa Xipikara. (Translation of Xitsonga member’s statement
follows.)

[Ms C NKUNA (ANC): Hon Speaker, life is better than it was yesterday in the
Mokwakwaila area in Limpopo. The reason is that there is a machine that
helps the community to claim for different social grants provided by
government. Once the grant is applied for, an investigation is done and on
the very same day it gets processed and people do not have to wait for long
to get the claim processed. The people of Mokwakwaila do not need to take
long journeys to Giyani, Ga-Kgapane or Tzaneen to register. All that is
needed is done under one roof.

We commend the ANC-led government for Sassa that enables our people to get
access to their grants easily. We would like to ask each and every
community member who is eligible for these grants to register at the
Mokwakwaila community hall, where they will know if they qualify or not.
Tomorrow will be better than today at Mokwakwaila. Thank you.]

              THE SLOW PACE OF ECONOMIC GROWTH IN SOUTH AFRICA
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Acting Speaker, we the concerned and optimistic
South Africans are heading for a big disappointment in view of the fact
that our economy is not growing as fast as it should to enable us to meet
our goals such as unemployment reduction and poverty alleviation by 2014.
We were hoping that the economy would grow by 6% thereby enabling us to
create jobs and reduce poverty.

Unfortunately, only 5% growthwas realised. What contributions or assistance
can we South Africans make towards the realisation of our objectives? Where
did we go wrong? If we have to call an indaba in order to review our
economic policies, then so be it. I thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I just want to warn you that the Minister of
Finance has hijacked your cucumbers. I think it is a very serious matter.

The ACTING SPEAKER: If it is on the question of cucumbers, please take your
seat. I know where to find my cucumbers hereafter.

                          EVICTION OF FARM DWELLERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N T GODI (APC): Speaker, the APC adds its voice and strongly condemns
the heartless, inhuman and dehumanising eviction of farm dwellers. It is a
known fact that this dislocation has taken place on a massive scale since
1994 with some estimates putting the figures of dislocated people at no
less than a million.

In any normal country this should have been a major national crisis but, in
our case, this has not elicited any forceful and considered political
effort. The APC calls on government and the inter-political class in our
country to heed the plight of these helpless people and questions the
patriotism of the farmers who dislocate our people so heartlessly.

We wish to highlight the plight of a certain family in George on the farm
owned by a certain Watson. He ordered this family of 14 off the farm and
then ordered them to slaughter their cattle and pigs, threatening to burn
their house at night when they were asleep. This family subsequently went
to the police, who refused to help them. The APC condemns this unnecessary
harassment of these poor people by this heartless farmer.

We also condemn the indifference of the police who generally side with
farmers in the rural areas. We call on government to come up with
legislation that would give more protection to the destitute and vulnerable
farm dwellers. The APC’s last call is that the poor masses must unite
against this abuse that is designed to undermine the culture of human
rights and human dignity. Thank you.

                    STATUS OF DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Speaker, yesterday in this House in reply to my question,
the Minister of Home Affairs agreed that her department was a national
disaster. She agreed with my description of the Department of Home Affairs
as a national disgrace. One has to look at the situation down at the
refugee centre on Cape Town’s Foreshore, where hundreds of desperate, angry
and hungry people are treated in the most appalling manner to see that the
Minister is correct. Their dignity has been trampled upon and their human
rights are also being ignored.

However, so too do the citizens of our own country where millions of law-
abiding and tax-paying South Africans are often forced to confront chaos
and indifference in dirty and dysfunctional Home Affairs offices in an
attempt to secure an ID document, a passport and registry of birth or
death.

There are notable exceptions of well-functioning offices and polite,
efficient officials, but these are just that - exceptions. More often than
not, the documents they have applied for never reach them or they are
recklessly changed to somebody else. Yesterday was the first time the
Minister shared the Frankenstein views of her director-general, who has
admitted that there was disgrace in the Department of Home Affairs and
asked to be given five years to clean up the mess.

It will require more good attention to address the endemic corruption, poor
capacity, superior attitude and lack of IT assistance and other technology.
It starts with commitment and prioritised funding driven by hands - on
political leadership from the Minister. Yesterday, she had the courage to
admit that there was chaos in the Department of Home Affairs. If she now
shows the same courage to tackle the situation, she will have the complete
support from the DA and commendation from the grateful nation.

                   VISIT BY COMMITTEES TO POLLSMOOR PRISON

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D V BLOEM (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC is encouraged by the joint visit
of the Portfolio Committees on Correctional Services and Justice and
Constitutional Development to Pollsmoor Prison on Tuesday, 23 October 2007.

The growing confidence in the ANC in transforming our prisons into
correctional facilities was again demonstrated in the two committees during
this visit. The ANC also notes the immense improvement in the Pollsmoor
management. Now there is order, discipline and direction.

It further acknowledges the steps taken by the Minister and the national
Commissioner to strengthen the management of Pollsmoor following an outcry
from the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services with regard to the
management of Pollsmoor.

We wish Mr Mkhabela, the area commissioner of Pollsmoor, much more strength
in shaping Pollsmoor to be a better institution in order for the department
to implement its White Paper without any hindrance.

The ANC is heartened by the seriousness with which the department is
reaffirming our commitment to realise the injunctions of the Freedom
Charter. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

           SELLING SOUTH AFRICA AS A TOURIST DESTINATION OF CHOICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Speaker, much has been said about the
phenomenal growth of the tourism industry in South Africa as well as the
ever-increasing number of foreign visitors who arrive on our shores every
year.

This sector is now playing a much more important role and making a greater
contribution to our economy. The Springboks’ remarkable victory in the
Rugby World Cup and the resultant scenes of jubilation and celebrations
throughout our country will no doubt further enhance our reputation as a
destination of choice.

The brutality and lack of respect for life and property that is so evident
in our society will, however, nullify and undo all the good work that has
been done to market South Africa as a tourist destination. The callous
murder of internationally recognised musician Lucky Dube, for example, will
put the spotlight firmly on crime and the negative aspects of our country.
As long as crime is such a prominent feature of our society and people -
both foreigners and locals - do not feel safe in our country, we will never
reach our full potential with regard to tourism. This is a shame, as our
beautiful country has so much to offer. I thank you. [Time expired.]

                 SUSPENSION OF ABALONE FISHING BY EXECUTIVE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J L FUBBS (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC supports the full implementation
of the new fishing policy. In the context of the seasonal nature of the
fishing industry, we need to review regularly the impact of policies and
programmes on employment, income, beneficiation and BEE. However, all these
must take into account the strategic objectives of the Marine Living
Resources Act.

The decision by Cabinet to support the suspension of wild abalone
commercial fishing will ensure the survival of the species and will ensure
that our children will, in generations to come, know what abalone is.

In the early years, the catching of abalone was unregulated and landing
escalated to a high of nearly 3 000 tonnes in 1965, before declining
rapidly in 1970, when the first commercial quota within a total allowable
catch was introduced.

The ANC is conscious of the negative impact that the suspension will have
on the local fishing community, and we wish to commend government on
developing a social plan to mitigate the impact of the suspension. I thank
you.

         DROPOUT RATE AT UNIVERSITIES THE RESULT OF FUNDING PROBLEMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Madam Speaker, it is disingenuous of the government to
cry foul over affirmative action outcomes if it does not provide the
educational opportunities the prospective affirmative action employees need
to become employed.
Research has shown that 70% of students who drop out from universities,
most of them from previously disadvantaged groupings, do so because of
economic need. Yet our universities are paralysed to do anything about this
situation as they are still suffering the financial consequences of the
measures imposed on them, while at the same time having experienced a real
decrease of 3,1% in state subsidies of since 2004.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement is the most opportune occasion for
the government to show its commitment to its people by responding to the
problems which they highlight through their hardships, social protest and
through the media.

The students of the University of Johannesburg and elsewhere have spoken.
They might not have done so in the terms that we find acceptable, but it
does not make their message invalid.

We hope that the Minister of Finance Mr Trevor Manuel, himself an affected
student at some point, will remember his roots and address this situation
on Tuesday. Thank you.

                  CELEBRATION OF TRADITIONAL HEALING SYSTEM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N F MATHIBELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the World Health Organisation Africa
Region declared 31 August 1978 as African Traditional Medicine Day.

The day has never been celebrated in South Africa. However, it was
celebrated for the first time on 6 September 2007. The celebration was held
in Limpopo, Sekhukhune District, Elias Motswaledi Municipality, in
Tafelkop, in my constituency.

The ANC works tirelessly for the integration of the traditional healing
system into the public health system. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         CHALLENGES FACING THE SAPS
   INTERPLAY BETWEEN DEMOCRACY, EDUCATION, AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND ECONOMIC
                                   GROWTH

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Speaker, I just wanted to advise that we have
consulted a dictionary and the hon Turok has tried to confuse the House.
Those are gherkins pretending that they are cucumbers! It is quite a
different issue! [Laughter.] So he read the wrong tariff line, but we will
leave them for now. They were called cucumbers in the translation from
Polish into English. Do not worry about them, they are gherkins!
I would like to respond too because I think that the hon Velaphi Ndlovu and
the hon Eddie Trent are talking on the same issue, but differently. What
the hon Ndlovu raises is very important. What we need to confirm is that,
in budgetary terms, the police are reasonably well resourced. If you look
at the increase in personnel numbers over the last while, there has been a
very significant pick-up. What we need to ensure is that there is local
oversight and control so that the issues that the hon Trent raises do not
fall through the cracks. This is a matter of systems. I think there is
demonstrable proof of the fact that, where you have functioning community
police forums as the hon Ndlovu referred to, then for instance, the
disappearance of files between a police precinct and the court is
significantly minimised. The time spent on the beat, the time spent at work
- all of those kinds of indicators - improved significantly. That is what
we must hold out for. A democracy wants involved citizenry, and I think
instances like the community police forums offer those kinds of
opportunities. I would like to plead for greater public involvement in that
direction.

In respect of the issues on growth, it is not what you are doing wrong. The
6% target is something that we have raised. Part of what we need to
understand is that, as a country, we do not have the wherewithal. We have a
very poor skills endowment. We do not have sufficient people who have
adequate knowledge of maths and science to make a smooth transition from
school into a highly productive work environment. It also impacts on the
number of people who are ready for training, especially in the engineering
disciplines, be it at technikons, in the FET sector and certainly at
universities. These issues then impact on the number of jobs we can create.


Part of our endowment is also this need to spend. So we spend next year’s
income, and if we can spend the following year’s income as well, then we
are very happy. Economies need savings in order to grow and that, I think,
would be amongst the two greatest challenges that continue to confront us.
It would not be a dissimilar position in other parts of the world.

I am not quite sure what the hon member was raising because “zama zama”
[try] this way, that way, from affirmative action to the students at the
University of Johannesburg - I think it is a “zama zama” kind of statement.

Let me say that I was never a disaffected student; I went to work after
school. However, I am an affirmative action appointee. So I don’t know what
he is saying about me and how useless I am because I am an affirmative
action appointee. Nevertheless, we will leave that debate.

The key issue is that we should invite the hon member to read the
Constitution, the Bill of Rights and the requirements of democracy in this
country along with the Employment Equity Act and then take a fresh approach
to what needs to happen in this country. The legislation is clearly there
and we have to ensure that we continue to train people for absorption into
the economy. Thank you.

 CHALLENGES FACING, AND SUCCESSES ACHIEVED BY THE DEPARTMENT AND MINISTRY OF
                                HOME AFFAIRS

                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMISEBENZI YOMPHAKATHI: Phini likaSomlomo, ngithanda
ukuphendula nje umbuzo obuzwe umfowethu we-DA mayelana noMnyango
Wezasekhaya. Ngiyathokoza nokho-ke ukusho ukuthi uNgqongqoshe nomqondisi
woMnyango bayavuma ukuthi inkinga ikhona, njengoba naye eshilo. Bazozama
futhi ngendlela abangenza ngayo ukuthi bazixazulule lezo zinkinga
abazibonayo eMnyangweni, ukuze phela abantu bakwazi ukuthola izimfanelo
zabo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Speaker, I would like to reply to the
question asked by the hon member from the DA concerning the Department of
Home Affairs. I am indeed glad to say that the Minister and the director-
general accept that a problem exists, as she indicated earlier on. They are
also going to try in the best possible way to resolve those problems which
they come across in the department so that people are able to receive what
is due to them.]

I think it is also important for us as hon members to appreciate that, when
the Minister realised that there were challenges, she, on her own, working
with her colleagues - the Minister of Finance and the Minister for the
Public Service and Administration - set up a task team to investigate what
the challenges actually are that need to be addressed within the Department
of Home Affairs. Following this, they agreed collectively on the way
forward in order to address those challenges.

I think our approach should be to support the department and the Ministry
in the work that they are doing, because, clearly, from the outcomes of
their own investigation, there is a particular course of action that they
have to take and have taken. I am sure we have read in the newspapers about
some of the officials who have been suspended as a result of the alleged
corruption. This is an indication that there is commitment and a political
will to deal with the problems that are there. I really think that what we
can do is to give as much support as possible to enable the department to
know where specific problems occur, particularly in those offices that we
know of, so that they can attend to them. Thank you very much, hon member.

I would also like to respond to the member of the ANC who raised the issue
of the improvement that has been seen in service delivery, particularly on
the accessibility of the offices of the SA Social Security Agency that
deals with social pensions. I think, if one reflects on what the hon member
has said, we can all agree that the various interventions to improve the
infrastructure, even in rural areas and to bring service delivery closer to
the people, will go a long way towards improving the lives of our people
generally. Thank you.

                 SUSPENSION OF ABALONE FISHING BY EXECUTIVE
                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES:  Madam Speaker, the decision taken
with regard to abalone, or “perlemoen”, is certainly a very important
decision. Just to advise the House, as you may be familiar, this decision
is taken in conjunction with another decision which is that the impact of
the decision on abalone will be accompanied by a social plan negotiation
led by the Department of Labour. Those of you who are familiar with this
legislation would know that there are three phases to it: Consultation to
try and avoid job disruptions; attempts to find other employment and
bringing about training in the industry. In fact, the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism is also taking steps right now to see if
alternative forms of employment could be provided. So the decision is
definitely accompanied by steps to ensure that the impact on the community
is mitigated.

I think this is a step that deserves the support of all parties. Preserving
our natural marine resources is critical. In fact, one of South Africa’s
great advantages in this area is precisely that we have managed our fish
stocks very well and, on a scientific basis, we must continue to do this.

Regarding the short-term damage to communities, you should know that we
will use the other measures this government has put in place to ameliorate
those effects. Thank you.

          OVERSIGHT VISITS - RIGHT STEP FOR CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Speaker, the joint visit by the
Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services and the Committee on Justice
and Constitutional Development is a step in the right direction for the
criminal justice system. I would also like to encourage the Social
Development Portfolio Committee to do as we have done with a number of
young children who should not be in our prisons.

I would also like to encourage the women caucus of Parliament to do the
same. It was quite shocking to see, during the visit, that there are women
with children in prison, as well as women expecting children.

So if we all come together to assist the criminal justice system to deal
with some of these cases, then surely - what I keep on saying day-in and
day-out - correctional service is a societal responsibility. It does not
rest with Correctional Services or with Ngconde Balfour only, but with all
of us. Thank you.

          EXECUTIVE HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURES

                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEZOPHUHLISO LOLUNTU: Sekela-Somlomo, bendifuna ukucacisela laa
nkosi ibithetha phaya kwela cala, ukuba eza zinto ibithetha ngazo azinanto
yokwenza nesigqeba solawulo. Akukho namnye uMphathiswa obandakanyekayo
kwiinkqubo eziphuma kwiNdlu yoWiso-mthetho yeSizwe. Laa nkqubo imiswe ngabo
ngenxa yeengxaki ezikhoyo kulawulo lwale Palamente. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Acting Speaker, I would like to
explain to the hon member who spoke from that side of the House, hon member
Spies, that the things he spoke about have nothing to do with the
executive. Not a single Minister is involved in the issues emanating from
the National Assembly. The process surrounding that Bill was stopped by
Parliament as a result of problems within the management of Parliament.]

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON
                   CHILDREN’S AMENDMENT BILL TO STAND OVER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Social
   Development on Children’s Amendment Bill stand over.

Agreed to.

                          CHILDREN’S AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Second Reading debate on the Children’s Amendment Bill stand
   over.

Agreed to.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Acting Speaker and
hon members, the Department of Provincial and Local Government is committed
to ensuring that local government delivers services to the people. To
achieve this objective, one of the key tasks for us is to continually
reflect on the legislative and institutional context of local government
and, taking into account our experiences over the past 10 years, propose
policy and legislative refinements.

The Local Government Laws Amendment Bill of 2007 is one important step in
this direction. As you may be aware, other processes will follow, notably a
major review of local government and the White Paper process on provincial
government currently underway in government.

The Local Government Laws Amendment Bill effects amendments that refine,
adjust and align core local government legislation such as the Local
Government: Municipal Demarcation Act of 1998, the Local Government:
Municipal Structures Act of 1998, the Local Government: Municipal Systems
Act of 2000 and the Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Act of 2004.
It also repeals legislation that has become redundant.

The policy intentions of the amendments contained in the Bill serve to,
among others, specifically improve fiscal alignment, planning and
budgeting, promote the uniform interpretation and application of the law,
enhance performance management in local government, further refine and
remove impediments in the implementation of municipal property rates,
promote practices in good governance and ensure alignment among legislation
pertaining to local government.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government welcomes the additional
amendment adopted by the portfolio committee that strengthens ward
committees’ public participation and the undertaking and implementing of
development projects in the ward. This significant improvement in the role
of the ward committee provides further opportunities to deepen democracy
and community involvement in local development projects.

Lastly, I would like to thank the members of the Portfolio Committee on
Local Government, under the able leadership of Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, for the
lively discussions and for thorough and rigorous deliberations on the Bill
itself. Undoubtedly, his long experience in matters affecting local
government enriched the deliberations by the committee.

I would also like to thank all stakeholders who provided useful criticism
and insight on various clauses of the Bill. I urge all Members of
Parliament to vote for the adoption of this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Acting Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, our
conclusion is that it has been very useful interacting with the department
and Ministry on this legislation. It has also been extremely useful to
interact with others who showed interest in local government related
matters to get to hear their views on the proposed amendments to these
various pieces of legislation. We thank those organisations and individuals
who responded to our request to make submissions both in writing and
orally. These submissions served to throw light on a variety of issues we
are looking at. By clarifying issues in that manner, hearing it from
practitioners and those who apt to think about these things, it enabled the
committee to deepen its understanding of what was there before it and by
leading to the amendments that today we invite the House to approve.

In the nature of dialogue and debate, not every proposal and contribution
from the stakeholders as mentioned above was accepted. What is before the
House, however, is in fact the majority of the issues that we came to agree
on which strikes a median that best represents what we think was intended
to be the object of the legislation. As the Deputy Minister has already
indicated, we are quite ready and beginning to be active in the process of
evaluating the White Paper on Local Government which gave birth to this
legislation. Also, out of practice and reflection on the implementation of
this legislation, we are generating further ideas that will inform that
process of review and possible further amendment later. The recommendations
and amendments in this legislation today include, as was already indicated
by the Deputy Minister, important aspects of improving financial
management.

I would like to pause and say that one of the most useful events which took
place this week was the launch of the report on city finances published by
the South African Cities’ Network. Its conclusion is encouraging, saying
that great improvements have been made in local governments’ finances,
despite perceptions that in fact the situation is different. This
legislation before us contributes to that further improvement.

It also relieves municipalities in some very important aspects which
otherwise would amount to potential administrative burdens. The
recommendation we made around support for local government for ward
committees comes from our listening to the cry of ward committee members
and residents in these areas which are served by ward committee members
that they be given additional support. We were also responding to the
reality on the ground that many of the innovative municipalities in the
country have already begun to grant funds to communities run by ward
committees to undertake development activities in their wards. What we are
doing is providing a legislative framework within which it can be done and
supported by all within government. This is an important contribution to
deepening democratic practice and the question of funding of communities in
undertaking an initiative so that they are themselves in charge of
development, supported by an active state. This is a current issue that
must be appreciated by all of us.

Of course, there are issues that relate to relationships of the various
spheres of government that are being cleaned up by this legislation. An
active relationship must exist between the Minister for the Public Service
and Administration and the Minister for Provincial and Local Government in
undertaking the issues that relate to staffing, recommendations and
regulations, for example, that relate to discipline. This must be done in
collaboration and co-operation.

We are encouraged by the degree to which we receive speedy responses to our
request for comment. There are often incorrect perceptions that
collaboration between us in Parliament and others is not necessarily
adequate to handle and be incorporated into the work we are doing here and
what others believe correctly to improve legislation.

We are convinced that by taking on board a holistic view of this
contribution, we have been able to accommodate the best, in our humble
opinion, of what was presented to us so that the legislation that helps to
drive development is responsive to the issues raised. It is in fact also a
very important part of implementing our task from our local government
manifesto to make local government work. These activities must be supported
by all within government. We believe that the amendments to date are not
only useful in creating a basis for further strengthening of municipalities
to be able to undertake their task along with other spheres of government,
but to rid this country of poverty and service delivery deficits that
characterise many of our communities to date.

We support this Bill as amended, and thank all stakeholders for their
contributions. We hope they will do so in future. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr W P DOMAN: Waarnemende Speaker, as daar nou ’n erkenning is dat in
plaaslike regering eerstens groter beheer oor finansies moet kom en
tweedens dat die stryd teen korrupsie deur raadslede en amptenare verskerp
moet word en derdens ondersoeke en ingryping deur die Minister en LUR’e by
wanbestuurde munisipaliteite opgeskerp moet word, dan is dit hierdie
wetsontwerp.

Iemand het êrens wakker geskrik en die DA verwelkom al die klousules wat
begin luister na die noodkreet daar buite rondom beter bestuur en die
vasvat van skuldiges. Hierdie wetsontwerp het aanvanklik 37 veranderinge
aan vier bestaande wette voorgestel en die DA wil die provinsiale plaaslike
regeringsdepartement van KwaZulu-Natal bedank en gelukwens met ’n
skitterende voorlegging. Die agb Tsenoli het maar liewers daaroor stilgebly
toe hy dankie gesê het, maar waar was die ander agt provinsies wat sekerlik
daagliks in die praktyk ervaar wat kan verbeter in hierdie wetgewing?
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN: Acting Speaker, if there is  now  an  admittance  that  there
must firstly be greater control over finances in local government;  secondly
that the fight against corruption  by  councillors  and  officials  must  be
heightened;  and  thirdly  that  investigations  and  intervention  by   the
Minister and MECs at municipalities  where  maladministration  is  prevalent
must be sharpened, then it is this Bill that will help us do that.

Someone somewhere has woken up and the DA welcomes all the clauses that  are
listening to the call for help regarding better  management  and  clamp-down
on culprits. This Bill initially suggested 37 changes to four existing  Acts
and  the  DA  wishes  to  congratulate  the  KwaZulu-Natal   Department   of
Provincial and Local  Government  on  an  excellent  presentation.  The  hon
Tsenoli decided to keep quiet when he said thank you,  but  where  were  the
remaining eight provinces that must surely experience, on a daily basis,  in
practice what can be improved in this Bill?]

It is also shocking that, from the South African Local Government
Association, Salga, who, according to their website, is on the cutting edge
of local government, the committee heard absolutely nothing. Is it because
their loyalties and those of the MECs’ departments - those eight who did
not make any submissions - were divided between what the Minister and the
department wanted and what the unions and the municipalities wanted in a
number of clauses? It was disappointing that the committee did not want to
accept a few good proposals from the KwaZulu-Natal department that would
improve governance, but was prepared to accept the change from a non-
governmental organisation on ward committees. That, in my mind, is going to
create difficulties for municipalities. This is one of the three reasons
why the DA will not support the Bill.

Ward committees should not be allocated funds and resources to undertake
their own projects. The real possibility exists that these projects will be
outside the integrated development plans of municipalities, accountability
for such funds will be a serious concern, and there is even a possibility
that ward committees will want to exert power over council officials to
execute their projects.

These are some of the problem areas municipalities are going to run into
with this late new clause that the ANC has put into the Bill. More
fundamental, however, is our concern that clause 13 determines that a staff
member of a municipality must resign when he or she is officially declared
by the Independent Electoral Commission as a candidate for elections. Of
course, such officials should not be working during the canvassing period,
but we believe that this clause will be found to be unconstitutional if
challenged. We agree with the union proposal that unpaid leave would have
been the correct measure.

Lastly, we agree with the unions that clause 14 is an intrusion in the
bargaining process in local government. In fact, it is an intrusion in the
local government sphere by national government that Parliament is today
asked to allow the Minister of Provincial and Local Government also to
consult the Minister for the Public Service and Administration before the
former issues regulations on staff members. This is clearly a precursor
towards a single public service, and this clause does not respect the
constitutional position of the local government sphere.

We are, however, glad that the department and the ANC withdrew two other
clauses because we also felt that they were unconstitutional. We are
worried that these pieces of legislation come to Parliament and the
constitutionality of these is not checked very clearly beforehand. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Chair and colleagues, I am just standing in for my
colleague Mr P F Smith, who is a member of the portfolio committee.

The Bill comprises a set of amendments to various statutes affecting the
local government system including the Local Government: Municipal
Demarcation Act, the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Act, and the Local Government: Municipal
Property Rates Act. In the main, the IFP is not unhappy with the proposed
amendments to the law. We recognise that the local government system
evolves and, on the basis of practice and experience, certain changes
become increasingly necessary.

Then there are the issues of alignment of various laws and technical
amendments which serve to correct defects in the principal Acts. These then
get packaged as a general amendment Bill, which is what we have before us
today.

Though we are happy with the general thrust of the Bill, this is not to say
we are delighted with each and every clause. For instance, the notion that
municipal employees should resign from the municipality once they become
formally accepted by the Independent Electoral Commission as candidates in
national, provincial or local elections is all very well, but if we have
regard to the position of state employees and municipal elections, then we
see that some flexibility may be required. Teachers, for instance, who
resigned but were not successful in the last local government elections
were subsequently reinstated in their posts. Surely this is both desirable
and necessary. We believe a similar provision to this should have been
inserted. Everyone has a right to stand for political office. The notion
that this must entail losing one’s job irrespective of one’s success or
one’s position on a list is problematic.

On the other hand, some clauses are clearly needed and some we support. For
instance, we strongly endorse the principle that the Minister, with the
concurrence of the Minister of Finance, may set an upper limit on the
percentage by which the total revenue derived from rates on all property
categories or rates of a specific category of properties may be increased.
We tried to have a similar provision included in the principal Act but
without success. We further trust the Minister will, after promulgation,
promptly act on this empowering provision to curb the number of councils
which seem to have no regard for the consequences of sometimes totally
unreasonable rate increases. That was quick! [Time expired.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, the local government legal
framework consisting of the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act,
Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, Local Government: Municipal
Systems Act and the Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Act is in
need of amendment to ensure better implementation of these laws.

The Bill before us seeks to address this in a number of ways. Firstly there
is the issue of amendments to the Constitution of the country which require
consequential amendments to all the affected local government Acts. These
relate to the definition of the municipal financial year and the effect
thereof on the boundary determinations. The Bill also clarifies the
question of staff members’ participation in national, provincial and local
government elections as candidates. The remainder of the Bill deals with a
variety of technical matters that are aimed at streamlining the functioning
of local government especially in terms of the administration of property
rates. Finally the Bill provides for certain important fail-safe measures
such as municipal managers’ appointments not exceeding five years as well
as amending clause 20 to ensure that important investigations can be
initiated by the MEC if the council fails to do so. The UDM finds this
amendmending Bill very important and significant under the circumstances. I
thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP’s greatest concern about local
government in general is the greater lack of capacity to deliver according
to the needs of our taxpayers. Unlike paying taxes to the National
Treasury, people paying their rates and taxes on a monthly basis out of
their own pockets want to see that what is delivered is of the best quality
in terms of both service and administration from their local municipality.
We are aware that capacity-building is taking place in municipal
administrations and that continued in-house training is taking place.

We are aware of what the SA Local Government Association and other
institutions are doing to capacitate our officials. The Local Government
Laws Amendment Bill intends to strengthen the Minister’s hand in
establishing evaluation systems by which performances of staff members will
be measured. However, it is of no use if staff members are well trained but
do not have the skills to deal with people. Knowledge combined with people
skills will result in good local government officials. This does not mean
that local government is failing. There is enough evidence that millions of
South Africans are benefiting from the work being done by dedicated staff
members. We suggest government take a fresh look at the present system of
municipalities and see if it would not be better to have smaller and more
manageable municipalities instead of the present large catchment areas
which are difficult for administrators to manage efficiently. Thank you.

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Chairperson, I wish to support this Bill on behalf of the
ANC. As was mentioned earlier, this debate happens at a time when the ANC
is reviewing its policies as well as allowing all South Africans to make
input in terms of how best service delivery can be improved. The areas that
I will cover will be for emphasis, as most members, including the Deputy
Minister, have already covered these.

It is important to share that it is common practice that strategic people,
when confronted with challenges and bottlenecks in the implementation of
policies or programmes, will of course employ strategic analysis
mechanisms. The same has happened with the Department of Provincial and
Local Government, which is the implementer of the policies and the laws we
make.

It is also important that I remind you of the mandate that is guided by the
fundamental principles that are enshrined in our Constitution. There is a
section 152 that is very important, more so because we see South Africa as
a developmental state. It states that local government is to provide
democratic and accountable government, to ensure also the provision of
services to communities, and to encourage the involvement of communities.
It is important that at all times, as some sectors would say, it is a case
of ”nothing about us without us”.

It is important that we attach even more value to people-centred and people-
driven service delivery. In our engagement, just to add on to what the
chairperson has alluded to, we made some observations that people usually
assume that when the municipal financial year-ends are aligned with
national objectives, things are well and proceed smoothly. There are also
assumptions that double dipping - which is the term used when a public
servant who has earned money from this department and the other - in
relation to what was alluded to where public servants would even stand for
election whilst compromising their productive role, would occur.

Also, in the absence of an assessment report on the implementation of the
Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Bill which is an area that is of
concern, you would know that not all municipalities had, and neither did
people know that there were evaluation rolls. People have been lamenting
about municipalities not having capacity. The department has tried to
address the bottlenecks in ensuring that, whilst we are engaged in the long-
term process of policy review, the relevant Acts are amended for smooth
application. Hence it touches on the question of the Local Government:
Municipal Demarcation Act in order to align the financial year-end.

Also, as it relates to the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, you
would know that there are consequential amendments to address what was
earlier raised in terms of authorisation and adjustments of powers and
functions, which are a concern. Above all, this alignment was meant also to
regulate the participation of municipal staff members, as I said earlier,
in local government.

On the issue of the Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Bill, it
also allows for the quantifications in terms of cost of relief measures to
be dealt with through a municipal budget, and also to allow municipalities
not to value public service infrastructure if there is no intention of
levying it. It is important that revenue rates be kept.

Lastly, to rationalise local government laws, as the Deputy Minister
alluded, all the apartheid laws, through this process, will be repealed and
we will then be having our democracy as well as our transformation process
being rolled out without any hiccups. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, die FF Plus sal nie hierdie
wysigingswetsontwerp ondersteun nie om verskeie redes. Kom ek gee vir u
twee: Die een is dat daar nou ’n wysiging is in terme van munisipale
bestuurders wat verwys na hulle kontrak van vyf jaar en wat binne ’n maand
na ’n verkiesing moet verstryk. Maar die belangrikste wysiging is waar daar
opgetree moet word teen ’n munisipale bestuurder waar so ’n bestuurder by
’n vorige munisipaliteit bedrog, diefstal en korrupsie gepleeg het en
voordat dissiplinêr teen so ’n munisipale bestuurder opgetree kan word,
spring hy maar net na ’n ander munisipaliteit, soos wat gebeur het in die
munisipaliteit van Matlosana. Die Openbare Beskermer kon nie eers teen hom
optree nie want hy pleit net eenvoudig die audi alteram partem reel; hy kan
nie ’n geleentheid kry om sy saak te stel nie.

Die ander aspek is die aspek rondom eiendomsbelasting. Daar word nou wel ’n
wysiging ingevoeg om te sê dat die agb Minister ’n maksimum perk of limiet
kan stel in terme van die persentasie van die totale inkomste in terme van
eiendomsbelasting. Die bestaande wet maak daarvoor voorsiening dat die agb
Minister ’n perk kan plaas in terme van die persentasie uit die rand. Ek
vra vir die agb Minister al die afgelope drie, vier jaar stel asseblief
daardie perk. Maar die Minister doen dit nie, want daar is munisipaliteite
wat tot 800% toename in eiendomsbelasting het, maar die agb Minister tree
nie op nie. Hoekom verdere wysigings as die Minister dit nie gebruik nie?
Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, the FF Plus will not support this Bill for
various reasons. Allow me to give you two: the one is that there is now an
amendment which deals with municipal managers which refers to their
contract of five years which may not be extended beyond one and then not
longer than a month after an election. But the most important amendment is
where action should be taken against a municipal manager who previously
committed fraud, theft and corruption at another municipality and, before
disciplinary action could be taken against such a manager, he would just
jump to another municipality, as has happened in the municipality of
Matlosana. The Public Protector could not even take action against him
because he would just simply cite the audi alteram partem rule – he cannot
get an opportunity to state his case.

The other matter is the aspect around income tax. An amendment is being
made that the Minister may set a maximum limit in terms of the percentage
of the total income tax. The current Bill provides that the hon Minister
may put a limit on the percentage of the rand. I have begged the hon
Minister for the past three or four years to set that limit. The Minister
did not do it, because there are municipalities which have up to an 800%
increase in property tax, but the hon Minister does nothing. Why further
amendments if the Minister does not use them? I thank you.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, we in the UCDP welcome the
fact that the Act has been scrutinised closely so that it can pave the way
for good governance. The fact that municipal financial year has been so
aligned that it is different from the conventional financial year is also
welcomed.

Members of the ward committees have up to now been exploited as they
depended on the crumbs that fell from the tables of the bureaucrats for
compensation. That is being corrected by the amendment of section 73 of Act
117 of 1998 to the effect that their out-of-pocket expenses have to be paid
by the council. Much relief has also been brought by the introduction of
the office of the deputy executive mayor.

Of great significance is that staffers who stand for election as candidates
should resign on receipt of their certificates of candidature to the
council, provincial or national election as well as nomination as delegates
to the NCOP. This is most welcome and we hope it will cover even the staff
in the Public Service. If necessary, the Constitution may also be amended
to cater for this provision. The concerns of the Public Service Commission,
PSC, on this matter have been heard loud and clear and are fully noted.

The UCDP also welcomes the clause that no councillor may be party to or a
beneficiary under a contract for the provision of goods and services to any
municipality. We hope that municipal managers will, unlike bureaucrats in
central government, take joy and pride in declaring their interests while
the council would also respect the confidentiality of whatever will be
declared. The UCDP supports this amending Bill.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, there has been much debate and reservation
expressed on the independence of local government as a constitutionally
recognised, independent yet co-operative sphere of governance.

We have always described local government being hawk eyes at community
level. It has been ascertained that the independence and running of local
government has always been respected, but that all three spheres of
government remain answerable to the people under the provisions for
transparency and free access to information.

In view of the amendmending Bill, the MF acknowledges that a number of
crucial matters have been addressed, such as demarcation and corruption,
and that we certainly hope these will in future circumstances serve to
curtail possible issues. We believe that rates remain too high and that the
amendment in relation to this shall hopefully serve to address ratepayers’
dilemma. The MF supports the Local Government Laws Amendment Bill. I thank
you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the Bill is aimed at amending various local
government laws of our country to remove bottlenecks that hindered service
delivery.

In the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act of 1998, the Bill
attempts to normalise the limitation of boundaries in line with provided
systems. It falls short of addressing the limitation of contested
boundaries and tackle outstanding applications of prospective metro
municipalities such as the Mangaung Local Municipality.

In the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act of 1998, the
standardisation of ward committees has been a factor. Resources to ward
committees and the allowances of ward committee members are challenges that
must be addressed. The Bill is pussyfooting around this matter. In the
Local Government: Municipal Systems Act of 2000, the Bill will address the
ceremonial status of the deputy executive mayors who will get full
recognition as office bearers. The APC proposes that clear roles and
functions of the Deputy Executive Mayors must be spelt out. Property rates
must be regulated. The APC supports the Bill. Thank you.

Nkosi M NONKONYANA: Mhlalingaphambili, malungu ale Ndlu abakekileyo,
iinkosi zam zonke mazithambe isicaka sizolile. Ndibamba ngazo zozibini
kuwe, Mgcinisihlalo, ngokuba undifekethise, ukuze nam ndiqongqothe umongo,
ndihleze kweli thambo, ukuze ndishiyele umkhuluwa wam, uMphathiswa, iqwele.


Inene abakhalazayo abazange baphela, basamana ukumanamana nabanye. Umbutho
wesizwe i-ANC wakhiwa ngeenjongo zokukhulula abantu beli lizwe bonke
kwidyokhwe yengcinezelo nakwisandla esirhabaxa soorhulumente begcuntswana,
iintsapho zabo ezazingamaphandle kunye nabaxhasi babo oo-Boreman, abathetha
inkosi ithetha.

Loo mhlaba neendonga zawo uncangathi ligazi lamadelakufa. Sinyanzelekile,
njengombutho wabantu beli lizwe, ukuba simana siyiguqula imithetho
ngeenjongo zokuphucula iintlalo zabo. Njengoko ulawulo lusezandleni
zabantu, siyiguzule imithetho yoorhulumente bangaphambili bengcinezelo.
Siyakhile imithetho emitsha ngenxa yamava ngolawulo nemiceli-mingeni
esihlangabezene nayo.

Sindulula kule Ndlu ibalulekileyo imithetho yoomasipalati ukuze intlalo
yabantu bakowethu ibe ngcono kunangaphambili.

Inguqu imnandi kwabayithandayo, kodwa ikrakra okwencindi yekhala
kwabangayifuniyo. Abanye bayaqonda ukuba urhulumente we-ANC uyakuthandwa
nangakumbi ngabantu kwaye njengokuba sifaka le mithetho iivoti ziya kuya
zisanda ngoko. Yiyo loo nto umntaka kaBoreman emana ekhunyuluka okoko
ndiqalile kweli qonda, kwaye esaza kukhonyuluka phambi kokuba ndikhwelele
kulo.

Inguqu kwimida yoomasipala kufuneka ingadali ntlupheko kubantu bakowethu.
Kananjalo kuyafuneka simana sikhumbuzana ukuba le mida yoomasipala
mayingavuseleli ingcinga yamaphandle. Singabantu belizwe elinye, abanembono
enye nabanenjongo enye yokuphuhlisa zonke iingingqi neziphaluka ukuze bonke
abantu beli lizwe bazuze intlalo entle nobomi obuhle kwiindawo zonke.

Kungenxa yesi sizathu sibone kufanelekile ukuba ibhodi enoxanduva
lokuguqula imida ikwenze oko inike ingqwalasela kunyaka-mali. Asibuyi
ngamva kwinyathelo lokuqinisa amanqwanqwa karhulumente wentando yesininzi,
ngakumbi kulawulo loomasipalati. Amabhunga ooceba kwimida yoomasipalati, i-
ward committees ngokwamakhumsha, kuyabonakala ukuba lifikile ixesha lokuba
siwakhuthaze kumsebenzi omhle awenzayo ngokuthi siwabuyisele imbuyekezo
kwinkcitho ayenzayo.

Siyazi ukuba ooceba bayafuna ukuba banikwe imali njengabameli boluntu.
Okwakaloku nje, lo mcimbi sisawuqwalasele, kwaye sigunyazisa ukuba bafumane
izibonelelo kwiingxowa zoomasipala babo, ethembeni lokuba ucuntsu akazi
kufana noshici.
Mhlalingaphambili namalungu ahloniphekileyo, kuyavuyisa kakhulu ukubona
nokuva abantu beli lizwe bethabatha inxaxheba kwiinkqubo zale Palamente
ekhokelwa yi-ANC ngokuthi rhoqo bazise izimvo zabo ngaphambili. Sithi,
enkosi kuni mawaba nani mawasakazi akowethu. Nangamso!

Ingqokelela yooceba be-DA kunye negqwetha eliqeshwe ngumasipala walapha
eKapa, nabo baphosile esivivaneni. Kungumnqa kuthi ukubona abantu nemibutho
yabo bethabatha ithuba lokuba bazithethele ngokwabo, kodwa lize lithi iqela
elithi lona lilelikhulu kwaphikisayo lihambe liye kuqasha ummeli, ekubeni
bekufanele ukuba bathathe imali bayinike abantwana balapha eKapa ukuze
impilo nentlalo yabo ibe ngcono kunangaphambili.

Kucubhula ngentsini kwaye kukwacaphukisa ukufumanisa ukuba kukho izimvo
ezihlabanayo kwiqela elinye. Yiva ooceba be-DA xa besithi kuthi iikomiti
zeziphaluka, okanye iiward committees, mazingabhatalwa koko zinikwe
izixhobo zokusebenza, zandiswe ukusuka kwi-10 ukuya kuma-20.

Igqwetha elithunywe ngumasipala okhokelwa yi-DA lithi lona ezi komiti
mazibhangiswe ngoba ayikho imfuneko yazo. Kuyacaca ukuba eli qela
liphikisayo liqela lasekunene, elineempembelelo zamanxaxha asekunene
noontamolukhuni. Bakho abasadla ngendebe endala. Simana siliva linyemba i-
ANC. Inene iqaqa aliziva kunuka! [Inzwi.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech
follows.)

[Chief N NONKONYANA: Chairperson, hon members of this House, I humble
myself to all of you, and I want to convey my gratitude to the hon Chair
for affording me this opportunity so that I can add my views to this debate
before my big brother, the hon Minister, can conclude it.

Indeed the cynics never stop, and they are always criticising progress. The
ANC was formed with the aim of releasing all the people of this
country from oppression and segregation by the minority regimes, and their
families who were outside including their supporters like hon Doman who do
not respect authority.

This soil and walls are full of the martyrs' blood. We are obliged, as this
organisation, to always change the laws with the aim of improving people's
lives.  Since the government has come into the hands of the people, we have
done away with the oppressive laws of former regimes, and we have passed
new laws because of the experience of governing and the challenges that we
have come across.

We pass municipality-related Acts in this august House so that our people's
lives can be better than before.

Change is good to those who like it but bad to those who hate it. Others
feel that the ANC-led government is getting popular, and as we are changing
the laws, the votes are going to increase in number. That is why the hon
Doman is grumbling as I am speaking here, and he is still going to continue
doing so until I leave this podium.

The changes in border demarcation of provinces should not create poverty
for our people. We should continue reminding each other that these
demarcation changes in municipal borders should not be a reminder of the
homeland system. We belong to one country; have one objective of developing
all our areas and regions so that all the people who love this country
can have a good living and a great life in all areas.

It is for this reason that we decided that the Municipal Demarcation Board
that is responsible for the changes in borders should do that with a
specific regard to the financial year. We are not moving backwards in terms
of strengthening the democratic government especially local government. It
is clear that the time has come for us to encourage ward committees by
refinancing their official expenditure.

We know that the councillors, as public representatives, also need money.
As of now we are still looking at this matter, and we authorise that they
get financed from their municipal budgets. We hope that will be enough.

Chairperson and hon members, it is with great pleasure that I note that
people of this country take part in the programmes of this ANC-led
Parliament by coming forward with their concerns. We would like to thank
you, children of the soil. 

A group of DA councillors together with a lawyer employed by the Cape Town
Metro were in the news. It is rather strange to see that as people and
their parties are participating in debates and speaking their minds, you
find a party that regards itself as the leader of the opposition going out
of its way to hire a lawyer instead of taking that money and improving the
lives of Cape Town's poor children. 

It is both funny and angering to see that there are conflicting ideas
within one party. Listen to the DA councillors when they say that ward
committees should not be remunerated, but should be given working
tools, and their number should increase from 10 to 20.

The lawyer hired by the DA-led municipality is saying on the other hand
that these committees should be abolished since they are useless. It is
clear that this opposition party is a rightwing one, and has serious
rightwing tendencies. They are still conservative. You are always critical
of the ANC. You need to assess yourselves first. [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order hon members, can the member
just finish the speech. We are also running out of time.

Nkosi M NONKONYANA: Phambi kokuba ndikhwelele kweli qonga, banga bonke
abantu kweli lizwe, ngakumbi abantu bakowethu ababona ukuba bona kufuneka
bahlohle ezabo izisu, nabanobuqhophololo nobuqhwemesha, bangaqonda ukuba
sisifakele isihlomelo sokungavumeli ooceba kunye namagosa kamasipala ukuba
baxhamle. Kungoko ke sisithi, enkosi mhlalingaphambili. [Laphela ixesha.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Chief M NONKONYANA: Before I leave this podium, I wish to ask all the
people of this country - especially our people who tend to think they have
a right to be selfish and corrupt – to think twice because we have added a
section in this law that guards against such acts of councillors who
benefit through corruption. With those words I thank you [Time expired.]]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson and hon
members, our system of local government, in its current democratised form,
has been in place since 2000. We are today proposing to amend aspects of
the core local government legislation and, in some instances, to repeal
legislation, which has become anachronistic.

As has been said by earlier speakers, the Bill concerns itself with the
ongoing attempt to improve the ability of the local government system to
discharge its obligation to the people. It is critical to the functional
health of local government and to the efficacy of the system of government
as a whole.

On behalf of the Ministry and the Department for Provincial and Local
Government, I would like to join hon Deputy Minister Hangana in thanking
the chairperson and the majority of the members of the portfolio committee
for their support and co-operation. Their helpfulness and enthusiasm was
crucial in ensuring that the version, which is finally before the House
today, is enriched by historical lessons drawn from our shared experience
of what is happening on the ground. The positive attitude of the majority
of the committee members stands in stark contrast to the negative reaction
typically associated with the cynical minorities who object to the Bill.

I am sure that the people of this country will appreciate the goodwill and
reasonableness displayed by most parties in the committee and in the House.
After all, our people know that each country has its own problems.

Even as members of the committee proposed some amendments to the original
draft, we understood that their proposals were based on the clear intent to
help sustain the positive developmental momentum which is abroad in our
country.
We are acutely aware that to the extent that we want to make our system of
government more effective, what we have taken is necessary albeit not
sufficient. It is for this reason that we once more draw attention to the
two related processes, which are currently underway: the formulation of the
White Paper on Provincial Government and the review of the White Paper on
Local Government.

In this regard, we invite you hon members of this House to share your
thoughts and experiences with the rest of our people in order to ensure
that we get a product which will be cherished for all posterity. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

 THE ISSUE OF SOCIAL COHESION AND THE CHALLENGES WE NEED TO CONFRONT AS PART
   OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF A COHESIVE NATION IN THE BUILDING OF A NATIONAL
                             DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, hon members, when starting this debate, it is
appropriate to quote that clause in the Freedom Charter that says that:
“South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white, united in our
diversity.”

On numerous occasions from this platform, President Mbeki, in various
speeches - either during the state of the nation addresses, or in reply to
other debates, or in reply to questions - referred to the issue of social
cohesion. More recently the matter was sharply raised one afternoon during
Questions to the President.

One of the outcomes of such interactions and discussions was that the task
was conferred on us in this House to debate this matter and also to move
forward towards a common understanding on the importance of and the
strategies needed to achieve this goal. This will hopefully set us on the
path to identifying those issues that we need to confront and address
through collective action in order to put our country on a path towards the
realisation of a national democratic society.

This debate comes at a time when all of us – the entire nation – are still
basking in the glory of being confirmed as Rugby World Cup champions. The
scenes of sheer jubilation and joy at the momentous success the nation
achieved bear testimony to the fact that we are a winning nation that can
proudly take its place among the nations of the world.

When you interact with the players and management of the team, it is clear
that they have come to realise the pivotal role and substantial
contribution that they can make towards the sharing of our common values
and in ensuring that we can take up our place and contribute towards the
building of a new world order.

This also illustrates the potential and ability of sport in general to
unite people across gender, race and cultural lines. However, rather than
just celebrating social unity at key points of victory on the sportsfield,
we have to strive towards a united nation by improving the lives of the
disadvantaged as a key element of building a unified nation. Such
significant victories achieved on the sportsfield must be utilised as
building blocks to achieve our objective of building one nation, united in
our diversity.

I am thus reminded of the following statement from the 2007 state of the
nation address, when President Mbeki said:


   We are duty-bound to ask the question: Have we all fully internalised our
   responsibility in building social cohesion and promoting a common sense
   of belonging, reinforcing the glue that holds our nation together?


It is my humble submission that we must continuously work towards the
creation of this national identity and that our efforts should be
fundamentally focused on strengthening a sense of belonging.
It is also clear from our experiences that national reconciliation and
social cohesion will not happen on their own; it requires collective action
from all political parties, visionary leadership and demands that we focus
on the bigger picture.

The ultimate goal of a national democratic society has not been reached
yet. Therefore, in this debate, we will try to highlight some of the key
elements of that national democratic society we are striving to realise.
One of those elements is a united state based on the will of the people,
without regard to race, gender, belief or geographic location.

A second element is the establishment of a dignified and improved quality
of life among all the people by ensuring equal rights and opportunities for
all our citizens.

A third element is the restoration of the birthright of all South Africans
regarding access to land and other resources.

The ten-year macro-social report of government highlights the progress made
in the attainment of these objectives. This report:

   ... points to our transition from an inhumane society characterised by
   racism, division, inequality, injustice to a society that is ostensibly
   caring, open and democratic, committed to the ethos of nonracialism,
   nonsexism and freedom.

It further reflects on the positive mood and confidence that has been
developing in the economy since 1994, the enormous strides that have been
made in the delivery of basic needs, including housing, education, health,
social development, sport and recreation, and it also focuses our attention
on the trajectory of accelerated delivery, acceleration in growth and
social cohesion.

Some of these macrotrends have been discussed in this House and I will just
repeat a few of them.

The macro-social report highlights the changes that are taking place in our
society and the migration that is taking place from the rural areas to the
urban areas where there is better economic potential, with the resultant
sprawls of informal settlements in our major cities and towns.

It also focuses on the opportunities that have been created for the youth
to take advantage of professions that have now opened up, and opportunities
in the arts and other areas. However, it also focuses on the
marginalisation of young people who do not have the skills required by this
economy.

Although we have a better gender representation in all organs of state, we
also see slow progress in the private sector, and serious manifestations of
poverty and human abuse taking place.

There is better advocacy and access in relation to the rights of people
with disability, but there is still a huge legacy of marginalisation that
we need to address. Although there is a greater focus on the rights of
children, the issue of unacceptable levels of child poverty and abuse is a
serious concern.

It is in this context that we need to focus on the issues of social
exclusion and inequality, and recognise that all our people do not have
equal access to education, health, employment, housing and economic wealth.
A tremendous amount of work still needs to be done. Unless we achieve this,
the goal of social cohesion will remain elusive.

The ANC-led government, in all spheres of the state, is striving to
confront these challenges and also requires the support of all political
parties to decisively deal with poverty and underdevelopment. Challenges
for the implementation of programmes aimed at providing a better life for
all our people should thus not be used as a celebration of failure.
Instead, concrete proposals and action are needed and required from all
South Africans to make democracy work to the benefit of all our people.

It is thus fundamentally important that we remain guided by the principle
that we can only claim to be human if we give full attention to the
wellbeing of our fellow South Africans. The isiXhosa proverb that goes
“umntu, ngumntu ngabantu” [I am because you are.] is appropriate. This is
one of the key elements that all of us, as we share and as we have seen
with the wondrous victory that we achieved on the rugby fields, can also
achieve in society. Thank you.

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Voorsitter ... [Chairperson], let me start by saying
that this topic typifies what is wrong with the ANC. While our country and
its people suffer from widespread poverty and a generally low standard of
living, the ruling party concerns itself with those typical nationalist
issues which do little more than appease the ANC’s lust for empty rhetoric.


The issue of social cohesion: What does that mean to the average South
African? Nothing. Here are some real issues on the other hand which this
House would do well to debate and which have much more significance for the
South African people.

One, the issue of the Health Minister’s performance. Two, the issue of
service delivery riots that continue to break out across the country.
Three, the issue of Advocate Pikoli and his suspension. Those are real
issues with real consequences, both for ordinary people and for the nature
of our democracy. Interestingly, those are also the issues the ANC wants
nothing to do with. We are in the midst of a constitutional crisis and what
does the ANC want to talk about? The construction of a cohesive nation in
the building of a national democratic society!

If the ANC wants to build a national democratic society, then it needs to
start acting like a democratic party. It should stop using the National
Intelligence Agency, NIA, to bug its own people. The President should stop
interfering with the independence of our prosecuting services. The
Commissioner of Police should take a voluntary suspension and the ANC
should stop trying to control and clamp down on the media.

Those are just a few basic starting points. Once we have got the basics
right, then we can start to talk seriously about building a truly
democratic society. And, if we are going to be serious about ideas like
social cohesion, then we need to be serious about determining who
constitutes a South African citizen.

Since 1994, the ANC government has distinguished between South African
citizens. It often refers to “our people”, like President Mbeki did in
2002, when he said that South Africa’s international sport teams should be
prepared to lose because the government was bringing our people into the
teams. I mean who are “our people”? Thank goodness the Springboks and Jake
White did not listen to the President, because I can assure you, winning
the World Cup has done much more for South Africa and South Africans than
losing it would ever have done.

My point is, we cannot have ideas like “our people” and “their people” if
we are going to unite behind those democratic principles that define our
Constitution. Then the ANC needs to learn that we are all South African
citizens. We are all equal and all have a role to play in making this
country a better place. Dankie [Thank you].

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Chair and colleagues, for a country subjected to the
indignity and divisiveness of slavery, colonialism and apartheid, South
Africa emerged from our own dark ages as a deeply divided society along
race, class, ethnic, gender and cultural lines at the dawn of democracy.

The successful negotiation process or what some people called a negotiated
revolution, and a constitutional democracy, did much to bridge the divides
I have mentioned above. We have come a long way in only thirteen years to
forge a nation of sorts to some form of social cohesion, but we still have
a long road ahead with many formidable challenges to overcome.

When I read the topic for today’s debate, I wondered what the hon Frolick
meant by social cohesion. As I am not much of a mind reader, I consulted
the Internet and found the following definition: “Social cohesion is the
ongoing process of developing a community of shared values, shared
challenges and equal opportunities based on a sense of trust and hope.” If
this is what is meant by this subject, it is indeed a lofty ideal to aspire
to. It is even more so when one considers the great variety of cultures,
languages, customs and traditions to be found in South Africa. All of this,
of course, is protected in our Constitution.

Colleagues, I want to argue that we must go a step further and explore our
own African philosophy of ubuntu and appropriate for ourselves those values
which are common to us all. If I were to ask everyone here what exactly we
meant by ubuntu and what the principles are of such a philosophy, I would
get different answers. This shows, therefore, that there is no philosophy
which is our own on which we can base our actions, our lives and even our
education. If I were to ask on which ideas our education system is based I
would get different answers. Then we ask ourselves what can we use,
therefore, as a basis for this social cohesion? The answer, I am afraid, is
nothing.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members, crime and civil
unrest in South Africa are phenomena that presumably inspire discussions
about social cohesion. Indeed, the violence that attends both these issues
is what is most disconcerting because it is a violence that points to the
rage and frustration felt by the perpetrators. In the past two years civil
unrest and industrial action have not only increased, but, whereas five
years ago they would have been largely peaceful, the current trend is
widespread violence, vandalism, assaults, murder and intimidation.

Where does this come from? Some of it can and should rightly be attributed
to the history of this country and the legacy of that history. However, we
cannot blame the past for the sudden widespread resurgence of violence,
crime and civil unrest - there must be other roots.

Firstly, there is the question of patience and legitimate expectations.
Democracy was ushered in peacefully in this country because South Africans
are inherently patient and tolerant. The vast majority of the people
believed that their legitimate expectations would be addressed under
democracy if they applied some patience. This sort of frustration will take
root in poor communities who face unrelenting poverty, degradation, crime
and unemployment day-in and day-out.

Can we say that such legitimate protests – even if the attendant violence
is not legitimate or necessary – are undemocratic or run against the grain
of social cohesion? People who unite around a common cause are expressing a
social cohesion among one another, if not within society at large. It is
also a society at large, who does not always acknowledge or feel any social
cohesiveness with certain poor communities and settlements.

Secondly, we are a consumerist society. We are seeing signs of backlash
against grand capitalism and globalisation. In democracies across the
globe, there is a growing disillusionment with the way that the individual
and humanity in general are becoming merely cogs within a larger system of
commerce and politics, instead of these things being merely expressions of
human endeavour.

The important point, however, that I want to make, is that the test of
democracy is whether it can, as it should, mitigate and manage these
issues. These three factors arise from a sense of disempowerment and
frustration. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr L W GREYLING: Thank you, Chair. Social cohesion is one of those academic
terms that is rarely understood, yet used by different people to mean
different things. For the ID, social cohesion can be summed up in our
party’s overarching slogan as ‘bridging the divides’. We believe that the
only way for our country to prosper and for all of us to realise our dreams
and aspirations for this great nation, is for the destructive divides of
the past to be bridged.

These divides are evident everywhere and we cannot simply take a denialist
attitude towards them. We need to recognise the way in which our
differences were violently accentuated in the past to prop up a racist
ideology. We need to recognise that, in the process, people’s dignity was
stripped and all South Africans were denied the opportunity of renewing the
bonds of our common humanity.

So how do we deal with our divided past? How do we build a common
nationhood in which our diversity is celebrated and respected by all? We
firstly need to build a common vision which all South Africans, regardless
of political persuasion, can get behind. We need to not only unite, but
mobilise all of our people in confronting the enormous socioeconomic
challenges that we face as a country. As my leader, Patricia de Lille,
stated in Parliament last year, “The problems of the poor are the problems
of the rich.” We, therefore, all need to step out of our comfort zones,
confront our fears and deep-seated prejudices and start reaching out to
each other across our past divides.

In this regard I would like to congratulate Patricia De Lille’s
spokesperson, Steven Otter, on the publication of his new book called
Khayelitsha, where he lived for two years. I hope his example leads to
other white South Africans confronting their fears and truly discovering
what it means to share a common nationhood with all South Africans.

It is also important that we in this House show leadership on this issue
and consider the ways in which our behaviour influences the attitudes and
actions of the broader public. South Africa desperately needs visionary
leadership that can mobilise people across all our past divides.
Unfortunately, however, this House does not set a good example and we have
to find ways of engaging with each other that does not simply perpetuate
our old divisions. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, our Constitution and the Bill of Rights have
played a very important role in our nation-building. Coming from a past
characterised by division and racism, the role of human rights in restoring
dignity and equality and the building of a national democratic society
cannot be overemphasised. However, there are clearly huge challenges facing
our nation and these must be confronted as we seek to build a cohesive
nation.

We, as the ACDP, believe that the family is the primary unit for social
cohesion and nation-building. This is a widely held view. The strength of a
nation lies in its families. Healthy families result in healthy
communities, resulting in healthy nations.

The decline in the traditional family values has led directly and
contributed to absentee fathers who do not pay maintenance, sibling-led
households, escalating rates of crime, violence and drug dependency.

Family patterns are cyclic. When a boy has no father or stable role model
or if his father is in prison or is a drug dealer, it is almost inevitable
that he repeats what he sees and the cycle is perpetual. This is a very
serious challenge to social cohesion in our nation.

However, there is hope. There is always hope, and families are showing
remarkable resilience notwithstanding being severely tested by the issues
of unemployment, poverty, HIV/Aids and high levels of crime.

Clearly, the race issue remains a major challenge in building social
cohesion, with whites, coloureds and Asians feeling marginalised, and with
black people feeling that there has not been sufficient recognition for the
devastating effects of apartheid or sufficient restitution. This is another
issue that needs to be addressed.

Another significant challenge to social cohesion relates to poverty and
unemployment, and the disparity between the rich and the poor.
There must be a greater care for the poor, failing which masses of people
will be at the beck and call of any populist leader who promises the earth,
but can deliver little.

What our nation needs is to build on the tremendous national pride evoked
by the Rugby World Cup Victory, and it is a new heart for each citizen to
take hands and to build the nation together and to ask the question, as
John F Kennedy did:


  Ask not what your country can do for you - ask what you can do for your
  country.

Significantly, this year marks the 40th anniversary of the first heart
transplant in the world, which took place here in Cape Town. I believe it
is significant and that our Heavenly Father would want us to replace our
hearts of stone with hearts of flesh – that we would become more caring of
the poor and the sick, the abused and the downtrodden, the widows and
orphans and, most importantly, the youth. Let us start living the golden
rule of “doing unto others as we would have them do unto us” and in so
doing we would contribute to nation-building and social cohesion. I thank
you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, one single definition of social cohesion does
not exist. In the multitude of definitions there are, however, common
characteristics. These are, amongst others, shared values, shared
challenges and equal opportunities. In other words, we have a common vision
and a sense of belonging amongst all our communities; we appreciate the
diversity of our people’s backgrounds and circumstances; we create similar
life opportunities for people from different backgrounds; and we share in
this responsibility. In the South African context, it means addressing the
inequalities of the past.

What are some of the key challenges that we face in order to ensure a
cohesive nation? While we acknowledge respect and also celebrate our
diversities, we should work actively towards reaching social cohesion
within this kaleidoscope of diversity. Our diversity should start to fit
into an overarching national identity. It should become the glue that binds
us together, not serve as the borders that divide us.

Achieving cohesion is not and can never be the responsibility of state and
of government on its own. Cohesion cannot be achieved from top down, but
will only be successful and sustainable if it involves grassroots and
organised civil society. As public representatives, that places a
particular responsibility upon our shoulders. In many ways, it provides
direction to us on how to approach our parliamentary duties and execute our
different political roles.

For example, it means that, while we can, we should be vigilant not only to
the extent of criticising in carrying out oversight over the work of the
executive, as Parliament, but we also have the responsibility to
collectively find solutions for the challenges that we face.

It requires a special kind of opposition, one that would share in this
responsibility, join hands in finding solutions and one that would not
celebrate perceived failures of programmes aimed at promoting cohesion, but
would rather, collectively, take responsibility in addressing the
challenges that lead to setbacks. “The ability to accept the responsibility
is the measure of a man”, so said Roy L Smith.

Achieving social cohesion demands selflessness and patriotism. Infusing
ubuntu into our lives means that there is readiness to sacrifice and that
selfless action then becomes the transformative force that is needed in
order to achieve the changes required to create opportunities for those who
need them most. That selflessness should also be reflected in our Public
Service.

The ANC has identified key groups as vulnerable, namely the poor in
general, especially those in rural areas; those living in underdeveloped
informal settlements; and children, especially those that head households.

In order for us to achieve social cohesion, an intervening developmental
state is required. This developmental state needs to intervene in the lives
of the vulnerable groups, but also needs to get directly involved in
creating equal opportunities to address inequalities.

I believe this should be complemented with redistributive processes that
can express the journey to cohesion in concrete terms. We need to determine
how we can include the objective to promote cohesion in all the policies of
our country. We, as public representatives of our country, have a shared
responsibility to create, implement and combine initiatives to escape and
overcome poverty.

As the elected representatives of our diverse nation, we share the
responsibility to develop measures against discrimination of any kind and
to harness and protect the recognition of fundamental rights, and to insist
on and ensure effective co-ordination between our social and economic
policies.

With acknowledgement to John D Rockefeller Jr, who said that:


  ... every right implies a responsibility; every opportunity, an
  obligation; every possession, a duty.


History and generations to follow will judge us. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, in the state of the nation address at the
beginning of this year I said, on social cohesion, that we do not really
know each other and do not really debate with each other. I also said that
a two-minute speech from this podium is not debating.

The President then proposed that Parliament discuss social cohesion and
really debate the issues. Today cannot be that final debate as I, again,
only have two minutes and I do not see any Cabinet Ministers here.

What exactly is understood by nation-building? Is the ANC’s recipe the only
one? Is successful nation-building possible without the consent of all the
parties involved? I say no. You cannot force me or anybody else into a
recipe of nation-building that we do not agree with. That is why a real,
lengthy debate on this discussion is necessary.

After the Springboks’ victory, we suddenly, again, have that positive
feeling of success in the country. For many years we had lost it. It
immediately changed the atmosphere in the whole country. The majority of
South Africans have said that they really do not want conflict and tension.
I am not so sure that the same goes for everyone in this House – if I
recall some of the speeches in the past.

Why did nation-building fail in several African states with comparable
language and ethnic setups as South Africa? Nation-building failed in those
countries because some citizens or some ethnic groups were permanent
winners, while others were permanent losers. The best recipe must be a
situation in which everyone feels like a winner, with no losers.

Meneer, vir permanente harmonie en versoening in Suid-Afrika moet die
balans tussen eenheid, aan die een kant, en verskeidenheid in Suid-Afrika
gevind word. As eenheid oorbeklemtoon word, vervreem dit taal- en
kultuurgroepe. As verskeidenheid oorbeklemtoon word, kan dit na konflik
tussen die groepe lei. Deur trots op my taal te wees, en daarom op my
taalregte te staan, word vandag verkeerdelik as onverdraagsaamheid teenoor
ander tale geïnterpreteer deur sommiges. Deur trots op my kultuurerfenis te
wees en vir my eie te veg, word verkeerdelik as meerderwaardigheid gesien;
dat ek my bo ander probeer verhef. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Sir, for permanent harmony and reconciliation in South Africa, the balance
between unity, on the one hand, and diversity on the other in South Africa
should be found. If unity is overemphasised, it could alienate language and
cultural groups. If diversity is overemphasised, it could lead to conflict
between the groups. By being proud of my language, and therefore insisting
on my language rights, it is erroneously interpreted today by some as
intolerance towards other languages. By being proud of my cultural
heritage, and fighting for it, it is erroneously seen as arrogant; that I’m
trying to elevate myself above others.]

You know, sir, research in Europe showed that the nations and the
communities of Europe do not mind to become part of the larger European
fruit salad, as long as everyone is allowed to maintain their identity by
remaining either a banana or an orange within that fruit salad. That is a
workable recipe for a country like ours.

Sir, as an Afrikaner, I want to be myself in Africa. Is that too much to
ask? If there is a place in the north of Africa for Arabs with their
religion and their different - if I may call it – culture, then there
should also be a place for me as an African – a South African, but also an
Afrikaner - in the south, even though some black intolerants call me a Euro-
African. It is interesting how white and black racists are the same.

The trick in a successful society is for minority citizens to be able to
feel that they are more than one thing at once – to be able to feel
American and black, Scottish and British, Orthodox Christian and Bosnian,
Muslim and Indian. Surely, once we get that right, it would be the right
recipe in South Africa. Let’s work on it. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, when Bantu Biko wrote his
book, I Write What I Like, he meant to make a clean breast of his
experiences. I shall also speak from the heart in this debate.

South Africans have turned into a laughing stock regarding our human
relations at home. We are known for the ability to pacify worrying nations
on the continent yet we are miles apart from one another. To find one
another with the government of the day leading, we should work hard and
hone our relationships of mutual love, respect, trust, service, tolerance
and consultation.

The biblical injunction is love your neighbour as yourself. Do this
regardless of their political affiliation, creed, colour or whatever. Love
them because they are made in the image of God. In short: ‘Do unto others
as you would like them to do unto you’. They will be glued to you.

The relationship of mutual respect expects of us that in order to be
respected we should respect others regardless of our status or size of our
organisation.

Mutual respect is at its lowest ebb in this country. People need to develop
confidence and trust in their government or leaders. If you promise to
deliver houses, do not put up incommodious, ramshackle shacks and when
questioned say: I promised you a million houses; I never said to what
extent they would be habitable. If you promise some party international
mediation, by all means deliver. If you do not, your government will always
be viewed with scepticism. If you deliver they will trust you.

The question of flexing our muscles when in leadership positions is
abominable. Have time for dissent. Listen to differing voices. Bragging and
strutting around like a Colossus because you are the majority party is in
bad taste. Never be impatient with the views of the minority. Don’t push
them aside because those people are white, they are not 100% this or that
or they come from some past, because each one has a past about which much
can be said. All role-players and leaders should not be too big for their
breeches.

If only we can learn to consult, even when we do a good thing, this country
will have a cohesive nation. Gone are those days of: “Dis goed genoeg vir
hulle” [This is good enough for them]...
where people would be given anything that they had to contend with even
when they were not happy.

It should be an affront for the government of the day to say: “We are going
to change the name of a town or street, or to pass this law because we are
in the majority.”

It should be an upfront for the government of the day to say we are going
to change the name of the town, street or we pass this law because we are
in the majority.

One big threat to social cohesion is lack of consistency in the application
of practices. If it is good to retain Venda as a place and have Venda
University, good to refer to the Transkei and eMtata, but it is
unacceptable to refer to Bophuthatswana and even fight tooth and nail to
bury an innocent name such as Mmabatho – know that you are polarising
society. With that type of conduct other people will remain disaffected,
suspicious, cold and dubious.

For social cohesion to take root, let us use brains, not brawn, just like
we did when this democracy was hatched at Codesa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson and hon members, we need to understand the debate
from a historical perspective. When we talk of cohesion, a cohesive and
national democratic society, everybody needs to understand in a realistic,
meaningful and practical way what we are talking about - not just sweet
words and melodic words but thunderous words that move our society away
from polarisation to a more human and caring society.

To this end, South Africans have, on many occasions, demonstrated the quest
for a moral and just society. We can go back to history from 1912, navigate
through to 1955, continue the voyage to 1994, and then from 2004 to date.
We saw the establishment of the people’s organisation in 1912 in response
to the stealing of their land. The call was for unity to fight for justice
and democracy. This call was sharpened in 1955 when representatives of all
South Africans made a significant call that South Africa belongs to all who
live in it; that all national groups shall have equal rights and that the
people shall share in the country’s wealth.

The Freedom Charter which today is embraced by all caring South Africans
remains the doyen on guidance on all that we need to do. As we know as a
country and society we still, after 13 years, address serious challenges of
poverty, informal settlements, dusty roads, poor sanitation, bucket system,
lack of basic infrastructure, ill-equipped schools, overcrowded hospitals
with long queues, underdevelopment and huge inequalities. What is starkly
clear is that this poverty is located within specific areas and specific
communities - Indians, Coloureds and Africans - in the worst black
communities. This reality is something that needs to be corrected.

This can only be corrected if all of us particularly the English,
Afrikaners, Greeks, Portuguese, Italians, French and the so-called White
South Africans located in posh suburbs with capital savings, surpluses and
mansions, can start agreeing on a comprehensive cohesion programme to build
a caring society. Unless we accept the existence of poverty in its extreme,
then together we can, in a meaningful way, start dealing with it
effectively in an effort to ensure a better life for all. I believe we can
act together to deal with these challenges.

Recently, we rallied around the support of our Springbok Rugby Team that
participated in the 2007 Rugby World Cup Tournament. Right at the beginning
of the tournament, every South African pledged support and followed the
progress of the team. As a matter of fact, every time when the Springboks
played there, there would be that euphoria, some ecstasy and celebrations
at the end of the games.

Oku sikubonile ngexesha kudlalwa umdlalo wamanqam kule veki iphelileyo.
Bonke abantu baxelelwa ukuba batshintshe igazi labo libe luhlaza. Kuloo
mdlalo, owawubanjwe ngoMgqibelo, uMzantsi Afrika wathi waphumelela, sabona
abantu behlangene bephuzana, nabangazange baphuzane ngaphambili.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We saw this during the final last week. Everybody was asked to change
their blood to green. During that match, which was played on Saturday,
South Africa won and we saw people united and kissing each other, even
those who had never kissed each other before.]

In our democratic dispensation, the ANC-led government has committed itself
towards a better life for all. The state should not be seen as perpetuating
poverty but rather as minimising it. Poverty alleviation is our commitment
to build a caring society.

Ngamafutshane, sifuna ukubona laa nto besiyibona ngoMgqibelo, abantu
bephuzana, bethandana, bebulisana – nabangazange babulisane ngaphambili.
Ukuze sibe nokulwa ubuhlwempu kwaye sakhe ilizwe elimanyeneyo, kufuneka
sonke khe sisuke kubumnandi beendawo esihlala kuzo siye kuba phakathi
kwabantu abahluphekayo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Briefly, we want to see what we saw on Saturday, people kissing, showing
love and greeting each other – even those who have never greeted each other
before. In order to eradicate poverty and to create a united country, we
need to move from our comfortable homes and go and mingle with the poor.]

The ANC-led government has indeed developed programmes aimed at dealing
with social ills to promote social cohesion. Of course, as the ANC, we
reaffirm our commitment to redress poverty and inequality. As we know, the
ANC-led government has declared 2007 as the year of intensifying the
struggle against poverty. It has developed an anti-poverty strategy that
addresses income, asset and social poverty with the objective of
eradicating poverty and creating employment. However, the ANC government
cannot do this alone.

Ndiyakholelwa ekubeni oongxowankulu nabo banegalelo ekufuneka belenzile.
Kwakukho umbutho woongxowankulu okwakusithiwa yi-Urban Foundation,
owawuhamba uqhayisa ngelithi abantu mabeze ngaphambili kuba baza kubakhela
izindlu. Ngoku, njengokuba ixesha lifikile lokuba bancedise ekulweni
nentlupheko, manyamalele.

Amadoda asebenzile kwimizi-mveliso iminyaka evileyo eshumini. Kodwa ithi
indoda njengokuba isebenza nje, ifane nomntu ongasebenziyo kuba nayo ayina
ndlu, ijonge kwalo rhulumente ukuba ayakhele indlu. Uye uxakeke ke ngoku
uzibuze ukuba ngaba la madoda asebenza amatye okanye asebenzela
oothikoloshe, okanye asebenzela abantu abangenamsebenzi nawo, abafuna
ukuhlohla izisu zabo kuphela na. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[I believe that the affluent also have a role to play. There used to be an
organisation of affluent people which was known as the Urban Foundation,
which used to go around asking people to come forward and they would build
them houses. Now, when the time has come for them to lend a hand in the
fight against poverty, they have disappeared.

Men have worked in factories for more than ten years. However, even though
the man is working, he is no different from an unemployed person because he
also has no house. He is looking to this government to build him a house.
One then wonders whether people are earning peanuts or are working for
tokoloshes, or are employed by people who have a complete disregard for
them and are only looking to enrich themselves at their expense.]

The emphasis on the social wage programme is to assist in dealing with
social poverty and social problems. Indeed, we need educated and skilled
citizens who are healthy and capacitated so that they can benefit from the
Asgisa.

Education and health are prioritised as core elements of social
transformation.

Ngamanye amazwi sithi, masiqinise kwezemfundo, sikhuthaze abantu bethu
ukuba baphile impilo engcono. Xa ndimamela okuthethwa ngabantakwethu kweli
cala, eneneni ngathi balahlekile. Ngoku asithethi ipolitiki yeyantlukwano,
sithetha ipolitiki ethi singenza njani na ukuqinisekisa ukuba abantu
bayahlangana.

Oogxa bethu basaqumbile. Ungambona noNkskz Van der Walt obethetha apha,
ukuba usaqumbile, usalwa nangona sisonwabile ngokuba Amabhokobhoko
ephumelele indebe yehlabathi kumbhoxo. Mhlawumbi ke kuya kufuneka ukuba
sikhe simchwethele nganeno, sihlale naye ukuze simbonise lo mqulu
ubalulekileyo kuthiwa nguMqulu waMalungelo. Mhlawumbi emva koko uya kuqonda
ukuba sikumzabalazo wokuhlanganisa bonke abantu baseMzantsi Afrika.
Unyanisile utata othethe egameni le-IFP, ukuba le ndlela isende, kodwa
kufuneka siqale ndaweni ithile, sisebenze sonke ukwakha isizwe esisodwa
sabantu baseMzantsi Afrika.

Utata othethe egameni le-FF Plus utshilo ukuba asizi kumnyanzela. Kodwa
zange khe ndibone nakweliphi na ilizwe kunyanzelwa umntu ukuba ahlangane
nomnye. Into endiyibonayo kweli lizwe kukuba endaweni yokuba sibe
siyamanyana, kukho abathi: “Thina asifuni loo nto. Hlalani nodwa, thina
sifuna indawo yethu ukuze sizihlalele simhlophe.”

Asiyondlela yokuhlalisana koluntu leyo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[In other words, what we are saying is that we must intensify our efforts
in education so that we can encourage our people to live a better life.
When I listen to what our colleagues on the other side are saying, I
realise that they are truly lost. We are no longer talking the politics of
separation. We are talking politics that ask what it is that we can do to
ensure that people unite.

Our colleagues are still angry. You can see that even Mrs Van der Walt, who
spoke earlier, is still angry. She is still fighting even though we are
celebrating the victory of the Springboks in the Rugby World Cup. Maybe we
need to bring her this side and show her the Bill of Rights. Maybe she will
then realise that we are in the struggle of uniting all the people of South
Africa. The hon member who spoke on behalf of the IFP, is right in saying
we still have a long way to go. However, we need to start somewhere,
working together to build one nation of the people of South Africa.

The hon member who spoke on behalf of the FF Plus did say that we cannot
force him. However, I have never seen it in any country where a person was
ever forced to unite with others.  What I see in this country is that,
instead of uniting, there are those who say: “We do not want that. Keep to
yourselves. We want our own place in which we can live separately as
whites”.

That is not how human beings should live.]

Society by its own nature is social. You develop within the society. You go
through the revolutionary system ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, your speaking time has
expired.

Mr B M SOLO: Awusandiphi nomzuzwana na? [Won’t you give me even a second?]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mnu B O Bapela): Ndizamile ukukunika umzuzwana. [I
tried to give you a second.]

I have been trying to be so tolerant to everybody that I gave them a few
minutes or seconds.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, we have certainly, as a nation, grown away from
the racial divides that apartheid forced us into and the gaps that have
been bridged have made us a strong nation. Today we stand as a united,
equal and democratic nation.

However, the reality of poverty, social and economic challenges and crime
is what is slicing away at our people on a daily basis. We have numerous
projects and initiatives that create opportunities for every South African
to grow and escape the shackles of a poverty-stricken lifestyle. Yet, we do
not always win. The challenges tend to hold us back much more strongly than
we can push forward.

The national Constitution has eradicated every divide and our Bill of
Rights has liberalised our people immensely. However, we need to go forward
and loosen these shackles. We have to address the repercussions we have
inherited from the apartheid regime - that is, poverty, crime, lifestyle,
education, transport and access to basic services.

The MF recognises that government has been doing this. However, we believe
that the roots of these challenges need to be uprooted, opposed and
rehabilitated before we are to plant any more seeds that should multiply
our democracy to greatness, unity and a nourished people. We do not dream
of a problem-free South Africa.  The reality is that overcoming each
problem makes us stronger, but a great leader once said: Let us fail to
have temporary success, rather than have temporary success, only to
eventually fail. We have ultimately achieved democracy, but this democracy
is set to fail if we do not remove the divide that separates our people. I
thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, social cohesion relates to, among others, a sense
of nationhood and shared national values. Our nation-building efforts will
only be successful and sustainable if we premise them on the historical and
progressive aspects of the norms and values of the majority. Our struggle
for liberation was not just about political rights or limited to economic
justice. It also had to take into account the disfigured and mutilated
history and culture of the majority. Therefore, our forward march as a
nation should take this into account.

Everyone in this country says they are Africans. What does it mean to be an
African? What are the values and norms that we must internalise and
espouse? If we are all Africans, how do some as Africans become a minority
amongst Africans? Some in our country must disabuse themselves of the
notion that Africans and their culture can be supplanted by a foreign
outlook. We must promote the projection and development of the African
personality. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, the issue of social cohesion and the
challenges as part of the construction of a cohesive nation in the building
of a national democratic society is a very important topic to debate in
this House. I want to state categorically and without fear of contradiction
that this task will not be achieved without the eradication of poverty,
inequality and underdevelopment in our country if the resources of this
nation are not shared equitably according to population figures.

The two-nation syndrome of the extremely rich minority and the extremely
poor majority in this country is suicidal. It has consequences of political
instability and of instability for our people.

Secondly, sectarianism, racism, tribalism and regionalism must be uprooted.
All heroes of our country must be equally honoured and their role in the
history of our nation recognised. It is disturbing to see some streets in
this very city of Cape Town named after war criminals like Oswald Pirow or
towns named after the British Colonel, Harry Smith, and Colonel Benjamin
Durban. The last two were involved in the death of King Hintsa. Yet, we
sometimes divide the African community by renaming a highway that is
already bearing the name of another African man. Chairperson, the culture
of “service to the nation first” must be cultivated.  The “me first” will
kill ... [Interjections.] Izwe lethu! [Our country!] [Time expired.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, allow me to thank the hon Frolick for highlighting the
importance of this matter. I have, in the past, pointed to the fact that
cohesion in South Africa is at the risk of passing our people by. First of
all, I believe the question is whether we do indeed have a common
understanding as to what cohesion means - because we frequently use the
concepts that are being used without any apparent insight, full
understanding and appreciation for their true meaning. Secondly, we should
ask the question whether we have any consensus as to how cohesion should
manifest itself.

With regard to a common understanding of cohesion, the NA believes that
cohesion can only be achieved if a conducive political environment exists.
The NA believes that the foundation of a conducive political environment is
an understanding of basic democratic principles and practices.

Voorsitter, dit bring die vraag na vore of demokrasie binne die Suid-
Afrikaanse konteks as voorvereiste vir samehorigheid nie gereduseer word
tot ’n numeriese konsep nie. Die ANC-regering regverdig juis die
beleidstandpunte met die beginsel van “the majority”. Wel, Voorsitter, die
“majority” sluit nie almal in nie. Die NA glo dat demokrasie, as politieke
stelsel, primêr as doel het om regverdigheid en billikheid teenoor alle
onderdane te verseker. As die regering van die dag beleid skep slegs vir
die meerderheid, sluit hy die res uit as ’n suksesvolle teenvoeter vir
samehorigheid. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chair, it raises the question whether democracy, as a prerequisite for
unity, is being reduced to a numerical concept within the South African
context. The ANC government precisely justifies the policy position with
the principle of “the majority”. Well, Chair, the “majority” doesn’t
include everyone. The NA believes that democracy’s primary goal, as a
political system, is to ensure justice and fairness towards all citizens.
If the government of the day draws up policy only for the majority, the
rest is then excluded as a successful counter to unity.]

Chair, the NA believes that together with other important factors,
government policies pose the greatest obstacles in the way of cohesion. The
most notable here is the adverse effect brought about by the Employment
Equity Act and government’s persistence to turn a blind eye on the matter.

Government should be for all people and not for some people - even if they
are the majority. Get this right and you will be dramatically closer to
social cohesion. I thank you.

Mnr S E OPPERMAN: Voorsitter, terwyl miljoene Suid-Afrikaners oorweldig is
deur die euforie wat deur die oorwinning van die Bokke in die Wêreldbeker-
eindstryd teweeg gebring is en dit seker ’n ideale tyd is om gesprek te
voer oor social cohesion – samehorigheid – is dit goed dat Jan-Jan Joubert
ons gister herinner het aan die woorde van Madiba tydens die Rivonia-
verhoor en toe hy 150 000 van ons die dag van sy vrylating in 1990 op die
Parade in Kaapstad toegespreek het:


    Ek het dit teen wit dominasie geveg het hy gesê –


    ... en teen swart dominasie. Dit is die ideaal waarvoor ek lewe, maar as
    dit nodig sou wees, is ek bereid om daarvoor te sterwe.

Waarlik ’n ikoon wat bereid is om te sterwe in sy stryd teen magsmisbruik,
wat die dood in die pot is vir samehorigheid.

Dit was komplekse maatskaplike, ekonomiese, religieuse en politieke
prosesse wat die produk van ’n Suid-Afrikaanse samelewing waarmee ons
vandag sit, geskep het. Hierdie is ’n realiteit wat nie onderskat moet word
nie, en hierdie realiteit benodig evolusionêre prosesse in plaas van
“social engineering” om bymekaar te bring wat uit innerlike oortuiging
bymekaar hoort. Enigiets anders sal kontraproduktief wees.

Dit is net jammer dat die geskiedenis ons leer dat niemand uit die
geskiedenis wil leer nie. Die leuse van ons land, Eenheid in Diversiteit,
vorm ’n belangrike onderdeel van die demokratiese bestel waaraan ons vandag
bou en waarin ons samehorigheid gesetel moet wees.

Daar is nie net een universele lewensbeskouing nie. Daarom behoort ek aan
’n party wat my persoonlike morele oortuigings respekteer en my toelaat om
te stem volgens my gewete waarmee ek moet saamleef. [Tussenwerpsels.] In ’n
demokratiese bestel moet hierdie vryheid van keuse gerespekteer word as ons
samehorigheid wil uitbou. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Toe ek ’n kind was, het ons gereeld die zai laat loop nadat ons
“saamgegooi” het. “Saamgooi” het beteken elke laaitie moes bydra. Die zai
was die brood wat ons gekoop het. Almal het saamgegooi, maar net een het
gedeel; die zai laat loop.

Daar was egter een belangrike reël. Die ou wat gedeel het, moes laaste vat.
Nodeloos om te sê, as die zai geloop het, was niemand ongelukkig nie. Die
geleerdes sal dit “even-handedness” noem. Ons laaities het dit beoefen.

Ons, agb lede, sal dit moet toepas as ons wil hê die “social cohesion
project,” wat ’n belangrike onderdeel van die Afrika-renaissance moet wees,
moet slaag.

Ek wil vanmiddag sê, ’n regering en ’n party wat toegelaat het dat
bevoorregte kaders onder die dekmantel van SEB multimiljardêrs geword het
terwyl die meerderheid van hulle ondersteuners hulle met moeite voortsleep,
het die reg verloor om namens die armes van die land te praat. Ek dank u.
[Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN: Chairperson, while millions of South Africans are
overwhelmed by the euphoria provided by the victory of the Springboks in
the Rugby World Cup finals – and it is certainly the ideal time to discuss
social cohesion – it is good that we were reminded yesterday by Jan-Jan
Joubert of the words of Madiba during the Rivonia trial, and when, on the
day of his release, he addressed 150 000 of us on the Parade in Cape Town.
He said:

   I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against black
   domination. It is an ideal which I hope to live for ... But if needs be,
   it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.


He is truly an icon that is prepared to die in his struggle against the
abuse of power, which is detrimental to social cohesion.

These were complex social, economic, religious and political processes
which created the product of a South African society we have today. This is
a reality that should not be underestimated, and, to unite that which, out
of an inner conviction, should be together, evolutionary processes are
needed instead of social engineering. Anything else would be
counterproductive.

It is a pity that history teaches us that no one wants to learn from
history. The motto of our country, Unity in Diversity, forms an integral
part of the democratic system on which we build and in which our social
cohesion must reside.

There is not only one universal view of life. That is why I belong to a
party that respects my personal moral convictions and allows me to vote
according to my conscience. [Interjections.] In a democratic system freedom
of choice should be respected if we want to promote social cohesion.
[Interjections.]

When I was a child, we usually clubbed together and shared alike. Clubbing
together meant that every young man had to contribute. We bought bread. We
called it “the zai”. Everyone contributed to the zai but only one shared:
we shared and shared alike.

There was actually one important rule: the one who handed out had to take
last. Needless to say, once the zai was shared, no one was unhappy. The
learned will call it even-handedness. As young boys we practiced it.

We, hon members, will have to practise it if we want this project of social
cohesion, which should be an integral part of the African Renaissance, to
be successful.

I want to say this afternoon that a government and a party that allowed
privileged cadres to become multi-millionaires under the pretext of BEE
while the majority of their supporters soldiered on with great difficulty,
lost their right to talk on behalf of the poor. I thank you. [Time
expired.]]

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, I would like to thank the parties that
contributed to this debate. Firstly, let me say that I completely agree
with Dr Mulder in that this is most probably not the time and that there is
also not sufficient room to discuss this topic in further depth. In fact,
you could quite easily see that the first speaker from the DA was clearly
out of her depth when she tried to deal with this issue. [Interjections.]

I believe this is the beginning of a process and that it remains the
responsibility of all political parties in Parliament to put together the
necessary structures and forums to ensure that we carry the process
forward, so that is something that requires further attention. Thank you
very much for the input.

Ek moet terselfdertyd ook die bydraes van die lede Greyling, Swart,
Rajbally, Godi en Pheko beklemtoon deur te sê ... [At the same time, I
should also emphasise the contributions made by members Greyling, Swart,
Rajbally, Godi and Pheko by saying ...]

... we are closer than we were when we started.
Ons het nader aan mekaar beweeg omtrent hierdie onderwerp. [We have moved
closer to one another regarding this topic.]

Of course, in terms of all the political parties, it requires further
interaction, because it is quite clear – and maybe that is why it was
important to put this topic up for discussion – that we need to ask: What
exactly do we mean by social cohesion?

It comes from a time in South Africa just after the dawn of democracy in
the mid-nineties, when we realised that the attainment of political power
and freedom meant nothing unless we ensured that we dealt with the legacies
of apartheid. That is where it comes from. It means that we must eradicate
poverty. It means that we must deal with the inequalities that have kept
our people apart from one another. That is where the concept comes from.

The previous speaker once again raised the legacy of Nelson Mandela, of
whom all of us are very proud. However, Nelson Mandela did not operate as
an individual. He was part of a collective; the collective ANC, which
introduced and dealt with these concepts and made concrete work of
reconciliation, because what it means in essence is that you bring two
different people together: One was discriminated against and the other one
was the discriminator – and then you say let us forget about the past and
try to charter a new way forward.

It requires the willingness to contribute actively towards that project,
and if the willingness is not there we shall sit with a serious problem,
and maybe that is why that hon member expressed herself in the way she did.

May I further say to Mr Simmons that the wheels of democracy will test the
policies of your party in the next election and hopefully beyond that we
will be able to discuss social cohesion with you again.

There is hope out there. You know, in my previous career, I was an educator
and later a school headmaster. I used to tell pupils in my class to prepare
themselves well for the exams that lay ahead, because they would be caught
out when they had to make their presentation. It is quite clear that these
members were caught out today. [Interjections.] Based on the contribution
that you have made I would have failed you. However, there is hope out
there. There is hope out there.

Just recently I was fortunate enough to listen to a young white South
African – and I want to emphasise the words “young” and “white”. The reason
why I want to mention it is that some parties in this Parliament claim to
have exclusive access and assert that it is their constituency. Listen to
what this young man said at a former Model C school when he addressed a
valedictory service. He was addressing young matriculants who were sitting
in front of him, who were most probably being bombarded with propaganda
saying that they should leave the country because they were not needed here
and that this was not working for them. He said to them:


   I compare the men sitting before me to our fledgling South African
   democracy. You are part of the very fabric of where our country is
   headed. In your first 10 years you were like a toddler learning to walk.
   Then, as you strengthened, you learned to run, flexed your muscles, burnt
   your fingers, learned some hard lessons, now come the hard yards as you
   become self-aware, aware of where you are going and what you need to do
   to get there.


   You are part of it all. The future is a very bright place. South Africa
   belongs to all of us. You have the power, the skill and the determination
   to greatly influence where we are going and what we should achieve as a
   nation.

He then concluded, and this is very important. He said:


   I challenge you ...

And this is also the challenge that I want to put to the hon member here –


   ... to wear our country’s colours with pride. I am not talking about a
   green and gold rugby jersey on World Cup final day. No, wear them in the
   way you talk about our country, in the way you conduct yourself in
   business, in politics, socially and in the high regard you must hold for
   your fellow countrymen and countrywomen. I thank you.

[Applause.]

I will definitely use the privilege I have to congratulate you on the
manner in which you handled the debate. It was quite honest and open, but
obviously there are quite a number of issues that were raised:
philosophical questions that need to be engaged and addressed; quite a
number of legacy issues were also raised about our history.

I hope that this is the first step of ensuring that we indeed go to that
debate where the mechanisms in Parliament will then probably provide for
that space where we could reach consensus and identify the areas on which
we are still divided and what we should do about those particular areas,
whereas, where we have reached consensus, we could then carry on and say
what it is that makes us South Africans.

I am glad and happy that all of you were quite optimistic about the future
and indeed we are raising issues with a view to correcting them and
ensuring that that future belongs to all of us. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:36.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

         (a)     National Environment Management: Waste Bill [B 39 –
              2007] (National Assembly– proposed sec 76) [Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
              No 30142 of 3 August 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.


2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by
         the Minister of Transport. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees
       Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
       Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
       202-2007].


