---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 13 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-06-13
---

WEDNESDAY, 13 JUNE 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the House:

  That the Council –


    1) notes that, in his address to the Council during the debate on the
       Transport Budget Vote on 6 June 2007, the Minister of Transport, the
       hon. Mr Jeff Radebe, indicated that –


       (a)  an amount of R41 million has been allocated between 2007 and
           2010 to increase and facilitate the movement of passengers and
           cargo in the Northern Cape province; and


       (b)  R33 million of this amount will be spent in Upington and R8
           million in Kimberley;


    2) acknowledges that such an investment will contribute significantly
       towards expanding economic activities in the Northern Cape province;
       and


  (3) takes this opportunity to congratulate the hon Radebe on his continued
       commitment to invest in advancing the lives of the people of the
       Northern Cape province, who for many years were subjected to neglect
       and underdevelopment by the apartheid government.


Me H LAMOELA: Ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die volgende sittingsdag sal
voorstel:

  Dat die Raad -

  (1) benewens die feit dat gesondheidsorg groot tekorte van professionele
       gesondheidswerkers ondervind, ook kennis neem dat —

       (a)  kontrakteurs projekte aanvaar vir die bou van hospitale —met
            verwysing na die Eben Dönges—hospitaal te Worcester in die
            Breederiviervallei — en dan groot probleme ondervind met
            vaardigheidstekorte wat werk van swak gehalte tot gevolg het;
            en


       (b)  die toedrag van sake vertragings in die voltooiing van hospitale
            veroorsaak en uiters nadelig is vir die lewering van
            toeganglike gehaltegesondheidsorg, veral op die platteland; en

  (2) dus ’n beroep doen op die LUR van Gesondheid vir die provinsie Wes-
       Kaap om in te gryp en te verseker dat tenders in die toekoms toegeken
       word aan kontrakteurs wat gehaltewerk binne beperkte tydsduur kan
       lewer.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Ms H LAMOELA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of the House:

  That the Council -


  (1) in addition to the fact that huge shortages in professional health
       workers are experienced, also notes that –


         a) contractors accept projects for the building of hospitals –
            with reference to the Eben Dönges Hospital at Worcester in the
            Breede River Valley – and then experience problems with skills
            shortages resulting in poor quality work; and


         b) the state of affairs causes delays in the completion of
            hospitals and is extremely detrimental to the rendering of
            accessible quality health care, especially in rural areas; and

  (2) therefore urges the MEC of Health for the province of the Western Cape
       to intervene and ensure that tenders will in future be awarded to
       contractors who can deliver quality work in a limited space of time.]


Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of this House on behalf of the IFP:


  That the Council –


  (1) notes that prosecutors have declined to prosecute a wheelchair-bound
        man who allegedly shot dead a criminal who attempted to hijack his
        vehicle at gunpoint;


  (2) further notes that criminals in this country are totally out of
        control and do not show care or respect for anybody, as they commit
        acts of violence and crime against anyone; and


  (3) realises that unless drastic measures are taken to curb the
        excessively high crime levels and restore high morals and values, we
        are facing a very bleak future.


Mr S SHICEKA: Chair, I wanted to raise the issue of the
constitutionality and legality of the motion by hon Mzizi about
killings and so on. He comes from my province, but I think the
motion is illegal and unconstitutional.

The CHAIPERSON OF THE NCOP: Very well, I will go through that motion. I
will have the power, as the Chairperson of the Council, to look into the
motion. I will do so.


                            ATTACK ON SCHOOLGIRL

                             (Draft Resolution)
Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council –

     1) notes with concern that -


        a) a schoolgirl in Atlantis was stabbed by a fellow  learner  while
           her teacher, who participated in the strike, was not present  in
           the classroom;


        b) the sick and injured are being  turned  away  from  clinics  and
           hospitals;


        c) this strike mainly affects the poor and vulnerable, who have  no
           alternatives;

     2) conveys its condolences to the families who have been bereaved; and


    3) calls upon the government and the unions to reach a solution in order
       to end the paralysis of service delivery.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       WORLD DAY AGAINST CHILD LABOUR

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council –

  (1) notes that –

       (a)  yesterday, 12 June, was World Day Against Child Labour, which is
           celebrated by 180 Members States of the International Labour
           Organisation, including South Africa;


       (b)  this day is aimed at mobilising people around the world against
           child labour and its worst forms;


       (c)  this year the World Day Against Child Labour focuses on the
           elimination of child labour in agriculture, which is estimated
           to employ over 100 million girls and boys aged five to 14 years
           old, of whom over 50 million are in sub-Saharan Africa;

  (2) while acknowledging the progress that South Africa has made in
       reducing child labour, there are still an estimated total of 4,8
       million child labourers between the ages of five and 17 working in
       the various sectors of the South African economy; and


  (3) takes this opportunity to urge our communities, particularly the
       business community and those in farms and rural areas, to act against
       this atrocity and report it to the relevant authorities.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                         SCHEDULE RELATING TO GIFTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion printed in my
name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That, subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly, item 8(f) of
   the Schedule to the Joint Rules of Parliament, relating to gifts and
   hospitality, be amended to read as follows:


   8. (f)   Gifts and hospitality:


                i) A description and the value and source of a gift with a
                   value in excess of R1500;


               ii) A description and the value of gifts from a single source
                   which cumulatively exceed the value of R1500 in any
                   calendar year; and


              iii) Hospitality intended as a gift in kind.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I shall now put the question. The
question is that the motion be agreed to. As this decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I need to ascertain very clearly
whether delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their
provinces’ vote. Are all delegation heads present?

I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declaration
in terms of Rule 71 if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal e lethu. [KwaZulu-Natal in favour.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?
Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Siyavuma. [In favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Mpumalanga iyavuma. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Bokone Bophirima e a dumela. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.




                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 27 – Housing:

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP, allow me to
acknowledge and congratulate our new MEC for Housing in Mpumalanga the hon
Mashego-Dlamini in her position and welcome her here as the MEC for
Housing. [Applause.]

And so again, we come to the House to request that you accept and endorse
our budget; to account for what we have done regarding that which you
approved last year and to inform you of what we intend to do with the
allocation that we hope you will approve today. As we begin our cycle of
life across the length and breadth of our country, the inspiration to
deliver on the hopes of our people reverberates, awakening in us the spirit
of a new nation. It binds us all who so many years ago stood at opposite
ends, driven by a common goal to achieve a life sustained by that which is
most basic to life: shelter, security and comfort. This exciting epoch
cannot end until the objective of providing all our people with shelter has
been completed, but for now, the budget.

The total allocation to provinces in terms of the Integrated Human
Settlement Development Grant has grown from R6,8 billion in the 2006-07
financial year, to R8,2 billion in 2007-08, at an annual growth of 19,5%.
Hopefully it will grow to R9,9 billion in 2008-09 and it is expected to
reach R11,5 billion in 2009.
Last year, hon members will remember, we were allocated      R6,8 billion.
I am happy to announce that six provinces have spent 98% of their budgets,
with the roll-overs in the other three provinces being the result of
scarcity of building materials and, therefore, delays in construction and
other nonrecurrent administrative problems. We have greatly improved our
monitoring capacity and we are certain that we will further reduce the
incidence of roll-overs.

A new allocation formula that was approved by the housing Minmec towards
the end of 2005 has been implemented in phases with the understanding that
the department will implement an increase in the baseline allocation at 6%.
This funding framework includes an initiative to top up funds in order to
address national priority housing projects. For the current financial year,
Zanemvula in the Eastern Cape and the N2 Gateway Project in the Western
Cape have been identified as these national projects. It is expected that
full implementation of this concept will take place during the 2009-10
financial year.

The framework for the implementation of priority projects, including the
criteria that will guide project selection, is in the process of being
finalised and it reflects that funds are ring-fenced by National Treasury
for priority projects. To maximise housing delivery, we would like to
prioritise mega projects, such as we have done at the N2 Gateway and
Zanemvula.
This instrument will allow the department to focus on optimising housing
delivery while contributing to the achievement of the broader goals of the
comprehensive plan. It will allow us to transform human settlements from
the dormitory suburbs of the past to truly integrated urban suburbs that
will have a more positive impact in addressing the nation’s housing needs.

A right to housing, as interpreted from our Constitution, indicates that it
is not only the state which is responsible for the provision of housing,
but the other agents within our society, including individuals, must also
be enabled by legislative and other measures to provide housing.

This is what we have done, being inspired by the good spirit prevailing
within the environment of our social contract. We conducted negotiations
with developers and other stakeholders over the past year to ensure that we
would collectively develop an inclusionary housing policy, which we talked
about last year. It was a careful process, somewhat prolonged, at times
flaring up in the open, but generally one that recognised how the burden of
the dysfunctionality of apartheid spatial planning continues to impact
negatively on the poor, and this needs changing with immediate effect.

The policy has now been drafted and enjoys the support of all our major
stakeholders. The policy will be implemented in stages and will culminate
in legislative measures by the end of the year.

It is worth stressing at this point that the policy we have developed is
only one instrument, and that in order to counter segregated or
exclusionist outcomes of our built environment processes, we will need
several other tools to change our legacy.

Last year at this time, I was reminded of our urgent responsibility by the
ghostly grip of winter and so we pledged to fast-track delivery. We have
found that the major impediment in accelerating delivery is our bureaucracy
and its inefficiencies, coupled with severe capacity deficiencies at all
levels, but especially at the local level. Research undertaken by, amongst
others, the Banking Association has revealed that perhaps the most serious
obstacles to speeding up housing delivery is the time it takes to process
development applications for new projects. We have been working towards a
solution that would see the streamlining of all administrative processes so
that we can cut waiting time by 50%.

We are greatly indebted to Partners for Housing, a section 21 company
chaired by Ms Wendy Lucas-Bull and financed by four major banks. This
entity has worked on analysing the processes followed within local
authorities. The aim was to help identify and remove obstacles that cause
delays and to define how current processes could be changed to achieve the
desired 50% efficiency improvement. The City of Tshwane volunteered to
serve as a pilot site for the project. The results in learning have
exceeded all our expectations and have been documented so that we can take
the lessons and make them available to other municipalities.

We are indebted to Partners for Housing because through the structure we
were indeed able to cut by 50% the housing delivery processes. We will be
sharing the re-engineering processes with other local authorities.

Every time we’ve been in this House, we have been sensitised by hon members
here to the unacceptable standard of work in our low-cost housing projects.
This has been a major concern to us as well. Hon members would be aware
that for the delivery of what we then referred to as RDP housing, the state
depended largely on developers and contractors. In the budget statement for
the financial year 2005-06 I reported to hon members that, as a result of
this delivery framework, what the state and the people were provided with
was shoddy work and in some instances incomplete houses. Poor communities
felt that government was not exercising its powers adequately to protect
them against these delinquent contractors. Coupled with the fact that
government itself sometimes was negligent of its responsibilities to pay on
time, a great deal of shoddy work from both unscrupulous contractors and
inexperienced ones became a blot on our record.
To put an end to this, developers and contractors will now have to adhere
to newly developed norms and standards that came into effect on 1 April
2007. Effectively this means that Breaking New Ground houses will be
quality houses, consisting of 40 square metres of gross floor area; two
bedrooms; a separate bathroom with a toilet, shower and hand basin; a
separate kitchen living area with a kitchen basin; and a ready board for
electrical installations. [Applause.]

In order to maintain these standards we have accordingly adjusted the
subsidy quantum from R36 000 to R38 000, and I am calling on other related
departments to assist us in ensuring that we can deliver quality houses. We
are also in the process of establishing an inspectorate that will work with
and enhance the work of the National Homebuilders Registration Council and
enforce the new norms and standards. Developers will also, as part of the
revised National Housing Code, be required to sell to the state houses that
they have built whose quality they can vouch for. Henceforth the state will
only buy quality.

To enhance quality of life, we are looking into regulating on energy-
efficient houses. We are in consultation with various departments to work
on this. When we have calculated availability of materials and cost
factors, we hope that we can come here next year and indicate that BNG
houses will, in addition to all the good things that I have indicated,
perhaps have solar energy.
We will support these changes with the introduction this year of the
Housing Development Agency that will identify and facilitate the rapid
release of well-located land for integrated housing and human settlements.
The Bill to establish the agency is in process of being submitted for
consideration by Cabinet. Further to the introduction of the Housing
Development Agency we will introduce planning cycles to ensure greater
efficiency in housing delivery.

I am pleased to announce that a more user-friendly manual for the
development of sustainable human settlements has been approved by MinMec,
which will further facilitate the delivery of housing. This manual provides
all the housing policies and implementation guidelines to ensure that the
comprehensive plan is carried out.

New and exciting housing development options are included in the revised
code. The new Integrated Residential Development Programme provides a
mechanism for a holistic development orientation, giving effect to the
government’s objectives to achieve integrated human settlement development.
The programme provides for a phased development approach and is based on
the entire need of an area or community and facilitates the provision of
serviced stands for all the required land uses.

The programme will also address the concerns regarding the affordability of
residential properties for the low-and middle-income categories, as it will
provide stands for the entire spectrum of the need.  The banking sector
will also benefit, as stands for the new finance-linked individual
subsidies will also be provided.

In a major breakthrough this year, and as part of our social contract, we
have had very fruitful negotiations with rural stakeholders to create a
rural housing policy that will enjoy the support of all. The rural housing
policy was workshopped at the rural housing indaba held in the Eastern Cape
which brought together Contralesa, the chairpersons of the National House
of Traditional Leaders and organised agriculture to assist in removing
obstacles in the delivery of houses in the rural areas. A policy which
incorporates the inputs received will be finalised during the third quarter
of 2007.  A pivotal element of this was the use of sustainable technologies
and housing typologies that are in tune with the rural environment.

We want to take this opportunity to thank all the stakeholders who made
this workshop such a resounding success.  We anticipate that we will be
signing the social contract with our rural partners next year, committing
ourselves to certain desired and measurable outcomes.

We know that our input would be meaningless to some members here unless it
touches on a very sensitive issue of hostel upgrades. [Laughter.] The
existing Public Sector Hostels Upgrading Programme, which was used to
effect only cosmetic improvements to dilapidated hostels, has been revised
and is now called the Community Residential Unit Programme.  This programme
provides a holistic, integrated development approach towards residential
units and, in addition, provides more appropriate funding mechanisms and
tenure arrangements for turning hostels around. I need to say that perhaps,
hon members, my department needs to ensure that we can fast-track this. It
is not possible for us, 13 years down the line, to live with the kind of
conditions that we have. [Applause.]

Before you come here, hon Mzizi, I would like to offer our sincerest
apologies for any of our shortfalls, but we will deal with this matter and
we know how passionate you are about it. When I come here next year, please
do not allow me to speak until I have lived up to my promises. Chairperson,
I realise that my speaking time is almost used up. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Just continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Our sincerest gratitude is also extended to
another important partner – the European Union.  The Social Housing Policy
and the guidelines for its implementation have been approved for
implementation.  To date, 52 776 social housing units have been provided in
collaboration with the EU, but the EU’s involvement unfortunately comes to
a close. I want to express our sincere thanks to them for their assistance
with this programme. Importantly also, we note that the Social Housing Bill
is now the subject of parliamentary processes.

A Housing Beneficiary Education Programme, which was initially piloted in
four provinces during the 2005-06 financial year, has now been rolled out
to all the provinces. More than 1 200 field trainers have been trained who
are now building capacity of housing beneficiaries and communities on
aspects such as their roles and responsibilities in owning a house, tenure
matters, how to gain access to government’s housing subsidies, etc. This
programme will continue into the 2007-08 financial year.

In view of the important role municipalities must fulfil in increasing the
delivery of housing, the department has embarked on a programme to build
the knowledge and capacity of municipal councillors on housing-related
matters. A desk-top handbook, as well as training material for this
purpose, has been developed and the training of councillors will commence
in the 2007-08 financial year.

I need your protection as I proceed to this particular point, Chairperson.
The accreditation of 16 priority municipalities involving the devolution of
the housing function to these municipalities has already begun with the
intention of elaborating capacity enhancements and institutional
restructuring of municipalities. To date, all 16 municipalities that we
have involved have received level one accreditation and are gearing up to
level two and three accreditation, depending of course on the output and
the affordability of these municipalities.

My department, together with the MECs, has been restructuring this and we
will have a hard look at this matter and we would like to advise that
perhaps we were too optimistic that we would progress to accreditation,
because the level of capacity in these municipalities is abysmal. We would
like your permission to allow us to stop at a particular time, look back
and see if we are in fact going in the right direction. We need you to
support us, because municipalities are very eager to get their full
accreditation and this is understandable, because this is what we hoped we
would do. We, however, needed to ensure that we do this responsibly.

My department has now restructured itself and a dedicated unit will focus
on the service delivery support function by supporting provinces and
municipalities with the upgrading of informal settlements and supporting
provinces in the unblocking of housing projects. The upgrading of informal
settlement projects and the unblocking of blocked projects have become a
priority as part of our delivery strategy for the coming year.

In respect of local government’s requirement to develop credible IDPs, and
specific to the creation of sustainable human settlements, there is a need
to align housing delivery plans at all levels, and these should form the
basis for accurate targeting and budget allocations.

It is therefore worth noting that, in response to the needs expressed on
the ground and the directive issued in the comprehensive plan, we have now
developed a programme for the development of municipal IDPs. In addition,
the department has approved a new housing planning dispensation that in
essence seeks to provide a strategic plan at provincial and national level
in respect of housing development planning.

The comprehensive plan places a fair amount of emphasis on demand
responsiveness as opposed to supply-driven state-assisted housing.  In
order to respond to demand and provide sustainable human settlements,
proper planning is required. More specifically, the comprehensive plan
requires that the development of housing chapters of municipal IDPs
include, among others, a municipal housing needs assessment, and a link to
provincial multiyear implementation plans. It is therefore worth noting
that the department, in response to this has created these norms and
standards and we need to ensure that municipalities are aware of this.

The rapid release of well-located land for integrated housing is one of the
cornerstones for the success of the comprehensive plan and the creation of
integrated communities with convenient access to social and economic
opportunities requires well-located suitable land close to economic
activities.

As mandated by Cabinet in 2006, the department has begun a process to
establish a housing development agency as I have indicated and we hope that
next year it will be fully functional. During this year, the
rationalisation of the housing entities will be finalised. The People’s
Housing Partnership Trust will work close together with Servcon. However,
those in the employ of these entities will be rationalised into the new
entities. In addition, the mandates of all three housing finance
institutions, i.e. the Rural Housing Loan Fund, National Urban
Reconstruction and Housing Agency, or Nurcha, and the NHFC will be reviewed
in terms of the National Treasury Development Finance Institutions review
process.

Now, for the crunch of the budget, the following is our allocation to the
provinces for the 2007-08 financial year. Firstly, the Eastern Cape gets
R1,052 billion; the Free State R653,3 million; Gauteng R2,197 billion;
KwaZulu-Natal R1,310 billion; Limpopo is allocated R651 million; Mpumalanga
is given R526,3 million; Northern Cape gets R130,9 million; North West is
allocated R766,8 million; and the Western Cape is allocated R948,5 million.
The total allocation of these amounts for housing for the financial year is
R8,238 billion. As per allocation formula, Gauteng province still remains
the highest in the allocation, receiving close to R2,2 billion, with the
poor, sparsely populated Northern Cape province being the lowest at R131
million.

In closing, I want to thank the Chairperson for his support and for putting
on the agenda of this House the very important discussion that happened
here earlier on in the year about the constitutional responsibility of the
national and provincial governments, ultimately to provide guidance on
policy in the issue of housing delivery, and this was an important
discussion around the N2. I was not here, but I’m told that it was a very
successful debate and I would like to thank the House for allowing us to
bring the debate here. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs, hon members and comrades,
it is always a pleasure to participate in this kind of debate, in
particular the policy debate on housing. Of particular interest is the fact
that in our last policy debate in 2006, as a committee we raised a lot of
challenges that we felt very strongly needed to be addressed by the
department.

We have thus noticed or observed a lot of improvement, of course,
notwithstanding some of the issues that have been raised by the provinces.

It is worth noting again that in most of the provinces we went to during
our oversight work we have also noticed an aggressive programme of
unblocking the blocked projects. This highlights the extent to which the
ANC is consistent with the programme of advancing and deepening the
national democratic revolution through its programmes. This debate is but
one among such policies. As we engage with the housing policy debate, we
cannot do that without locating it within the context of reconstruction and
development of our people’s lives. This debate is further located within
the content of availability of land for housing, water for sanitation,
skills for the construction of houses, co-operatives especially for women,
and for the socialisation of capital, therefore calling for an integrated
approach.

It must also be further understood that, as an instrument of
deracialisation, we need to deracialise the ownership patterns in the
development and support of new and emerging contractors. Of course, as
stated in our strategy and tactics, all this cannot come without a
struggle. Consistent with that line of argument, in our understanding as
expressed in the Freedom Charter that there shall be housing, security and
comfort, it is this defining character that has always made us understand
that housing cannot be seen in isolation of addressing the socioeconomic
conditions of our people. Therefore, the ANC’s approach to housing should
never be seen out of that particular context but rather as an all-inclusive
process of addressing the socioeconomic conditions of the poor and, most
importantly, the working class and the rural masses.

Hon members will remember that back in 1994, our approach in the main was
to provide shelter for our people. We did it with the understanding that
our people had to be socially and morally reconstructed. We understood at
the time that housing was a base to construct families and that by so doing
we were building a nation starting with the family through the provision of
a roof and a sense of privacy and honour.

It is worth noting that in some provinces there is an uncompromising
approach to construct housing using the principles of the Expanded Public
Works Programme. I deliberately choose not to mention those provinces but I
do make the point that especially through the unblocking of blocked
projects, we have seen some provinces opting for construction companies
rather than the labour- intensive approach to the construction of these
houses.

We raise this, hon Minister, through you Chairperson, because we believe
that a year after its launch in all our provinces, there is a well-
developed capacity of skills that have been transferred to our people,
ready to be used in the building industry - thus the Expanded Public Works
Programme.

We are well aware that not everything will come easy or without any
challenges. We, however, want to raise the same problem we raised in our
last debate, namely the extent to which we utilise our intergovernmental
relations to improve on our work, so as not to impose ourselves on our
sister departments. I am saying this by illustrating an example of a
municipality we visited called Phokwane. That municipality is newly co-
opted into the Northern Cape, and was previously in North West. One of the
problems that the municipality is faced with is the extent to which the
province can assist it in providing housing, because they do not have land.
The land that they have is communal land. With such a process in terms of
the principles of intergovernmental relations, we have seen the provincial
government and the Department of Land Affairs coming together, buying land
for the municipality. Together with the provincial department they were
able to construct houses for human settlement in the Phokwane Municipality.

We therefore thank Land Affairs for that kind of approach in assisting so
that this kind of problem can be resolved. This is unlike in the Eastern
Cape, in the Nelson Mandela Metro, where we came across a situation where
the municipality in actual fact identified prime land with walls. They put
that land on auction for private developers and relocated the people from
that piece of land further away from the centre of economic development. I
am raising this precisely because we have raised it with the municipality
and the province and we could see that clearly the understanding of working
together is just not there and there is a need for improvement in that
particular area.

The Breaking New Ground Programme by the department is one illustration of
how the movement of the people is capable of building a truly nonracial,
nonsexist and democratic society. The Cosmo project in Gauteng is a typical
example of how communities can be brought together with such a project,
thereby breaking the racial, cultural and ethnic and the class barriers
that exist in our society, as brought about by apartheid.

The N2 Gateway and many other such programmes in all our provinces present
a direct response to the clarion call made in 1912 with the formation of
the ANC when the then President, the late Pixley Ka Isaka Seme, called on
all tribes and ethnic groups to unite and build an organisation that would
in the main give leadership to a united society.

We have, however, noted that in the Northern Cape, again as an example, for
its two identified pilot projects, the province is expected to raise funds
from its fiscus for the Breaking New Ground project. Of course, the
Minister illustrated that clearly through the allocation to the Northern
Cape. I think that the committee feels strongly that we need to bring to
the attention of the department to assist not only the Northern Cape, but
also other provinces that might have similar problems of not being able to
raise enough resources to implement the process.

We take note of the fact that June is youth month; it is with that
understanding that we believe that, in particular, housing has a programme
that will engage young people of this country in productive activities.
With that understanding, we note that the Department of Public Works has a
programme for youth in the built environment linked to the issue raised
earlier around the infusion of EPWP principles in the work of the
department. We believe that with the skills that young people will learn
from this Public Works programme we can further develop these young people
and ensure that entities that fall under the Department of Housing, with a
mandate of constructing houses, will tap into this skill that had been
developed in this process.

Chairperson and comrades, let me thank the department for a very wonderful
thing that has happened. Something had been worrying me for a very long
time and we were very disappointed, but, hon Minister, with that wonderful
advert that is being shown on TV I think it is quite appealing in
explaining to our people the kind of progress that we have made as South
Africa in the provision of housing for our people and serving them.

And lastly, let me take the opportunity to thank the Minister and the
department and therefore exercise the mandate as given to me by the
committee to vote for the acceptance of this budget. Thank you. [Applause.]


Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, in an open
opportunity society individuals must be afforded the greatest possible
space to strive to achieve their aspirations and thereby reach their full
potential. It is difficult to envisage how this may be accomplished without
the security and shelter that a home affords. Moreover, a home confers
dignity on an individual and families, a root into the community, a sense
of place and belonging and the confidence to enter successfully into the
race of life.

In this sense, the DA in broad terms wholeheartedly supports the
government’s drive to extend housing to all our people, and we unreservedly
wish the Minister and her department every success in achieving these
worthwhile objectives.

It must be acknowledged that government has matched its good intentions
with the required funding. The housing budget in 2003 amounted to R2,4
billion. This year, it is almost R8,9 billion, very close to the R9,5
billion the Minister is anticipating for 2008-09. So the problem is not
intent or lack of finance. The problem rather is a series of inefficient,
ineffective and uneconomical practices which bedevil those very good
intentions.

The Auditor-General reports that there has been poor control over the
allocation of housing subsidies, including no evidence that beneficiaries
had qualified for subsidies, duplicate subsidies and over R300 million’s
worth of subsidies paid out to non-government employees. The second major
problem the Auditor-General identified was poor administration and
management of housing projects, which included an inability to collect
debts and rentals owed to the department, VAT evasion and a lack of
accounting, asset management and monitoring procedures due to poor record-
keeping to name only a few. At some stage – and I believe we have already
reached this point – we have to stop blaming apartheid for these failures,
hold the individuals responsible accountable, and boldly take the necessary
steps to ensure there is effective delivery to our people.

The N2 Gateway project was originally launched amid great fanfare, pomp and
ceremony as the government’s flagship project. Again, the intentions were
worthy. Thirty percent of the units were supposed to be allocated to
backyarders and 70% to residents of Joe Slovo, Langa, Gugulethu,
Bonteheuwel, Bokmakierie and Nyanga. Applicants had to be on the verified
housing list and they had to be South African citizens and the intention,
amongst others, was to transform the poverty-stricken N2 Gateway area into
a model housing project.

Last year in this very debate, the MEC for Housing in the Western Cape made
one of the most revolutionary and provocative speeches I have ever heard
during my 8-year tenure in this august House. In response to media reports
and concerns by various parties with respect to the N2 Gateway project, he
taunted the opposition in this House by responding to every issue by saying
“so what”. The outcome has been completely predictable: A projected R700
million cost over-run; the completion date shifted from June 2005 to
October 2009 or maybe even January 2010 - 5 years later than the original
deadline - just 705 units completed out of the anticipated 22 000 by June
2006; residents complaining about shoddy work and cracking of their units,
a threatened rent boycott and sub-contractors downing tools claiming they
had not been paid or were being short-changed. In the latter case, this is
the inevitable consequence of proper contracts not having been signed in
phase one in the absence of a proper policy framework. It has also been
more than a year since the City of Cape called for an urgent forensic audit
of the R12 million contract awarded to Cyberia Technologies in the first
phase of the project for findings to be released.

I take it we are not going to be saying “so what” to the residents whose
houses’ walls are cracking. The fact is, the contractors building the units
should be registered with the NHBRC, and a large project such as this
should only be awarded to a contractor who has graduated through the
various NHBRC stages to being authorised to construct a large number of
units. Something has clearly slipped through the cracks – no pun intended –
and the Portfolio Committee on Housing is quite correct to seek an
explanation from the NHBRC as to how this could have occurred.

I want to make it clear to this House today that quality control in the
construction of the N2 Gateway project vests in the contractors rather than
the City of Cape Town, and that land availability agreements had nothing to
do with the delays that have afflicted this beleaguered project.
Construction teams have been allowed on site, despite land availability
agreements not having been signed from the outset. Delays have in fact been
occasioned by price disagreements between developers and contractors,
community disputes and drawn-out negotiations between the department and
the community. In any event, the City of Cape Town was stripped of all
responsibility for the N2 Gateway project in June last year when the
national and provincial housing departments said the project was not a
local competency. It is time that these departments accepted accountability
for the outcome, but most importantly let us not forget that our primary
focus should be the marginalised families who are supposed to be the
beneficiaries. Let us learn from these problems, put them behind us, and
accelerate delivery.

The Minister will be aware that my party was extremely concerned with
respect to clauses 8(a) and 8(b) in the Housing Consumers Protection
Measures Amendment Bill, which proposed that the NHBRC Council has the
right to reduce any amount that may be expended to settle a claim, as well
as make payment to the housing consumer in full and final settlement of any
claim, or refuse any claim, where money was not available or “not expected
to be available” for that purpose. We saw this amendment as fundamentally
flawed, inasmuch as the purpose of the Bill is to protect the consumer, and
when a new house is registered with the NHBRC, the owner is taking out a
warranty in good faith against future defects. The Minister’s predecessor
may recall that in the late 1990s I made a similar objection as a private
citizen that no person should be forced to take out a monopolistic
insurance policy where the insurer was not obligated to pay out in the
event of a legitimate claim. Moreover, the CEO’s report in the latest NHBRC
financial statements indicate the substantial financial health of the
Council and the solvency of the NHBRC warranty fund.

It is therefore correct and pleasing to note that my colleague Butch Steyn
has this very morning succeeded in persuading the Portfolio Committee on
Housing to remove this offending clause in the amending Bill which will
hopefully restore confidence to housing consumers.

Lastly, on behalf of all housing consumers who are experiencing rapidly
escalating building costs and increasingly unaffordable housing, I would
like to raise the issue of the NHBRC grading system once again. In my
address last year I referred to the 2005 report by the CEO of the NHBRC
where he disclosed that the organisation “has introduced an exciting plan
as an incentive for home owners, the grading system.” I welcomed this
innovation which would incentivise sound business practices, make better
builders more competitive, lower the cost of homes to the benefit of our
citizens and align market forces with government policy. I stated that all
the regulations in this regard had been drafted, and yet a year later after
the CEO’s statement in the NHBRC’s report, the grading system was still not
operational. All that apparently was required was promulgation by the
Minister, and I urged her to do this as soon as possible so that these very
worthwhile benefits could be enjoyed by all.

I telephoned the council this morning to learn to my shock and horror that
they are still waiting for the regulations to be gazetted and that
consequently the grading system is still not operational. Are there any
good reasons for these delays? I urge the Minister yet again to personally
intervene in this matter, as year after year assurances are received, and
we are informed the system is imminent, and yet nothing happens. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms K C MASHEGO-DLAMINI (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, hon Minister, my
colleagues from the provincial executives, delegates and hon members of the
NCOP – this is my maiden speech as an MEC for Mpumalanga. [Interjections.]
As the Minister rightfully pointed out, we have made huge progress in the
delivery of houses as a country. Our achievements can only be matched by a
few nations - if any. In Mpumalanga we have built 111 963 housing units,
thus providing houses to close to half a million families. Although this is
far from being enough, as a result of the challenges that we have been
facing, we can indeed be proud of what we have achieved thus far.

However, we do acknowledge that there is still a lot of work that needs to
be done. Perhaps the challenges that we are faced with can best be depicted
by an 88-year old Gogo Samaria Zitha of KwaDela in the Msukaligwa
Municipality, who only got her house on 12 December 2006, at the end of the
16 Days of Activism Against Women and Child abuse. The tears of Gogo Zitha
receiving her house will forever remain in our memories.

The province has been saddled with a number of challenges that have
affected our ability to deliver houses at the rate in which we had planned.
We have since identified those challenges, with the biggest one being our
planning. We are changing the planning of our projects and implementing the
multi-year planning approach to our projects. We believe this will enable
us to make sure that when we plan we take into account the different
challenges and processes that we may encounter.

One of the other challenges has been the improper beneficiary list compiled
by the municipalities. To address this, we have requested all
municipalities to give us their housing needs by the end of June for the
planning for 2008-09. We have further set aside an amount of R100 000 per
municipality to help them develop their housing chapters.

The road ahead to meeting the 2014 Millennium Development Goals of
eradicating informal settlements will not be without its challenges.
Informal settlements are increasing at an alarming rate in the province.
Together with municipalities, we are looking at developing a provincial
policy that will deal with this problem. We cannot allow the situation to
go unchallenged.

We remain committed to the pledge that was made by our fellow countrymen 52
yeas ago in the Freedom Charter, where they boldly declared that there
shall be housing, security and comfort for all. When we talk of “all” we
mean all people - be they in rural, urban areas or even on farms. To attest
to this we will also be developing agri-villages on farms, targeting both
farm dwellers and labourers. Some farms have been bought by the national
Department of Land Affairs whilst others have been donated by farmers.

As part of rolling out the Breaking New Ground houses through creating
integrated human settlements, we have identified 10 municipalities in our
province where we will be implementing these projects. We will be working
with our Mpumalanga Housing Finance Company and other financial
institutions.

In 2006, the department conducted a survey on socioeconomic levels and
housing typology of informal settlements that revealed a very interesting
result. It has shown us that not everybody needs a RDP house, but some need
rental stock. This shows us that one of the biggest needs in the province
is to establish housing for rental purposes. To address this need, the
department has taken a decision to help municipalities to purchase land and
buildings in areas that have been identified as areas for human settlement.
We have also engaged the Department of Public Works to help us identify
unused government land that can be used to build houses.

We have further re-aligned our housing association in the province to be
registered as part of municipal entities in terms of Chapter 10 of the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act of 2003. We agree with
the Minister that we are still faced with the challenges of poverty
alleviation, access to land for housing development, access to housing
finance, protection of housing consumers from substandard work and the
eradication of corruption.

If we do not address these challenges, we will not succeed in our
endeavours to create a better life for all our people in the province. As
Mpumalanga province we therefore support the budget.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs, hon members and
comrades, as the ANC we support the Budget Vote of the Department of
Housing.

Ke nnete gore mmago ngwana o swara thipa ka bogaleng. Re bolela bjalo ka
baka la gore Presidente o ile a bona go tloga kgale gore Lefapha la tša
Dintlo le nyaka mosadi wa basadi. Ka gona re re o sware o tiiše.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[It is true that a woman can withstand any challenge. We say this because
the President realised a long time ago that the Department of Housing
requires a strong woman. We therefore urge you to continue working hard.]

In section 10 of our Constitution it says, and I quote: ``Everyone has
inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and
protected.’’

Housing became a priority for the ANC since its inception in 1912. In 1956,
at the People’s Assembly, it was declared that there will be houses,
security and comfort. This also refers to the people in the rural areas in
the provinces of Limpopo, Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the others.

All people are born with dignity, pride and status. This was taken away by
the apartheid regime when it passed laws that ensured that blacks are
removed from their land and forced to settle in dry, neglected and barren
land, far from economic activities and amenities. The department is
ensuring that the people of South Africa are housed and that their status,
dignity and pride are restored as real citizens of South Africa. Housing is
about life, about what is good for the nation.

Ge o goletše ka ntlong ya bjang goba ka lapeng la go itlhokela, o fela o
duma le go lebelela gore mohlang o gotše o kgona go itirela gape o kgona go
iphatela ka tša gago diatla, o kgone go agela batswadi ba gago mokutwana; o
kgone go ba agela ntlo yeo e tlago ba swanela go ya ka maemo a gago gomme
go tloga moo o ye go ikagela ya gago ye borutho. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraph follows.)

[If you grow up in a thatched house or in a poverty-stricken home, you
sometimes yearn to see the day when you are a grown-up and able to work on
your own to provide your parents with a decent house. It is then that you
can think of building your own decent house.]

Giving people affordable housing structures is not only about bricks and
mortar, hon Minister and Chairperson. It is about ensuring that all the
people of South Africa experience and enjoy what owning a decent house
entails. This even includes the rural provinces. It is about ensuring that
commitment, loyalty and dedication are applied.

Ke ka moo, bjalo ka mmušo, re tshwenyegago ka kudu ge re bona
boradikonteraka ba bangwe ba fo agela batho ba gaborena dintlo tša go
tekateka tšeo di beago maphelo a bona kotsing; dintlo tšeo motho a rego ge
a di lebelela a bone gabotsebotse gore di sekame. Dintlo tše bjalo ka tše
di a nyamisa gomme di dira gore motho a uše sefahlego. Re ipotšiša gore
batho bao ba agago dintlo tša mohuta wo ba tšwa kae, ke batho ba mohuta
mang le gona ba reng ba aga dintlo tše bjalo mola ba tseba gabotsebotse
gore bona ba itulela ka go tše majabajaba mo ba iketlilego gomme le go
phethoga ba sa phethogego ge ba robetše.
Ke ka moo, bjalo ka dikemedi tša Limpopo, re rilego ge re be re etetše
diporotšeke tša dintlo ka dinagamagae gomme re hwetša go agilwe dintlo tša
go swabiša, ra bona bokaone e le go bolela le balefapha la merero ya tša
dintlo ka profenseng ye gore ba emaeme ba dire gore bakgekolo le bana bao
ba dulago ka dintlong tšeo ba hwetša borutho le gore seriti sa bona se a
hlompšhwa. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[As government, we are really concerned when we see some contractors
building low-quality houses which put the lives of people in danger; these
houses are even crooked. These kinds of houses are disappointing. We ask
ourselves where these people come from, what kind of human beings are they
and why are they building these types of houses whilst they live in decent
houses.

That is why, as the Limpopo delegation, when we were visiting projects for
houses in the rural areas and we found that they were building poor quality
houses, we saw a need to liaise with the department of housing in this
province to provide decent houses for older citizens and children in order
to give them dignity and pride.]

It is heartening, hon Minister and Chairperson, to report that the
provincial department worked on those projects and unblocked them. Already
well-established contractors have been appointed. The challenge is that
Limpopo needs resources to the tune of R1 billion to do that.

In Limpopo we have established mechanisms to deal with fraud and
corruption. The department has established a toll-free number and a
consumer housing call centre - the first of its kind in the country - to
deal with consumer problems and enquiries regarding housing issues.

Ke ka lethabo go bega gore mogala woo o a šoma gomme e bile o kgontšha
badudi ba Limpopo go bega ka dipelo tšeo di lokologilego, ba tseba gore
mmušo wo o etetšwego pele ke ANC o tlo ba phethela, wa dira gore le bona ba
dule ka dintlong tša go kgahliša.(Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[It is with pleasure that I inform you that this number is in use and it
helps the people of Limpopo to report any irregularity without hassle. They
know that the ANC-led government will help them, and will make sure that
they also live in decent houses.]

Hon Minister, as the select committee we were able to attend the Rural
Housing Indaba in East London and we were very proud to see the dedication
that the role-players have shown at the indaba. The commitment that they
pledged was to ensure that even if one builds in a rural area one is not
discriminated against when it comes to financing. Rural people will be able
to access funding. They are going to use their houses as surety when they
apply for financing.

What we are saying as the ANC is that we are proud of our track record. It
is true that there are problems here and there. As a nation, we have to
commit ourselves, like the hon Minister and the hon MECs are doing, to
ensure that whoever undertakes to house our nation does so with commitment
and that whoever undertakes to give our people housing does so with the
dedication that the hon Minister and the hon MECs have shown.

I reiterate, as the ANC we are saying:

Re sa realo re re mmago ngwana o swara thipa ka bogaleng. Go wena Tona re
re: O gole o be kaaka tlou gomme thapo yeo o e kakatlele gore batho ba
gaborena kua magaeng, kudu ba kua gagešo Ga-Masemola le ba karolongkgetho
yeo ke šomago go yona ya Ga-Mmalebogo, ba be le dintlo gore le bona ba re
ge ba eme ba eme ka go ikgantšha ka la gore mmušo o re phethetše e bile o
re diretše. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[We still emphasise that a woman can withstand any challenge. To you
Minister we say, keep up the good work and stay focused so that our people
in the rural areas, especially people from my village at Ga-Masemola and
people in my constituency at Mmalebogo, can be provided with good quality
houses, so that they can appreciate what the government has done for them.]


Ke a leboga. [Legofsi.] [Thank you.] [Applause.]]

Mr R DYANTYI (Western Cape): Chairperson, since 1994 this government, as
reflected by the Minister, has achieved so much regarding housing delivery.
As we continue to achieve, we at the same time continue to face enormous
challenges. We are dealing with a backlog, hon member Krumbock, which is
historical. I take note of the fact that you want to look forward, but we
have to reflect from time to time. It is a backlog caused by and
contributions were attributed to the issue of people’s movements and
migration patterns when they were looking for economic and social
opportunities in different parts of the country. Of course, part of the
backlog relates to the level and the rate of delivery vis-á-vis the growth
that we have to deal with.

We continue, as a challenge, to face the issue of funding arrangements. It
is an ongoing challenge, even though we are getting what we are currently.
Further than that, speaking to you as members of this House, we have to
share with you that some of the challenges that we are facing are
legislative in nature. As the Minister would have reflected to you, some
projects were delayed because in a way some EIAs had to break away in
accelerating housing delivery. That is a challenge we have been continuing
to face, including issues of capacity constraints whether it relates to
issues of land, material, and prices that are rising every day.

The question is what are we doing? I want to start by thanking Minister
Sisulu on behalf of the Western Cape for allocating to us R948 million for
this current financial year. I want to answer the question that asks: What
we are going to be doing with this allocation? What is this money buying
for us? For the Western Cape, this budget is going to ensure dignity for
our people. That is what we want to do with the R948 million.

The Breaking New Ground Policy under the leadership of the Minister is
saying to us that no one size fits all. It says in order to find solutions
to these problems, we have to have a differentiated approach in dealing
with these issues. It is in that regard that, in the Western Cape, in line
with this policy, we are embarking on building partnerships with the
private sector, because we realize that government alone is not going to
confront this challenge and deal with these backlogs.

We are also talking about a partnership in terms of the state-owned
enterprises where they own land and other issues. We also have partnerships
with the beneficiaries and the communities themselves through programmes
such as the People’s Housing Programme and community residential units, as
the Minister was reflecting here. We have just last week highlighted the
kind of projects that we are going to be implementing in this financial
year.

I want to say, as I said last week to the Minister in this House, that the
Western Cape is committed to accelerating our implementation of the N2
Gateway. We think that, regarding what you are doing in the Western Cape,
that the Western Cape would be  poorer without the contribution of your
leadership because, for many years, the Western Cape has had an average
annual budget of about R300 million. We now are closer to a billion in
terms of the budget and that’s clearly because of your effort and your
leadership, and we thank you for that.

I also want to say that, just last week and yesterday, we handed over - for
the first time - decent housing of 40 square metres as part of this N2
Gateway Project, which is a flagship pilot project nationally, to mothers
who are older than 70 years. When we give, for the first time, houses to
people who are older than 70 years we cannot be looking back and asking
ourselves the question, why only now? It is, hon member Krumbock, because
of our history and so we will continue to reflect on those issues, because
it’s both a happy moment and a sad moment when we do that.

We also want to take this opportunity to say in relation to the N2 Gateway
Project, without apportioning any blame because we are a responsible
government, that there are people we have to deliver to. Some of you have
the luxury of pointing fingers which we do not have. We are going to
deliver and fast-track our delivery.

You did not mention to tell this House that the City of Cape Town sat with
the land availability agreement for seven months, which has cost more than
R15 million. You chose not to mention that. [Interjections.]

I also want to say here that we fully support what the Minister has
informed this House about. In relation to the issue of municipality
accreditation, we support the Intergovernmental Relations Act where we are
going to be using the delivery protocol to ensure that we do this project-
based as compared to devolving powers to municipalities. We are fully
behind you and we support that decision, Minister.

At the same time, we want to share with you that in relation to human
settlements in the Western Cape, we have already changed municipalities to
be able to understand what human settlement is all about, because if the
leadership does not understand what human settlement is all about, we are
still going to be sitting with problems. We have already done that for 20
municipalities as part of that training. We are insisting, in the
integrated development plans – their IDPs - that we want to see a chapter
on human settlements because that is where we are going to begin to speak
about issues in terms of where these houses are located. Are they located
in prime areas and closer to work opportunities? We also support what we
have mentioned here, the issue of the UISP - Upgrading of Informal
Settlements Programme - because we think that whilst we are on course in
eradicating the bucket system by December this year, this UISP is going to
help us achieve our universal target of 2010 for sanitation, and we are
beginning to roll that out. Already, through your leadership and policies
that you have created, we have gone a long way even in the past financial
year to stick to that issue which helps us to deal with that matter.

We have also referred here to some of the shoddy work that was done in the
past. We want to inform this House that, as the Western Cape, we are fully
in a programme of rectifying some of those issues. Just yesterday and over
the weekend we were dealing with some of those projects. We have to balance
two things while we build and deal with new business and build new houses.
We are still sitting with the existing stock that brings along these
quality challenges. With the kind of policies that we have created in that
regard, we are rolling those out in many areas, as we were on Sunday in
Gugulethu, to show those people that they also have a future in this
province.

Lastly, I also want to announce and share with this House with regard to
the three provinces of the Western, Northern and Eastern Cape, that the
Northern Cape budget is R130 million, but because of the way we are
working, the Northern Cape is aware that many of its communities are coming
to the Western Cape and, therefore, the kind of budget that the Minister
gives to the Western Cape also takes into account and accommodates that,
and helps the Northern Cape in terms of those issues. [Interjections.]
Those three provinces have now begun to talk about our own interdependence
as three provinces. We have begun to talk about joint strategies, joint
planning and what we make of all of these issues. We are not talking about,
hon member Robinson, creating Chinese walls between these provinces. It is
about how we are managing these people’s movements across the three
provinces. I thank you.

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, Ngqongoqshe kazwelonke noNgqongqoshe bezifundazwe -
nina bendlovu enamandla. [Chairperson, Minister and the MECs - you, the
children of the powerful elephant.]

Chairperson, taking part in this very important debate on housing, when one
reads the Constitution, section 26 on housing, it states clearly that
everyone has a right to have access to adequate housing. Hence the
Department of Housing has a responsibility to make sure that every South
African, rich or poor, has access to adequate housing on a progressive
basis within its available resources.

The other message we find is that no one may be evicted from their home or
have their home demolished without an order of the court, made after
considering all the relevant circumstances. No legislation may permit
arbitrary eviction. Minister, people still experience evictions and
demolition of their dwellings without proper consultation. This act causes
a lot of litigation and court processes. These cases are prevalent in the
area where I stay in Ekurhuleni, mostly involving self-help scheme housing
and other dwellings.

The budget allocated for the year illustrates an increase of 15,95%
compared to the 2006-07 financial year budget allocation. The average
annual growth rate is 17,2%, and I think that with this budget we will be
able to fulfil all other demands, especially for unforeseen circumstances
of disaster such as floods and fire.

The main challenges facing the housing sector are the lack of
intergovernmental co-ordination for accelerated delivery - especially in
relation to the capacity of provinces and local government to deliver on
national priorities - and the lack of monitoring and evaluation capacity to
administer the housing subsidy system.

The other problem is that you still find people on the waiting list. Just
to cite an example from the waiting list of 1996-97, a lot of people from
that time have not been able to have access to any kind of accommodation.

The IFP welcomes the idea of the government that the provincial housing
department should implement the process of building capacity to improve the
planning, technical and administrative procedures to accelerate the
delivery of housing units.

Ngqongqoshe mangisho ukuthi akuseyikuba kubi khona kwezezindlu ngoba phela
usuke waphakamisa isandla wathi maluju. Kodwa-ke Ngqongqoshe labo bantu
abangahlali emahostela kanye nabantu abangakaze bangene ngisho nakanye
ngaphakathi emahostela, abazi ukuthi kungani kubalulekile ukuthi sikhulume
ngamahostela.

Abantu abaningi bafika emahostela ngoba bebalekela izimpi lapho babehlala
khona. Abanye babefika namakhosikazi abo bayohlala nawo khona emahostela.
Uzokhumbula-ke Ngqongqoshe ukuthi amanye amahostela asasebenzisa loluya
luhlelo oludala lwama-cubicle units.

Kulawa ma-cubicle units kwakulala abantu babe yisishiyagalombili ndawonye,
kunguthela wayeka nje. Wawuye uthole ukuthi unkosikazi nomnumzane balele
embhedeni, uvale ngekhetheni kanti ngale kulele amanye amadoda. Angazi-ke
kahle ukuthi uma leyo ndoda enonkosikazi isebenza ebusuku leyo nkosikazi
yayisala nobani. Ukube ngangingaba kuleso simo mina ngangingeke ngisebenze
ngangingalokhu nje ngehla ngenyuka [Uhleko.].

Okubi kakhulu-ke Ngqongqoshe ukuthi laphayana emahostela kukhona izindlu
zangasese ezingavalwa, ezinguthela wayeka nje. Uthola ukuthi inkosikazi
ihleli laphayana, nanguyana uyangena nomnumzane mumbe laphayana naye afike
ahlale. Ngalawo magama-ke sisho ukuthi uma kungasekho inhlonipho ngakube
sibhekephi - ngoba nezingane zikhona njalo lapho. Angikhulumi-ke ngamanzi
... [Akuzwakali.] ... asazi ukuthi kwenzekani.

Kodwa-ke Ngqongqoshe ungihlabe umxhwele uma uthi cha usuyobhukula uke
ushone khona. Umnumzane uMashatile ngake ngambiza wazibonela ngawakhe
amehlo, kodwa-ke noma kunjalo siyaxhasa, akukho esikugxekayo kwisabelo
osinikile. Unwele olude. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Minister, let me say that at least things will not be as bad in the
housing sector, as you have since acknowledged the shortfalls. But
Minister, those people who have neither stayed in a hostel nor visited a
hostel do not understand why it is so important for us to talk about
hostels.

Many people came to hostels because they were fleeing wars in their areas.
Some came with their wives and went on to stay in hostels. You will
remember, Minister, that other hostels still use what is known as cubicle
units.

These cubicle units would accommodate at least eight people at once,
without any privacy. In some instances you would find that a man and his
wife are sleeping on the oneside of the unit, and only partitioned off with
a curtain and on the other side of the curtain a few men are also sleeping.
I am not too sure then as to who would look after the wife of that man if
he is doing night shift. If I were to be in that situation, I would decide
not to work, and simply pace up and down. [Laughter.]

The worst thing in hostels though, hon Minister, is that there are toilets
which cannot be shut, and everything is exposed. You find that a female
resident is sitting over there, and a male resident would simply walk in
and sit on the other side. With those words we are saying that if we lose
respect, then where are we heading, as all these things happen in front of
children ... [Inaudible] ... we don’t know what is happening.

Minister, I was immensely impressed by your saying that you will take it
upon yourself to visit the hostels. I once invited hon Mashatile and he saw
the conditions under which these people live there. Be that as it may, we
support this budget you have presented to us and we are not critical of
anything. Long live.]

Mr T M JEEBODH (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister of Housing, hon
MECs and colleagues, it is indeed a pleasure and honour to be part of this
debate on the Housing Vote.

I am from the kingdom province of KwaZulu-Natal, as some would say it’s the
only province with a first name and surname. [Laughter.] This lovely
province has the highest population of all eight provinces. According to
the 2006 estimates, our population was 9,813 million or 20,9% of the total
population of South Africa. Our contribution to the national GDP is 16,3%.
Our annual average household income is R78 205, compared to the national
average of R86 360. KwaZulu-Natal statistics on living conditions are:
Household living in formal dwellings is 61,7%, against the national average
of 69,6%; household living in informal dwellings is 14,8%, against the
national average of 15,9%; and the household living in traditional
dwellings is 23,2%, against the national average of 11,8%. The bottom line
is that we are the biggest province with some of the biggest backlogs.

Since 1994, when we got our independence and freedom, housing has been one
of the core social issues for redress, with a total of 2,2 million houses
built so far in South Africa. Our province has an opportunity to invest a
total of about R9 billion over 12 years.

One of the most significant constraints to Asgisa remains the partial
distortion by pre-1994 apartheid. On the one hand, it is common in all our
communities for growth and development to be highly effective, but unevenly
skewed and concentrated in a small geographic space. On the other hand,
apartheid spatial planning deliberately exacerbated these tendencies,
ensuring that people were located far from social and economic
opportunities, denying many people access to opportunities of employment,
wealth creation and social progress.

Since 1994, South Africa has witnessed a massive migration to the areas of
economic opportunity, leading to the spawning of informal settlements in
major towns and cities. Although poverty continues to be highly
concentrated in rural areas, today the greatest number of poor people
reside in our many urban centres. Nevertheless, the enduring legacy of
apartheid planning means that spatial marginalisation from economic and
social amenities continues to be a significant feature of our economy,
which must be addressed in order to reduce poverty and create a better life
for all. This means that social investments like housing must be located
within the midst of centres of economic opportunities. We have to act
decisively to reverse the pattern of housing delivery. It also means that
all spheres of government should target their social economic investment in
localities that will become major centres of growth in South Africa.

This brings me to the principal argument. The national Department of
Housing, together with its provincial counterparts, is planning the total
eradication of slums by the year 2014. Giving people a roof over their
heads gives back dignity to humanity.

In KwaZulu-Natal, the human settlement grant for 2007-08 is     R1,31
billion. We have a backlog of 330 000 and millions need to be housed in
order to totally eradicate informal slums. The challenges are enormous, but
we remain positive. We can achieve the objective of the total eradication
of informal slums, of which 156 000 families are situated in Durban,
Ethekwini Metro. Close to 32% of our housing budget goes to the Ethekwini
region. The province took the initiative in drafting a slums Bill, to be
passed into law within the next two months - public hearings excluded. The
KwaZulu-Natal Elimination and Prevention of Re-emergence of Slums Bill came
into the making 12 months ago and it has become a reality.

The objects of this Act are, amongst others, to eliminate slums; to prevent
the re-emergence of slums; to promote co-operation between the department
and municipalities in the elimination of slums; to promote co-operation
between the department and municipalities in the prevention of the re-
emergence of slums; to monitor the performance of the department and
municipalities in the elimination and prevention of the re-emergence of
slums; and to improve the living conditions of the communities in the
province.

This Act empowers the MEC and municipalities to contain the situation. Only
the public will be responsible for their land, building and prospective
tenancy. The responsible MEC must, within five months of the financial
year, be able to consolidate a report based on the annual report submitted
by the municipalities.

My final request is that if we are going to meaningfully achieve our
targets for 2014, we need more annual resources in the housing division.
Current budget allocations fall short of the stated objectives. A plea to
the National Treasury is that more money is needed for housing. A
discussion by members who re-evaluate the formula ought to benefit KwaZulu-
Natal. The formula as it stands is upside down. The weighting is in order
of priority of the elements as defined - allocation of 50% to households
earning less than R350 00, plus population of 20%. In KwaZulu-Natal, we
have overspent our budget and there are no roll-overs. I challenge other
provinces that could not spend their budgets to please give us the money
and we will put it to good use.

I would like to share with the NHRBC, Samdi and hon members our knowledge
gained from India. In December we took our portfolio committee to India and
we have learnt a lot on our visit. We visited projects that the Indians
have put in place. I must say to this august House that approximately
22 000 family houses were built within two years. It was reiterated that
with regard to these developments every project has a minimum of 545 civil
engineers on site and they are given two-year contracts to finish the
projects. In many cases they finished the projects within 15 months. This
is a challenge to South Africans also to take 15 months to finish such
projects. It should be clear through all of those examples that we could
cut our backlogs.

Finally, KwaZulu-Natal has the second largest number of hostels, next to
Gauteng. Could the Minister, in her reply, say to us how the funding models
for hostels could be achieved, because hostels are a burning issue? Thank
you.
Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, current figures
indicate a backlog of 1,8 million dwellings that can be considered as
inadequate housing. These figures include backyard shacks and informal
dwellings. Some traditional dwellings resort under these.

The ID needs clarification from the Minister in relation to the provision
of housing in Kimberley. Are these people I am going to mention now,
through the hon Chairperson to the Minister, registered on the housing
waiting list? These places are the centre where the TB hospital used to be
and Greenside, where the garages were given to people to live in by De
Beers.

The ID also requests the Minister to please deliberate on the situation at
Green Point in Kimberley, where 3 000 families live with one tap for every
300 people, and one toilet for every 300 people. What are the plans here?

With regard to the influx from the countryside to the cities, where there
is already a backlog, the following needs to be considered to make the
country towns attractive to live in. Factories need to be built to give
people a decent income and to enable them to obtain loans for housing and
to better themselves. This is possible when research has been done and
infrastructure is in place. A place like De Aar has unutilised buildings
which can be revitalised for use as factories. It will relieve the housing
burden on the department.
At Victoria West, in the Ubuntu municipality in the Northern Cape province,
after 5 years houses were built - just now – but there are only 50 houses.
These houses are not good and it was mentioned in the local paper that the
municipality is going to give R200 to each person moving into the houses to
do what they consider essential. The ID requests the Minister to please
launch an investigation into these matters. Loxton in the Northern Cape is
another place where the delivery of houses does not take place.

In relation to toilets at site C near the N2 from the airport, what can be
done there? Those people don’t have toilets. They relieve themselves next
to the road where the taxi drivers pass with their passengers. They told me
that it is a sight in the morning between 6 and 8 o’clock. I thank you.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, it is
encouraging to see that commercial banks are coming on board with providing
finance for the N2 Gateway Project. But of more significance is that our
combatants are people who have suffered outside in the bush and laid down
their lives so that they can get houses. I think it is about time for them
and their families to be housed properly. We respect the department for
that tremendous gesture. Unfortunately, both the quantity and quality of
the houses provided in the past year have been disappointing due to poor
workmanship and it is sad that it had to happen at the N2 Gateway Project.
More impetus should be given to the People’s Housing Process and more
sustainable funding should be sought for it. We need to look at spatial
development patterns and planning most of which are relics of apartheid-era
planning. In terms of intergovernmental relations we need to ask large city
metros that this be considered in their Integrated Development Plans.

Monitoring and evaluation in relation to contractors, the materials used,
skills of artisans etc are critical factors. It is unscrupulous contractors
who use cheap inferior materials, cutting corners in order to make a profit
on their tenders. There must be tighter performance measures, phased-in
payments only so that government can get value for money. At present
building contractors are sabotaging housing delivery with poor workmanship,
which later presents a hazardous and unsafe living environment. This cannot
be allowed to continue. Government inspectors should be held accountable.
In fact, metro inspectors should be allowed to inspect building sites as
well - and I don’t mean Cape Town Metro inspectors. [Laughter.]

People migrate to the Western Cape not because of our beaches, but they
come in search of employment so that they can support their families. The
only way to correct this and arrest the explosion of informal settlements
is to encourage business nodes in the rural areas where factories could be
established without being taxed. If we fail to do this we will never come
anywhere near to solving the housing problem in our cities.

The MEC for the Western Cape has reported that he built 16 000 houses in
the past year. Yes, this is wonderful news but it does not begin to make a
dent in our housing backlog of 450 000 houses and also relics of apartheid,
and the influx of 20 000 families per year.

We need to look at alternatives. Houses built with styrene Lego-type
blocks. Women can build a house in a matter of hours. Self-help schemes
must be the order of the day but must be properly co-ordinated. For these
schemes to really take off, we need engineers.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mor P MOATSHE: Modulasetulo yo o tlotlegang le Tona ya Lefapha la Matlo mo
Aforika Borwa, re a go leboga wena le lefapha la gago, Ditonakgolo go tswa
kwa diporofenseng tse di leng gone fa le baemedi ba ba kgethegileng le
badiri ka nna, ga o kolope matlapa fa o nna mo ntlong ya digalase. Kgomo e
tshwarwa ka dinaka, motho o tshwarwa ka mafoko. Fa o ka didimala ga re
kitla re itse gore o motho yo o ntseng jang. Go botoka go didimala fa o sa
tshwara mafoko a a latelang.

Monna wa Motswana yo o rutegileng tota a re, kgakakgolo ga ke na mebala,
mebala e dikgakaneng. Fa ke rialo, ke raya gore ngwana wa bo rona Krumbock
... (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Rev P MOATSHE: Hon Chairperson and Minister of Housing in South Africa, we
thank you and your department. Premiers from provinces present, special
delegates and my colleagues, people who live in glass houses do not throw
stones. If you are a liar, you are bound to be caught through what you are
saying. However, keeping quiet will not give us any information as to what
kind of a person you are. It is better to keep quiet if you do not know the
following words.

A learned Motswana man says that a tree is known by its fruits. By
implication I mean our fellow child Krumbock ...]

If you want us not to talk about apartheid, then ... [Interjections] ...
the word “apartheid”. Folks say we should not blame apartheid. You surely
must go back and blame apartheid. Apartheid cannot be defended. It was a
criminal system. [Interjections.]

Apartheid is a system that nearly wiped out the black majority in this
country. [Interjections.] The intention was to wipe them out and make them
the minority. They did not want a system that ... [Interjections.]

And as for us, we don’t want to talk about this. Take it away, take it away
from your mind. Come, face it, you don’t need it anymore. You want to
support the policy and all build for a better future for the rainbow
nation. Black and white ... [Interjections.] ... but some people want to
challenge this. The mindset has to be changed and therefore we want to
build a better future with our new consolidated houses.

In the previous financial year, 2006-07, the department experienced an
increasing number of shacks being destroyed by floods or as a result of
fire hazards. It also became imperative for the department to attain well-
located land for the relocation of flood or fire-stricken families, as well
as for the construction of subsidised low-cost housing.

The insufficiency of housing funds has impacted negatively on the
department as it tries to keep apace with the housing supply. In ensuring
that the department achieves the construction of quality low-cost houses,
it has increased the building standards from 30m² to 40m². This improvement
is welcomed, but it has also brought with it challenges regarding the
funding of the extra 10m².

Chairperson, this increase in the budget results from the President’s call
to intensify housing programmes through the formulation and development of
special purpose vehicles for the availability of well-located land for
housing development. The administration programme aims to provide strategic
leadership and administrative and management support services to the
department. Chairperson, the effective and efficient enrolment of housing
programmes within the department is similar to the 2006-07 budget
allocation. There is an increase in this budget allocation, which indicates
the department’s commitment to unblock bottlenecks using skilled human
resources. Are you listening? [Interjections.]

In the 2005-06 to 2006-07 budget allocation, the department indicated to
Parliament that a lack of skills within the department hampers the speedy
delivery of quality housing. At present, most provincial departments of
housing are experiencing difficulties in enabling quality housing
construction due to a lack of skills.

For instance, the provincial departments of housing in the Eastern Cape and
Mpumalanga were unable to ensure quantified housing expenditure due to a
lack of skills within the local departments of housing. This further led to
underexpenditure and the construction of poor housing units which do not
comply with the building principles of the National Home Builders
Registration Council – NHBRC.

It is therefore crucial that the budget increase for this programme be used
for the establishment of the housing units in local housing departments in
the worst performing local municipalities. This will improve the role of
the national Department of Housing in enabling effective and efficient
implementation of housing programmes and quantifying capital expenditure at
local and provincial housing levels.

Housing policy research and programmes envisage developing and managing
sound national human settlements and housing policies supported by a
responsive research agenda. The programmes further aim to monitor and
assess the implementation, performance and impact of national housing
policies and programmes and provide integrated business information.

Chairperson, at present the housing strategy aims to promote sustainable
human settlements through the investment of housing infrastructure and
human capital among housing beneficiaries. The housing strategy is silent
on research issues regarding housing, education for child-headed households
and persons with disabilities. It therefore becomes crucial for the
department to formulate mechanisms that will enable sustainable livelihoods
in low-cost human settlements through research and intergovernmental
partnership with the Departments of Social Development, of Home Affairs and
of Public Works.

This emanates from the fact that housing is not only giving shelter, but
also a platform from which childhood development can be achieved through
the inclusion of the civil society organisations or CSOs, nongovernmental
organisations or NGOs and other governmental departments in enabling the
creation of child-friendly human settlements.

The department’s housing strategy does not indicate to what extent it
intends to cater for human capital investment among children. This proposed
initiative further inculcates the culture of sustainable livelihoods among
all household members, which will automatically impact significantly in
enabling sound housing planning that is sensitive to the housing needs of
all household members. As a result, the majority of low-cost housing
projects are characterised by inadequate project management due to a lack
of sound technical support between the government and the private sector.

These difficulties impede on the creation of integrated housing
development, irrespective of the formulation of housing chapters in the
Integrated Development Plans – IDPs. The compromised partnership within the
three spheres of government and lack of viable tools to promote public
participation in housing delivery programmes is resulting in construction
of poor quality, which is usually not inspected by the NHBRC.

Before I have to stop, the People’s Housing Programme or PHP is very
important. You know, it educates. It gets people to take the initiative and
to take the brick and the spade and to work. I am saying this much,
Chairperson, because if you look today, the PHP, as they move on,
supporting one another, are acting as a team to construct their own houses.
It makes them very proud and confident and they are, at the same time,
gaining skills so that they are able to renovate their own houses as they
move on.

Let me conclude with the Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality, which includes
Port Elizabeth, Uitenhage and Despatch, in the Eastern Cape. Beautiful
houses have been constructed, but they were constructed on low-lying land.
When it rains, these houses are flooded. I think the problem is,
Chairperson and hon Minister ... [Interjections.]... You are not helping
me. Who is that?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order, order! hon members! I was
making the point that your time has expired. I must also bring to the
attention of the members that there should not be ... [Interjections.]. The
Reverend has hope for his houses in the Eastern Cape.

Rev P MOATSHE: Yes, I wanted to say that there is no stormwater drainage.
That is the problem. Because their land is low-lying –

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Your time has expired, hon member.

Rev P MOATSHE: Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Deputy Chairperson, I wish I could come to the
House more often. To be called here takes me back to a place I love to
reside in. Thank you very much. Also, I have this particular request to the
Whips: Please don’t ever put me after the hon Moatshe has spoken. To follow
him is a very tough act indeed. [Laughter.] With his eloquence he has
whipped up the House - even those who were sleeping are now up. [Laughter.]
I’m expected to do as well, and it is just not fair. So please put him
right at the beginning, so that the necessary environment is created for
me. [Laughter.]

Thank you very much, Chairperson. I’d like to thank all those who
participated in this debate. It was quite clear, as I was listening to you,
that this was a well thought-through discussion. Most of you had actually
sat down to understand what it is that we’re doing. That was very
encouraging because we do depend on you to give us the necessary support.
Even when you don’t agree, you are able to bring to our attention some of
the things that we might not be doing so well. We always pledge ourselves
to look into the issues that you’ve raised, to come back and to make sure
that we have attended to them. And we continue in this way because we need
your support in approving our budget.

I’d like to thank the chairperson, who acknowledged publicly that we are
making progress. We are making progress because now we’ve built 2,4 million
houses. I wake up every morning dreaming that this could just multiply,
because it never occurred to us when we started out with a backlog of three
million houses that we would get to the point at which the backlog would be
2,2 million. This is a dream come true. [Applause.]

We need you, however, to be our conscience. We need you to be out there
ensuring that we are able to do our work. We also want to thank the hon
Chair for recognising that our advertisement took him quite by surprise. It
is a nice advertisement.

An HON MEMBER: He likes it.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: He likes it, I know. I just hope it is not the
lead actor that he likes, but just the general principle ... [Laughter.]
... of what we’re trying to show in terms of where we come from, from the
shacks, from the smaller houses that we could afford, right through to what
we are now able to give as a house. I think it is a very good advert. We
will ensure that we have it on our screens as much as possible, because it
is very educative and it will take our people along with us.

On the Nelson Mandela Metro, it is regrettable that even though we have a
gentlemen’s agreement with the municipalities, some municipalities still
let us down. We have absolutely no way of tying their hands, but we are
hoping with the establishment of the housing development agency that we
will be able to buy land, hold it for ourselves and ensure that we can deal
with this.
Now, regarding what has happened – I’ve got to check this because I have to
be quite certain of my facts – I am told that we did have some of the land.
We devolved it down to the provinces, as a requirement of our Constitution.
The provinces also as a requirement – or they thought it was a requirement
– have devolved it to the municipalities. The municipalities are now
selling the land that actually belongs to us. Now we are running after them
to ensure that they don’t do this. We will keep tabs on this and see that
we can hold them accountable through a measure of legislative restraint.

We are aware that the chairperson comes from the Northern Cape. We omitted
to indicate that in our current top-slicing model, we have concentrated on
the Eastern Cape and the Western Cape because of the crisis that they are
experiencing in terms of their backlogs. Our next top-slicing will be
diverted to the Northern Cape. We are hoping that with one lot it will be
possible for us to wipe out the entire backlog of the Northern Cape. In
this way, we can use the Northern Cape as a pilot to show how we can build
into the future, because we have been building to catch up with our
backlog. Whether it is due to apartheid or whatever it is, this is the
reality we live with. We inherited a huge backlog which we are whittling
away on a regular basis. The Northern Cape will drive us into the future,
so that we can see how we build for our children as well.

Hon Krumbock, when I heard you recognising the good in our policies and
their intent, I was left completely speechless. I’ve never heard the DA
speak like that. I have actually been pinching myself, wondering what has
happened to the DA. But the true face of the DA did come up now when the
hon Moatshe was here, so I realised that it was still the same party that
was speaking. [Laughter.]

However, we do take the credit that you have given in that our policies are
solid. We take note of the point you made about shoddy work; we are just as
concerned as you are. We are dealing with that matter. On the matter of the
N2, I think that the hon MEC has indicated the progress we’ve made. In
fact, during the past two weeks we should have invited you to see the good
work that is being done on the N2. Let’s not dwell on recriminations. The
truth of the matter is that we were held back by the land availability
agreement that we were waiting for from the city. We should not run away
from that, in the same way that we will admit when we have problems. It is
absolutely important that the DA does also take cognisance of those things
that it did wrong, so that we’re not held back by any sphere of government.
This is about intergovernmental relations. They need my money as much as
they would need to co-operate.

We didn’t kick them away from their responsibilities on the N2. There is a
memorandum of understanding in place, and we expect them to deliver on
infrastructure and all the things that are very directly their
responsibility. So it is very important that we actually do get to the
truth. And, when we stand here, what we put out is the truth and facts.
Now, what you have indicated here is not true. It is not true that the
contractor on the N2 had access to the area. It is not true. The contractor
and the bank involved – First National Bank – are extremely reputable
people who will only go in when the entire legal infrastructure has been
put in place. They only went in two or three days ago for the first time.
They had been waiting for a year.

Please, therefore, for the purposes of this House, we need to correct that.
Please let’s make sure that between our own propaganda and the truth, we
come to understand that when we are in this House we deal with the truth
only. [Applause.]

To the hon member here, it only takes a woman to recognise what women are
capable of. Thank you very much for the confidence you’ve shown in us. May
I indicate to you that for some reason the premiers, perhaps because I
threaten them on a regular basis, have always given me what they consider
the best MECs. I’ve had the good fortune of having people who are able to
push up their sleeves and get to work. So, whatever it is we have done, I
owe it to them because they really are extremely committed people.

We wonder, too, what kind of people build the kind of houses that we have.
Sadly, it is our people. Sadly, it is our people who build these houses. So
stop wondering. We build these houses for our people. So something
somewhere has gone very wrong, and we here must take stock of that and go
back and ensure that we can put it right. We build these houses for our
people, and we go home to the posh houses that don’t leak, that don’t have
cracks. We must make sure that we bring a conscience to the people who deal
with the issues that we are dealing with.

Hon Krumbock, you were wondering what we’re doing about the Auditor-
General’s report. The problem with a budget of this nature is that it is
actually packed with things that we would like to tell you, because we are
actually very proud of the work that we have done and we could go on
forever telling you what it is we have done. But we are dealing with the
matter now. Fortunately, most of the civil servants who have defrauded the
subsidy scheme have come forward, given back the houses that they had, and
we are dealing with this matter with a lot of co-operation from those
people that defrauded the system. But this is on our table; it is very much
at the top of our agenda.

I was glad to hear the hon member from Limpopo indicate that our toll-free
line is working. I’d like to urge members here to ensure that in every
province we can give this particular service. It is absolutely important
that we support our people by giving them access to our explanations
whenever they experience a problem.

Hon Mzizi, you dealt with a matter that was dealt with by the hon Dyantyi,
which is the need for intergovernmental co-operation. This is absolutely
essential. This is at the bottom of our delivery system. I have read in the
newspaper that some political parties would like to withdraw from Salga. If
any of your councillors are thinking of this, I’d like to urge you here to
please tell them of the benefits they would get out of this. Salga provides
us with a forum at which we can discuss our issues, at which we can discuss
our policy, at which we can plan to go forward. Anybody who would like to
withdraw from this is only cutting off their nose to spite their face. It
just doesn’t work. [Interjections.]

I have given my pledge, hon Mzizi, on the hostels. I’m glad you mentioned
it. I have been to the hostels. I have been there, and I have seen the
poverty there. I have seen the disgraceful conditions of our people there.
You talk about the women there – that you would not be able to work if you
had to leave your wife behind. There are children there. On a daily basis
there are children running around in these conditions. Tell me what happens
to those children. I’m glad you raised it. I’m glad too that you raised
this so poignantly, because my officials are here. The same frustration you
experience, I experience. Before you here I am pledging that I am going to
take them to Meadowlands to see the conditions of the hostels there. Then,
maybe, they will understand what it is that we are dealing with.

Hon Jeebodh of KwaZulu-Natal, this is the problem you raised before: the
money and the number crunching. We have been through that. Please let us
not go through it again. We are very grateful that you have targeted the
elimination of slums. Please continue with that because it is absolutely
vital for us. We are aware of the Indian successes. That is why we have
asked the Indians to come into an agreement with us so that we can have
some skills-sharing. If we can eliminate informal settlements to the tune
of 22 000 houses in 16 months, we will be the happiest people.

To the ID, on the waiting list, I’d like to say that I have absolutely no
idea, hon member, what the problem is. Sitting here, I have no idea. But I
would like you please to help me with this, because as much as it is my
responsibility, I’d like you to take it on as your responsibility. We will
certainly investigate any irregularities that you draw our attention to.

I thank Mr Hendrickse for mentioning the gesture towards our ex-combatants
who helped to bring us here. This is a very important step that we have
taken, and it took us a long time to get here, but we are very glad that we
did get here.

Finally, Chairperson, I have never bitten my tongue as much as I bit it
here. This clock here has kept me on my toes more than I could ever have
done. [Laughter.] But I did get a note from the Chairperson, apologising
for it not having been adjusted. It has been 00:00 since I got here. It has
now been adjusted and I have exactly two minutes to finish. But I have
finished. Thank you very much for the attention. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Minister. Once more,
on behalf of this august House, we must extend our salutations and
gratitude to yourself and your department for the consistency you have
given in attending to your work insofar as it relates to the constitutional
mandate of this House. We appreciate that and we hope that the debate has
actually assisted to unblock some of the issues among provinces, delegates
and the department. So we thank you for that. That concludes the debate.
You are welcome to be part of the next debate as an observer if you so
wish, hon Minister.

Debate concluded.


                DEEPENING YOUTH PARTICIPATION THROUGH SERVICE


                          (Subject for Discussion)

USihlalo womKhandlu Ongamele iimFunda (NCOP): Somlomo ngithanda ukuthokoza
ithuba engiphiwe lona bonyana ngiphefumule ngalekulumo engizoyibeka
yelutjha. Angithome ngokuthi, ilutjha likusasa lethu, libarholi benarha le
esikhathini esizako. Kufanele-ke thina siyithlogomele, siyikhombe indlela,
siyakhe, sisebenzisane nayo bonyana ikusasa lethu libe yisasa elihle
nelikhanyako.

Sizokukhumbula bonyana umbuso lo esiwuthola namhlanjesi, ulihlangothi
lomzabalazo owawusizwa lilutjha. Abanengi balo balahlekelwa zamaphilo zabo.
Namhlanje abasekho emhlabeni, sebabekwa. Abanengi babo asazi nokuthi bafela
kuphi, basafunwa nanamhlanjesi. Bebalwela inarha le yeSewula Afrika bonyana
yikwazi ukuba yinarha ehle enetjhaphuluko, bekube lilizwe ekwazakalako bona
woke umuntu uzakuthatha indima ukuze aphile kuhle begodu nakamnandi.
(Translation of isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I would like to thank you for
the opportunity granted to deliver a speech about the youth. Let me start
by saying: the youth is our future, they are future leaders. We must take
care of them, show them the way, nurture them and work together with them,
so that we can have a bright future.

We will remember that the government we have today was throughout the
struggle assisted by the youth. Most of them lost their lives and we buried
them. We don’t know where most of them died; we are still searching for
them today. They fought for this country, South Africa, so that it can be a
beautiful and a free country, a country where it is known that all people
will play a role and have a better life.]

Youth activism played a crucial role in raising awareness among the youth
of our country about the atrocities visited upon the oppressed and poor
communities. It also played a big role in contributing towards the
liberation of our country and in the attainment of the freedom which we now
enjoy.

As we engage in this debate during youth month on our national calendar, we
need to look at some of the contemporary challenges that face our youth
today, most of which are still a legacy of the kind of past we have emerged
from. Some of these challenges include unemployment, and diseases such as
HIV and Aids.

It is not an overstatement to say that some of our youth have become
secondary and primary victims of the challenges of unemployment in our
country. I am saying this because the past I have just referred to created
a workforce which did not have the necessary skills needed by our growing
economy. Hence, we now talk about initiatives such as the Joint Initiative
for Priority Skills Acquisition – Jipsa - which are aimed at promoting
skills acquisition necessary for people to participate in and thus benefit
from the economy. These initiatives need to strategically target the youth
so that their newly acquired requisite skills can grow the economy, or
should grow our economy, and the current lack of skills does not become a
perpetual challenge.

There are, of course, signs that the economy is growing steadily and that
economic opportunities are being created. The President attested to this
yesterday when he said that by September this year the South African
economy would have been growing for eight solid years, longer than ever
before in the recorded economic history of our country, and that our
current rate of growth had remained at a steady, high level for longer than
ever before in our history.
This climate must allow us to move steadily to ensure that our youth become
the beneficiaries of this positive growth in the economy and do not become
dysfunctional members of our new society. One of the ways of doing this is
by instilling the spirit of youth activism that has seen the youth
contribute in a major way to the liberation of this country.

We should not allow a situation in which our youth become primary victims
of unemployment, as generations did before them. Equally, we must not allow
our children to fall victim to diseases such as HIV and Aids because of the
way they have been socialised. We have to intervene and ensure that we
direct our youth to activities that enable them to be responsible and to
take the future into their own hands. We can do this, among other things,
by creating platforms for youth engagement.

As members are aware, Parliament does have on its own annual calendar an
opportunity for the youth to engage through the Youth Parliament. This year
the Youth Parliament will take place on 21 June to 22 June. This is an
initiative through which Parliament recognises the valuable contribution
and the significant role that the youth must continue to play in shaping
our country and its democracy.

This role speaks to, firstly, a politically active youth that take charge
of its future; secondly, an informed youth that appreciate and help shape
our democracy; and, thirdly, a community-focused youth that seek solutions
through debate and discussion.

Through this and other initiatives, we must make sure that our youth take
centre stage and that they are involved in civil society youth
organisations; civil youth organisations; youth development programmes;
moral regeneration initiatives; social-cohesion initiatives; education and
training; and, most importantly, sport and recreation.

Through the platform we as Parliament have created for our youth, we have
witnessed that our youth want to participate in addressing the challenges
that face them and, in so doing, shaping the future of this country. This
is evident from some of the recommendations they have made, especially in
the past year, which included the recommendation to develop strategic
partnerships to increase the participation of youth in all economic and
social programmes, and in incorporating minority youth groups, the
development of which speaks to social cohesion. Also, there is a need for
the youth to participate in community forums to ensure that issues
concerning them are addressed. Lastly, as young people they must not depend
on being employed, but are also able to work towards being the employers
and create opportunities where there are none.

Through providing platforms for youth engagement, we hope that our
Parliament will contribute towards orientating our youth to actively
participate in youth activities and activities of the state. Hon members
would be aware that the National Youth Service became part of government’s
programme of action for the first time last year. Located in the
Presidency, this is a special government initiative that seeks to
contribute to the enhancement of young people so that they can participate
meaningfully in the political, social and economic life of the country.

The National Youth Service is intended to give our youth life skills, to
take the youth away from risky lifestyles and to prepare the youth to be
good citizens. In doing these things, it is hoped that it will eventually
achieve the goals of the Jipsa programme I mentioned earlier.

We will recall that the President, in his state of the nation address in
February this year, committed government to specific programmes through the
National Youth Service programme when he said:

   ... we will increase the number of young people engaged in the National
   Youth Service by at least 20 000 through 18 of our departments which have
   already developed plans in this regard, enrol 30 000 young volunteers in
   community development initiatives, and employ 5 000 young people as part
   of the Expanded Public Works Programme in the maintenance of government
   buildings; intensify efforts to integrate youth development into the
   mainstream of government work, including a youth co-operatives programme,
   and the ongoing efforts to link unemployed graduates with employment
   opportunities ...

I hope that the opportunities that our government is creating for promoting
the involvement of young people in activities which provide benefits to the
community, whilst developing their abilities through service and learning,
will assist us in addressing the contemporary challenges facing our youth
today. I wish the participants that will follow me in the debate a good
debate today, as we face June 16 on Saturday which is Youth Day. I thank
you, Chairperson. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo namalungu, okuningi uSihlalo weNdlu yoMkhandlu
Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ukusho kwaba sengathi ubefunda inkulumo yami
engiyiphethe lapha. Usewathathe wonke amaphuzu ami, kodwa akunani ngoba
ngizosho okumbalwa okuyilokho angakuthintanga.

Lowo owayenguMongameli wenhlangano ka-ANC, ubaba u-Oliver Reginald Tambo
wathi, ngizomcaphuna ngesiNgisi, “A country that does not honour its youth,
does not deserve its future.”
Ngabe wayeqonde ukuthini ngala mazwi? Wayeqonde ukuthi izwe kumele liyazise
intsha. Malingacini ngokuyibona kuphela kodwa kumele lizigqaje ngayo,
lihloniphe namalungelo ayo ngoba le ntsha izoba ngabaholi bakusasa.

Kulo nyaka iPhalamende lisebenza ngendikimba ethi, “Masijule Ngengxoxo
Mzansi”. Uma sijula ngengxoxo, kuzomele sibheke emuva, sicabange kahle
ukuthi ngabe sisukaphi nomzabalazo wokulwela amalungelo ethu siseyintsha,
kusukela ngo-1976 nangeminyaka yawo-1980.

Ngenxa yokuthi intsha iyona eyayizabalaza kakhulu, itoyiza, ishisa
ngama“necklaces” ishisa nangamabhomu kaphethroli, amaphoyisa abe azi ukuthi
izinqola zawo zazishaywa ngamatshe njalo. Amaphoyisa ayesebenzisa nentuthu
ekhipha isisi. Kwakushubile.

Uma kwakuthiwa azikhwelwa noma akuthengwa ezitolo zabelungu, kukhona
nabo“black Christmas” intsha iyona eyayiqinisekisa ukuthi abantu bathobela
imithetho yomzalabazo, nokuthi angabi khona “amagundane” anyonyobayo aye
emsebenzini noma aye kothenga edolobheni. Uma wawutholwe usedolobheni
wawuphuziswa i-Sta-soft noma lawo mafutha owawukade uyowathenga.

Emuva kokutholakala kwenkululeko, thina siyintsha kaKhongolose sabonisana
ukuthi njengoba intsha yayibambe iqhaza elibalulekile ngenkathi
yomzabalazo, iningi layo lalahlekelwa yizimpilo. Abanye babhadla emajele,
abanye bazithola bengenamakhono futhi bengafundanga ngenxa yokuthi
sasingekho isikhathi sokuya esikoleni. Kwakushiswa ngisho nezincwadi
ngenkathi kusalwelwa inkululeko. Kwathi nangenkathi i-Cosas iqhamuka
nesiqubulo esasithi, “Pass one pass all” iningi lethu laphumelela.

Ngeminyaka yawo-1980 intsha yayibizwa nge-lost generation. Ngeminyaka yama-
1990 emuva kokuba sesivotile, intsha yayibizwa nge-Boom Shaka generation
ngoba yayidansela umculo weqembu elalibizwa ngokuthi yi-Boom Shaka. Ngaleyo
minyaka bekungasashaywa ngamatshe, umzabalazo ubusuqondene nokwakhiwa
kwengqalasizinda ukuze nayo intsha imelwe ePhalamende.

Iqembu lentsha kaKhongolose yilona kuphela elaphakamisa ukuthi kube
noNgqongqoshe wezabasha, kepha niyazi nani ukuthi ngeke sakuthola konke
esikufunayo. Kodwa-ke kwakhiwa iKhomishane Yentsha okuyiyona eqinisekisa
ukuthi izwi labasha liyezwakala futhi nezinhlelo zonke zikahulumeni
ziyakwazi ukubhekana nezinselelo kanye nobunzima obuthwelwe ngabasha.

IKhomishane Yentsha yona-ke yabe seyakhe iSikhwama soMsobomvu okuyisona
esiqinisekisa ukuthi intsha iyawathola amakhono, amathuba emisebenzi futhi
ikwazi ukuzimela ngokuthi ibe namabhizinisi ayo. Intsha yamantombazane
ithola amathuba angcono kwezohwebo, ezikoleni ngisho nasemphakathini
jikelele. Siyazi nathi ukuthi uma ungumuntu wesifazane ucindezeleke
kathathu. Yingakho-ke iphupho lika 50-50 lizofezeka.

Namuhla intsha iyakhuthazwa ukuthi ibambe iqhaza kwi-National Youth Service
ukuze ibe namakhono ewathole ngokuvolontiya. Bathi ngolimi lwesimanjemanje,
“Uzoyithola kanjani uhlezi ekhoneni?”

Inselelo enkulu ukuthi uhulumeni omkhulu aqaphele ukuthi ingqalasizinda iba
khona kohulumeni bezifundazwe nakomasipala. Kumele nathi singamalungu, kuwo
wonke emakomidini esihlala kuwo, sibuze uMnyango ngamunye ukuthi ngabe
unazo yini izinhlelo ezibhekene nabasha nonokuthi yimalini ebekelwe lezo
zinhlelo. Nodaba lwamathenda futhi, ngabe intsha iyafinyelela kuwo na?
Izuza malini ukuze nakuyona kube nenqubekela-phambili?

Lapha ePhalamende kumele senze izincomo kuye uSihlalo weNdlu yoMkhandlu
Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ukuthi kwakhiwe i-youth caucus. I-youth caucus lena
kungaba yiyona ezokweluleka uSihlalo Womkhandlu kanye namalungu emakomitini
nasezinhlelweni zonke zeNdlu Yomkhandlu.

Ikomidi elikhona, leli okuthiwa yi-Joint Monitoring Committee alixoxi
ngokwanele ngezindaba zentsha kodwa lithatha amashansi. Masingaxoxi kuphela
ngentsha ngoba kuyinyanga kaJuni nePhalamende Lentsha kepha wonke unyaka
kufuneka sixoxe ngazo izindaba ezibhekene nentsha.

Ngithemba ukuthi amalungu azovumelana nalokhu. Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo.
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson and the members, the Chairperson of the NCOP
spoke as if he was reading from my speech. He took all of my points;
nevertheless, I will touch on the few that he has left out.

The former President of the ANC, Comrade Oliver Reginald Tambo, said the
following in English, and I quote: “A country that does not honour its
youth, does not deserve its future.”

What did he mean by these words? He meant that the country should honour
the youth. He meant that it should not just recognise them but also be
proud of them, and respect their rights because these very youth are the
leaders of tomorrow.

This year Parliament adopted the theme: “Let us deepen the debate, South
Africa”. When we deepen the debate, we need to look back to 1976 and to the
1980s, when we were still the youth, and reflect on where we come from with
the struggle of fighting for our rights.

It was the youth that was at the forefront of the struggle. They were toyi-
toying, using the infamous “necklaces” and petrol bombs, and the police
knew that their vehicles were always stoned. The police were also using
teargas. It was very tense.
When there were events like bus boycotts, consumer boycotts and black
Christmas, it was the youth who made sure that people honoured rules of the
struggle. It was the youth who made sure that there were no sellouts who
sneaked out and went to work or went out to buy in town. When you were
found in town, you were made to drink the Sta-soft or the oil that you
bought.

After the acquisition of freedom, we as the youth of the African National
Congress felt that many young people lost their lives as a result of taking
part in the struggle. Others are languishing in jail, and some find
themselves being unskilled and uneducated because there was no time to
attend school then. During that time even text books were burnt. Most of us
succeeded only when Cosas introduced the “Pass one, pass all” slogan.

The youth of the 1980s was referred to as the lost generation. During the
1990s, after we had voted, the youth was referred to as the Boom Shaka
generation because they were dancing to the music of the group known as
Boom Shaka. And the throwing of stones was over then and the focus of the
struggle was on building the infrastructure so that the youth could also be
represented in Parliament.

It is only the ANC Youth League which proposed that there be a youth
ministry, but you all know that we cannot get all that we want. At least
the Youth Commission was established which was to ensure that the voice of
the youth is heard and all the programmes of government are able to address
the challenges and the difficulties facing the youth.

The Youth Commission then formed the Umsobomvu Youth Fund which ensures
that the youth get skills, work opportunities, and become independent
entrepreneurs. Female youth get better opportunities in businesses, at
schools and in communities. We also know that if you are a female you are
triple oppressed and that is why the 50-50 dream will be realised.

These days the youth is encouraged to take part in the National Youth
Service so as to get skills through volunteering. They say, in today’s
lingo: “How will you get it if you are seated in the corner?”

The major challenge is for the national government to ascertain that there
is infrastructure in provincial governments as well as in municipalities.
As the members of different committees we also need to ask each department
if there are programmes in place for the youth and funds allocated to those
programmes. And also, regarding tenders, are they accessible to the youth?
How much profit do they make out of this for their progress?

Here in Parliament we need to make recommendations to the Chairperson of
the NCOP for the establishment of the youth caucus. The youth caucus would
advise the Chairperson of the NCOP and committee members on all the
programmes of the NCOP.

The present committee, known as the Joint Monitoring Committee, does not
discuss in detail issues concerning youth but it simply puts them
shallowly. We must not only talk about youth issues in June only and during
the Youth Parliament, but we must discuss youth issues right throughout the
year.

I just hope that members will agree with this.

Thank you, Chairperson.]

Vho O M THETJENG: Mudzulatshidulo na vhashumisani-nganne, namusi ndi dauvha
lavhudi ngauri ri khou ya u sedza zwa vhaswa. Ri khou ya u sedza uri vhaswa
vha re hone shangoni lashu ri do vha thusa hani. Muhulisei, kha vha ri ndi
thome nga u sumbedzisa uri kha Mulayotewa washu, vhaswa vhashu vha tea u
itelwa zwithu zwine zwa nga thusa heli shango. (Translation of Tshivenda
paragraph follows.)

[Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson and my colleagues, today is a good day
because we are going to focus on the youth activities. We are going to look
at the ways in which we can help the youth in our country. Hon Chairperson,
let me begin by making it clear that our Constitution states that our youth
must be provided with things that can help this country.]

Today we are debating how the youth’s participation can be deepened through
the provision of services. Our Constitution recognises a youth to be a
person over the age of 18 years but does not provide a ceiling and the
point at which one does outgrow this phenomenon.

Various governments throughout the world have their own definitions or
descriptions of what youth is. The following are some of the definitions of
youth. The United Nations General Assembly defines a youth as a person
falling between the ages of 15 and 24 years; the World Bank says it’s a
person between 15 and 25 years of age; the USA says it’s anybody less than
21 years of age; and the Tasmanian government says it’s anybody between the
ages of 12 and 25 years.

These are just some of the examples in terms of time lines, but it seems to
me that 25 years is the average age worldwide. Our country, in terms of its
operations, may not be limited by this definition because of our history.
Be that as it may, we do have a guide to determine when one does graduate
from being a youth, based on the above guidelines.

The National Youth Commission was established by the National Youth
Commission Act, Act 19 of 1996, as amended in 2000. The National Youth
Commission was then launched on June 6, 1996. The relevance of this body is
questionable, particularly in as far as service provision is concerned. The
DA has not seen its impact on the youth of this country in general, other
than being an employment agency for the ANC Youth League members who
sometimes use it as a ticket to come to Parliament. The majority of the
youth in this country do not associate themselves with this body as it is
irrelevant to them.

The other youth structure that has been formed is the Umsobomvu Youth Fund.
One of its tenets is the promotion of economic citizenship for the young
people. There are approximately 19 million young people in South Africa
today and about 7,8% of them are unemployed. This is according to the
website of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund, as accessed today. Seven out of every
10 black youth are unemployed and one in five believes that they will never
get a job. This is a staggering statistic that should provide enough energy
for government to intervene and provide direction. Do we need this entity
that is the Umsobomvu Youth Fund? I believe not. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, can I respond to hon
Shiceka?

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, with your permission, I want to ask the hon
member whether he will take a question.

Mr O M THETJENG: As soon as I have finished I will take your question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): He doesn’t want to take a question.
You may proceed, hon member.
Mr O M THETJENG: Do we need this entity? No. The Department of Trade and
Industry should be utilised to steer this programme appropriately.

The Deputy President of this country, hon Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, in her
speech on 14 April 2007 at the Botshabelo stadium in Bloemfontein,
indicated that 48% of the youth in this country is unemployed. Surely, this
is a staggering figure for a young democracy like ours. There are just too
many structures that are blocking the emancipation of the youth in this
country and those must be done away with.

I would like to ask various questions. I am not really sure but let me ask
this question, maybe they can respond to it. Is the ANC government
interested in all youths of different races in this country? Well, if you
are white, you must paint yourself black so that you can be relevant. Are
the white youths to blame for apartheid? [Interjections.] No. But why do
they suffer in securing job opportunities? We say the youth must be
provided with services, yet there are ways that are being used that really
discriminate against the youth. The youth have nothing to do with the past,
but have everything to do with the future, yet day in and day out they are
being discriminated against. [Interjections.]

Surely a day is to come on which, when we look back as a country, we will
regret some of the laws that have been put in place. [Interjections.] Let
us provide a service to all youths and not discriminate against some based
on their skin pigmentation. The South African youth is youth. The South
African youth is not to blame for what happened in the past. They must be
treated in the same way because they are South Africans.

The community development workers are not meant to confuse the ward
committees’ work, but we see every day how the two structures clash. Only
ANC card-carrying members get opportunities to become community development
workers. Now you need to have a card so that you can be a member. Are we
saying, as country and as Parliament, that we are treating you as the same?
The youth is not to blame for what happened in the past. Therefore as a
country ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, there is a point of
order ... Hon Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, it’s not acceptable for a
member to mislead the House. Will the member publicly ... [Inaudible.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): It’s a direct question, member. I
think you will respond to that ...

Mr O M THETJENG: As soon as I have finished speaking, I will respond. Let
us broaden the scope and definition of youth to mean all South Africans in
this country as unified as we are and not become sectoral in terms of
defining who the youths are.

Chairperson, through you, I believe today we should have youth from all
provinces here, as the NCOP. Being a relevant body, we should be having
youth from all political parties, from all communities. While debating in
this Chamber, I really challenge the House and say: ANC, as a relevant
body, let us engage the youth in the provinces for them to come and debate.
Let us hear what they have to say because now, as we are here, we are
speaking for them. Let them speak and come here. We should be sitting out
there, looking at what they do. [Interjections.]

Chairperson, let us allow South Africans to grow without any limitations. I
say youth in this country must be given equal opportunities and we should
not give opportunities to some while some are being discredited for being
what they are. God has made all of us. When you are given a particular
pigmentation, it should not be a problem but it should be a situation where
you are treated in terms of this Constitution and in terms of what you can
do. The skills are needed in this country. All of us must join hands and
say: Viva, youth of South Africa, viva! [Interjections.] [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I am not sure whether that is a
standing ovation to the hon Thetjeng for the speech that he has made, but
we can proceed.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Chairperson and hon members, June is the month for
recognising the youth with proper direction and a sense of responsibility,
hence the programme of deepening youth participation through service. In
all developmental stages children have basic needs, that is food, water,
education, love, recognition, self-esteem leading to self-actualisation as
Maslow’s theory of needs states. A child needs to have all its needs
satisfied in order to grow into a well-balanced human and eventually a well-
balanced adult. To serve means to give of your best so that whoever you
serve may come back again for more or to consult you.

Deepening youth participation through service means giving and taking
services to the youth and by the youth to society to improve the quality of
life of all South Africans. On 16 June we as South Africans will
commemorate the march of 16 June 1976, as well as the lives of all our
youth that were lost on that day and on other days of the struggle. All the
youth who were involved in 16 June need to see the fruits of their
struggle, but the struggle still goes on. The June programme is said to
address youth unemployment, homelessness, which may ultimately lead to self-
destruction through drug abuse, dangerous sexual behaviour or even homicide
or suicide.

Education is a key to deepening youth participation for quality service.
The youth has to be in school to learn, be it at FET colleges, technikons
or universities. Their right to learn should not be compromised because at
the end of the day, the youth would be expected to render service.
Government and the unions therefore have to ensure speedy solutions to the
present pay dispute impasse, so that educators are in a position to go back
to their learners in the classrooms. HIV/Aids and TB are decimating our
communities, leaving orphans who need to be guided and directed, so that
they too become good citizens who can serve others. All stakeholders such
as parents, relatives or educators, social workers, the churches, and the
NGOs, the fathers’ unions or mothers’ unions and other groups should make a
concerted effort to serve the youth with their needs, be they physical or
mental, psychological, emotional or spiritual. In this way our youth will
be developed into total human beings, capable of serving other citizens in
a deeper manner, with commitment, integrity and humility. The IFP salutes
the youth of the past who contributed to South Africa positively to make it
what it is today. All programmes should include the youth from all sectors
in the communities as a way forward. That is, for instance, the National
Youth Service. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Hon Chairperson, hon colleagues, South Africa’s
unemployment rate is currently estimated at 26,2%. Unemployment amongst the
youth is estimated at 69,6%, constituting approximately 5,5 million people
in South Africa. Women specifically form the majority of unemployed youth
at 3,1 million. It is clear, therefore, that unemployment is worst amongst
young people, and that there are currently very few opportunities for young
South Africans to engage in economic activities.

We have to make sure that the National Youth Commission and the provincial
commissions operate more effectively in order to improve the lives and
future outlook for our youth. To date we have not seen enough substantive
action from these commissions to curb the unemployment crisis, and yet
millions of rands go in their coffers every year.

Today the ID wants to call for the Umsobomvu Youth Fund to be overhauled
and made more accessible to young South Africans. Greater financial,
technical and training support should be provided to young entrepreneurs.
We call for the establishment of learnership agreements with employers to
benefit long-term unemployed young people. There should be development of
comprehensive economic empowerment strategies for young people
specifically. These must also be implemented and not just remain as
strategies on paper. There should also be co-ordinated internship
programmes to address the lack of skills through the involvement of the
public and private sector.

The time for action is now. Before I conclude, I want to make a proposal in
remembrance of 16 June. Why can’t we MPs change places with the youth who
are without toilets at their places for one week twice a year? Thank you.
[Interjections.]

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I think I would be making a very serious mistake
if I did not address the issues that the hon Thetjeng has raised.

In actual fact, the hon Thetjeng has experienced the very same issues in
his province, in Limpopo, that he is raising here. That is why he is not a
provincial chairperson. [Laughter.] It is because of the colour of his
skin. [Interjections.]

Nevertheless, I think it would never be correct for us not to remember the
role of young people and the extent to which young people have contributed
towards the transformation of our society. Taking us back to 1912, we
recall that the very same person who made the clarion call for umZulu,
umXhosa and umShangane and everybody to be united was a young person. That
young person continued to mobilise our young people up to the point of
1944, when the young people, under the banner of the ANC, thought it fit to
organise to form the ANC Youth League.

It is now time for us to look at that particular role of young people, even
beyond what we are looking at now at this moment, which is 16 June. It was
intellectual young people who saw it fit of course, at that particular
moment, because they were not young people who saw themselves in isolation
of the general populace of the country. They were intellectuals in their
own right – they were lawyers, some of them were doctors, some of them were
intellectuals in other fields – and they saw it fit for them to come
together and organise the South African youth.

Of course, there were others with a working class background, leading up to
a point where even these very same young people mobilised and volunteered
their services, going from door to door, asking South Africans in what kind
of South Africa they wanted to live under the leadership and voluntarism of
Nelson Mandela, leading up to the adoption of the Freedom Charter, which
says, ``South Africa belongs to all who live in it.’’

At that time, when they were moving around, mobilising people, they were
still young people. They saw South Africa as belonging to all the young
people in South Africa, irrespective of creed, colour or gender
orientation. [Interjections.]

It was those very same young people who understood and assisted this
country and the working class in particular and organisations to understand
South Africa’s oppression, up to a point of even characterising it as
colonialism of a special type. The young people of this particular country
– not young people who were black, not young people who were coloured, but
the young people who came together - realised that in our country, in
actual fact, our oppression is beyond the question of race.
[Interjections.] It is also an oppression of class. It is also an
oppression of gender. As a result, they came to a particular understanding.

It was those young people, again, who were able, with that understanding in
1969 ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I will tolerate
heckling, but not continuous interjections when an hon member is speaking.
[Interjections.]

Mr R J TAU: Well, of course, unfortunately, I know my problem.

It is of course these very same young people, having understood South
African oppression to be a colonisation of a special type, who laid the
basis to mobilise further young people up to a point of rising against the
system in 1976, not to replace white supremacy with black supremacy. In
actual fact, it was about rising against a system which they saw as unfit,
which they saw as unhealthy, which they saw as a crime against humanity, as
declared by the United Nations at that particular time.

It is therefore on that basis that these young people today were there
before today, who are the very same young people who, beyond 1976, were at
the forefront of mobilising of what we used to call the rudimentary organs
of people’s power, looking at sectoral interests, mobilising all society in
all sectors to belong and be one front because the people’s organisation
was banned by a very racist regime that did not want a South Africa that
belonged to all those who lived in it. [Interjections.]

It is these very same young people who saw South Africa. It is for that
particular reason that, as we participate in this debate today, we make
that kind of reflection because if we don’t do that, seriously incorrect
conclusions may be reached, as the hon Thetjeng showed. [Interjections.]

It is because of that that we call upon all young people in our country to
fight, of course, as they were dedicated before, like our forefathers were
dedicated against poverty, against disease, against illiteracy and against
absolute consumerism, which is a pillar of the DA’s liberal ideology, and
the individualism that is being put to young people to seek to be all about
what you have and about what you can consume, to display wealth, and not to
care about the next person that you are with. [Interjections.]

We call on our young people to refuse to be drawn into individualism, but
instead must strive and fight for collectivism, where they will be able to
mobilise the collective effort to build an economy that would be able to
assist them to fight crime and discrimination.

We further call on young people to take up the advantages, as put today, of
the programme led by the Department of Public Works in terms of this
month’s programme, which in the main is a programme that seeks to skill
young people to stand up on their own in the building industry or to negate
monopoly thinking – the so-called thinking that, in actual fact, the
building industry should be monopolised by a particular class or race that
exists within our society. [Interjections.]

Therefore, we call upon young people to take advantage of this kind of
situation that has been put by our government today to fight against the
conditions. [Interjections.] Young people must mobilise their communities,
and in particular the stokvels, burial societies and vendors to form co-
operatives that will enable them to harmonise all their economic activities
to take place where they live. [Interjections.] They shouldn’t see
themselves in isolation of the broader transformation that is taking place
in our country.

In conclusion, in remembrance of all those who came before us, in
remembrance of all those who fought for us, in remembrance of all those who
died for us, and in remembrance of all those who were sent into oblivion,
we need to bow our heads. Those who participated in the apartheid regime
structures must in actual fact, on a day like this, feel ashamed of
themselves. [Interjections.] They need to stand up and apologise for what
they stood for. [Interjections.] They need to stand up and apologise to the
young people of this country today who do not have role models because they
were murdered, who do not ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I want to take a point of order from
the hon Watson. [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: I am rising to the challenge by the speaker. I apologise for
apartheid, unashamedly. You must stop ... [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I thank him very much. We do have an official and
public apology today in this House, but that apology should not only stop
as an apology. It should also go beyond an apology by actively trying to
ensure that young people don’t hold to the inculcation that the present
government or the present state is a racist state. It must be an apology
that must go out and say, ``It is important, irrespective of where the 16
June event is, that young people of all races go and join those there.
Young people must come out of the suburbs and join those, wherever the
activities are. [Interjections.]

Young people must not be drawn into participating, of course respecting the
sporting codes that are there, but in actual fact, we should not stand up
or oppose those who say that there must be some restructuring of the
Comrades Marathon to allow young people to also participate in political
activities that have been organised in the country. [Interjections.]

Let me conclude by saying this: Let us bow our heads and remember Comrade
Anton Lembede, Nelson Mandela, Oliver Reginald Tambo, Malome Kotane,
Solomon Mahlangu, James Letswalo, Zola and many, many others, in particular
those who dedicated their lives to enable us debate the role of young
people today in a democratic society. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Can I take your point of order? I
thought that an hon member makes a point of order when a member is on the
floor, unless you want to make a point of order against me. Can I get your
point?

Mr A WATSON: If you’re not sure, how can I be sure?

I just want to rise and repeat another challenge. Will the previous
speaker, or any other member of the ANC, apologise for the reverse
apartheid practised by black economic empowerment against other youth?
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): No, you are out of order.
[Interjections.]
The House adjourned at 16:45.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:


         (a)     South African Express Bill [B 14 – 2007] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).


         (b)     Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 77 Bill:
          a) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee, dated 25 May
     2007:

         The Joint Committee on Constitutional Review met with Mr B Druchen,
         National Director, and a delegation from DEAF South Africa, on 16
         February 2007. The Committee had agreed to meet DEAFSA after
         receiving a request from them, to make representations to have
         South African Sign Language constitutionally recognized as the 12th
         official language.


         DEAFSA was requested to provide additional information regarding
         the implications of such an amendment, in order to enhance further
         deliberations.


         The Committee met on 16 March 2007 and had an in-depth discussion
         on the DEAFSA representation.


         The Joint Committee on Constitutional Review wishes to express its
         appreciation for the comprehensive motivation that was presented by
         DEAFSA, in its endeavors to have South Africa Sign Language (SASL)
         recognized as the 12th official language:

         The Joint Committee on Constitutional Review -


          1.      agrees that the status quo is unacceptable and
              discriminatory, as is being experienced by an appreciable
              section of our community;
          2.      recognizes that the accommodation of SASL as the 12th
              official language will have significant logistical and
              budgetary implications which would have to be investigated;
          3.      requests the Minister in the Presidency to consider
              convening a task team in conjunction with the Minister of
              Arts and Culture and Minister of Education to investigate
              this matter; and
          4.      urges the Pan South African Language Board to give
              credence to the instruction in section 6(5)(a)(iii) of the
              Constitution to promote SASL and report back to Parliament on
              progress that has been made in this regard.


          Report to considered.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Municipal Fiscal
     Powers and Functions Bill [B 9B– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75),
     dated 13 June 2007:


         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined the
         Municipal Fiscal Powers and Functions Bill [B 9B – 2007] (National
         Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism a Section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to
         the Bill.



