---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 May 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-05-15
---

TUESDAY, 15 MAY 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

               WELCOMING OF BOLIVIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I have the honour to recognise the
presence in the gallery of guests of Parliament who are members of the
Bolivian Parliament led by the hon Dr Sacha Llorenti. I would like to ask
them to rise. [Applause.] I take this opportunity to welcome you to South
Africa. The delegation has come to exchange with us in South Africa the
experience of constitution-making. You are welcome. Please be seated.
[Applause.]

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)
The SPEAKER: The vacancy caused by the resignation of Mr E T Vezi has been
filled by the nomination of Ms S P Lebenya with effect from 1 April 2007.

                                    OATH

The member had made and subscribed to the oath in the Speaker’s office on
12 April 2007.

Where is the hon member? I take this opportunity to welcome you into the
House. [Applause.] Hon members, I wonder why you are excited. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I have the answer to your question why
all hon members are excited. It is because our new member is the most
beautiful and most intelligent woman in this House. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Van der Merwe, you speak like a very loyal Chief Whip.
[Laughter.]

    APPOINTMENT OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY UNDERSECRETARY: TABLE ADMINISTRATION

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Ms Regina Mohlomi has been appointed to the post of National
Assembly Undersecretary: Table Administration with effect from 1 May 2007.

I shall ask her to rise. [Applause.] Congratulations to Regina and good
luck.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that
I shall move:

  That this House —


     1) notes with dismay that the ANC has neglected, failed or refused to
        take any action in respect of those members convicted of criminal
        offences in the Travelgate saga despite the recommendation of the ad
        hoc committee and the approval of their decision by this House.

[Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion:

  That this House —
     1) notes South Africa’s slump from 38th to 50th position in the Swiss-
        based International Institute for Management Development’s economic
        competitiveness ranking; and


     2) resolves to debate how the implementation of Asgisa could be speeded
        up and made more effective so that it may contribute to improving
        South Africa’s economic competitiveness to the required extent.

Dr P J Rabie: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following motion:

 That this House —

     1) notes the continuing delay of the appointment of the licensed
        operator for the national lottery; and


    2) resolves to debate the handling of the appointment of the new
       national lottery operator by Minister Mandisi Mphahlwa, and the
       relevant entities under this authority.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Ms Thoko Mabena)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —


   (1)      notes with shock and profound sadness the passing away of hon
         Thoko Mabena on Friday, 20 April 2007, whilst on an official visit
         to Australia;


   (2)      further notes that at the time of her death hon Mabena was a
         member of the African National Congress Women’s League and a member
         of the Mpumalanga provincial legislature, serving as Chairperson of
         Committees;


   (3)      recalls that hon Thoko Mabena started her political life in the
         1980s as a member of the then Chemical Workers Industrial Union
         (CWIU), and also worked as its administrator until 1994;


   (4)      further recalls that her sterling work in Cosatu’s National
         Gender Forum made her one of one hundred South African Women who
         attended the Malibongwe Conference in Amsterdam in the Netherlands
         in 1990;


   (5)      remembers that hon Mabena has been a member of Mpumalanga
         Legislature since 1994; and
   (6)      conveys its condolences to the Mabena family, the African
         National Congress, the Congress of South African Trade Unions and
         the South African Communist Party.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: The condolences of the House will be conveyed to the Mabena
family.

                  CRASH OF KENYAN FLIGHT KQ 507 TO NAIROBI

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —


   (1)      notes that last Saturday, 5 May 2007, Kenyan flight KQ 507 en
         route to Nairobi crashed shortly after take-off from Douala Airport
         in Cameroon;


   (2)      further notes that the ill-fated airplane had 114 passengers on
         board, amongst them seven South Africans;
   (3)      commends the Cameroonian and Kenyan authorities on their search
         and rescue efforts that have led to the identification of the scene
         of the disaster;


   (4)      expresses its confidence that the civil aviation authorities of
         both countries will thoroughly investigate the matter to determine
         the cause of the accident; and


   (5)      conveys its condolences to the Cameroonian and Kenyan
         governments and people, the families and friends of the deceased,
         as well as the South African families who have lost their loved
         ones.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: I would assume that there are no objections. The condolences
of the House will then be conveyed accordingly.

                              CONSTITUENCY WORK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T M MASUTHA (ANC): Madam Speaker, as public representatives, Members of
Parliament are elected every five years in a general election to do exactly
that, namely, to represent the people in government. One way in which they
perform this constitutional function is by establishing constituency
offices, which provide a service to the local community throughout the
year.

This service is aimed at ensuring that all members of the public residing
in that constituency area are assisted to access all available government
services due to them at all levels of government, irrespective of the
political party to which they belong.

During the recesses of Parliament, which often coincide with school
holidays, Members of Parliament make themselves personally available to
their constituencies generally and at their constituency offices in
particular, where their local communities are free to raise concerns
relating to services provided by government and to obtain assistance to
access such services.

During the recent parliamentary recess in April and early May this year,
several constituency offices were launched or relocated where ANC Members
of Parliament were deployed. These include the Galeshewe constituency
office in the Northern Cape, the Sibasa and Lambane constituency offices in
Limpopo and the Baviance constituency office in the Eastern Cape. The
constituency offices provide public representatives with better insight
into the various challenges hampering service delivery to enable them to
exercise effective oversight and to enable them to alert government to
these challenges and assist in finding solutions. I thank you.
                    AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM REPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W J SEREMANE (DA): Madam Speaker, as a matter of prudence government
must immediately accept the African Peer Review Mechanism, APRM, report on
South Africa. Government seems to reject all reports and commissions that
criticise its management of the country. Other examples of this rejection
include the Competitiveness Index and the TRC report.

In 2005, after observing South Africa’s poor ranking on the United Nations
Human Development Index, President Mbeki said that he was: “Quite convinced
that the report is wrong.” South Africa slipped another place in the 2006
report. The APRM report was an important step in highlighting the work that
must still be done in the country to improve democratic governance and
socioeconomic conditions. Government’s rejection of the report is
unconvincing and self-defeating in the face of necessary criticism. I thank
you. [Applause.]

                    RENAMING OF STREETS IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, two weeks ago Cabinet responded
swiftly to the disturbing developments in KwaZulu-Natal regarding the idea
of renaming streets and buildings–and rightfully so. However, that the
Cabinet delegation will carry with it the wisdom and fortitude to bring
about an amicable resolution to the problem in order to effect peaceful
coexistence in the province, becomes our fervent wish and prayer.

The strong emotional responses sparked all round as a result of this
undertaking became reminiscent of the genesis of the African internecine
war in this province. The peace that broke out in the early 90s appeared to
have been a mere papering over the cracks as the demons of hate and
intolerance are resurrected to remind us, as one African author wrote about
the conflicts of our country: “The graveyards are not yet full.”

The critical national question is: Must the author be proven right? It is
clear that the vision of the current ruling elite in KwaZulu-Natal to work
for African unity and reconciliation is seriously handicapped by their
inability to overcome the horrors of the past black-on-black conflict. If
they are not properly counselled, their poor judgment in this dispute is
likely to trigger a replay of that human tragedy, where more than 20 000
lives were lost.

For this reason, the IFP appeals to this august House to prevail on the
Cabinet delegation to minimise party-political dominance in this process
and insist on establishing an independent process presided over by a body
of renowned historians, sociologists, anthropologists, trade unionists,
religious leaders, business leaders and political representatives,
preferably selected by the President and party leaders nationally.

The intention is to strike a constructive and conciliatory, historical
perspective in line with the uniqueness of the socio-political developments
in this province. I thank you.

                              YOUTH EMPLOYMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mme M L MATSEMELA (ANC): Mmusakgotla, puso e e eteletsweng pele ke
mokgatlho wa ANC e itemogela maikaelelo phitlhelelo a tsogelo kgatlhanong
ya temokerasi ya bosetšhaba, ka go bona baagi ba metseselegae e nna
bajaboswa tota kwa Bokone Bophirima kwa Moses Kotane, gonne Setswana sa re,
khutsana e sa sweng e emetse monono.

Monono o, o sijwa ke porojeke ya disisele eo e tlhomilweng semmuso ngogola.
Porojeke e, e thapile baagi ba metseselegae e e latelang, Madikwe, Pella,
Tlokweng, Seshibitswe, Uitkyk, Vrede, Koffiekraal le Brakuil. Gareng ga
bathapiwa, bontsi ke baša ba ba feditseng mophato wa marematlou.
Maikaelelomagolo a porojeke ke go mekamekana le lehuma le botlhoka tiro.
ANC e rotloetsa le go tshegetsa se. Ke a leboga. (Translation of Setswana
member’s statement follows.)

[Ms M L MATSEMELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC-led government is achieving
its aim of sustaining national democracy. This is evident with the
residents of the rural areas of Moses Kotane district municipality in the
North West province, who are benefiting from these efforts. There is a
Setswana saying: “Perseverance is the mother of success.”

The sessile project, which was established by government last year, is the
one that brings these treasures. This project employs the residents of the
following villages: Madikwe, Pella, Tlokweng, Seshibitswe, Uitkyk, Vrede,
Koffiekraal and Brakuil. The aim of this project is to eradicate poverty
and unemployment. The ANC encourages and supports this. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

                                ASCENSION DAY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, Ascension Day used to be a holiday in
South Africa. With the recent calls for government to drop other
significant international holidays such as Good Friday and Christmas Day,
many Christians are concerned that important days on the Christian calendar
are under threat.

The ACDP along with Christians worldwide will celebrate Ascension Day on
Thursday, 17 May 2007. The ACDP has observed that Christians, who are in
the majority in South Africa, are beginning to take a stand on issues that
violate their beliefs.

Secular humanistic holidays and celebrations such as Workers’ Day, Freedom
Day, Youth Day, Women’s Day and Human Rights Day now dominate the South
African calendar. The abolition of Ascension Day, a previously long-
established public holiday, is significant because Ascension Day deals with
authority.

The ascension proclaims the Lordship of Christ in all areas of life. Jesus
has all authority; Jesus is Lord over the world of business, sport,
entertainment and government. Jesus Christ is Lord over schools, shops,
cinemas, factories, hospitals, law courts and Parliament. There is no area
of life outside of His authority. The ascension proclaims the ultimate
victory of Christ. Jesus is the King of kings and the Lord of lords. I
thank you. [Applause.]


                      MOSSEL BAY CREOSOTE PLANT PROBED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Madam Speaker, the ID took Parliament to the people
over our most recent constituency period. One example of where we have made
a difference with an issue close to the hearts of South Africans is the
creosote factory in Mossel Bay.

It was our reputation as a no-nonsense, solutions-driven party that saw a
desperate resident of the Rheebok community approach the ID to deal with
the wood treating factory. For years this factory has spewed out its
dangerous emissions, including arsenic, into the surrounding communities of
Tergniet and Rheebok.

Despite numerous complaints to the local and provincial government from as
far back as 2002, no action was taken against this company and the
residents were left to suffer numerous skin and breathing ailments. The ID
immediately called a public meeting of the two communities and we invited
Mr Lushaba from the national Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism to hear the residents concerns. Even though we only gave him a
day’s notice, Mr Lushaba flew down from Pretoria and, after ascertaining
the facts, he issued a notice of intent to close the factory.

The ID wishes to commend Mr Lushaba for being a role model for all public
servants in responding so quickly to the issues of the community.

The ID also wants to warn other polluting companies who dare to breach the
law and interfere with people’s constitutional right to a clean environment
that we will not hesitate to deal with them.
I thank you, Madam Speaker.


                      PASSING AWAY OF AARON “BB” PEMBA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M JOHNSON (ANC): Madam Speaker, our nation has learnt with sadness of
the passing on of Comrade Alven Bennie, affectionately known as Aaron “BB”
Pemba, on Wednesday 25 April after a long illness.

“BB” Pemba was a patriot who spent his life in the struggle for peace,
democracy and social justice for our country and the broader humanity. He
was born in Korsten, Port Elizabeth, on 16 December 1930. At a young age he
became an active ANC Youth League member and a member of the underground
structures of the SA Communist Party. He was a volunteer in the 1952
Defiance Campaign against unjust laws and was frequently arrested for
various offences during the course of the 1950s. He was also part of the
campaign to collect contributions to the Freedom Charter.

Comrade “BB” discharged his responsibilities with dedication, discipline,
diligence and humility. The life of this great leader epitomises heroism
and commitment to the cause of humanity.

Our condolences go to the Bennie family, the bigger ANC and the surrogate
SA Communist Party and the labour movement.

Robala ka kgotso Ntate “BB”! [May your soul rest in peace, Mr
“BB”!][Applause.]


                            NAME-CHANGING PROCESS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M MDLALOSE (Nadeco): Madam Speaker, enormous, fierce clouds have
shielded our rainbow. The storm that threatens to erupt is as a result of
political mudslinging that has overtaken the name-changing process.

We can neither erase the violent storms of the past from our history books
nor can we replace rain with sunshine where there was none. We are here
today as a result of a history that was heartbreaking and we shall
indefinitely be part of that identity.

Just as a rainbow appears in the sky after a storm, the telltale signs of
the storm do not mysteriously disappear in an instant. South Africans pride
themselves on the fact that they are instrumental in every aspect of the
growth of our young democracy. The name-changing process should be no
exception.

As different political parties, we all have members who have played a
strong role and feel that they deserve to be entrenched in history. Let us
allow South Africans actively to take part in this process, which has
evolved into an emotive exercise.

Every committee in the different municipalities that has been tasked with
this mandate should have historians who should spearhead the process. This
will ensure that a variety of South Africans will feel part of a
transparent operation.

Madam Speaker, the rumbling thunder in the distance can be silenced if it
is taken into account that as much as we are a rainbow nation that
represents all South Africans with their differences – racial, ethnic,
religious, cultural and political, including their idea of political heroes
and heroines–we cannot deny South Africans the ability to embrace their
past and their history. Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]


                              FORMER CAPE CORPS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Madam Speaker, the FD wants to reiterate its position
that was previously stated in this House regarding the former Cape Corps
members.

We need the Minister of Defence to address the grievances voiced by
families who are asking the Ministry to consider providing family support
to spouses of deceased members of the former Cape Corps, but who were not
incorporated into benefit schemes such as pensions and social assistance
grants.

Members of the former Cape Corps feel that certain actions during the
integration process led to attempts to minimize the historic relevance of
the regiment as a proud force serving its country and having fought in the
Second World War.

When the liberation forces were integrated into the SANDF, these forces
enjoyed greater prominence and respect than the former Cape Corps. As a
result of the dissolution of the regiment, many of the then permanent force
members had their defence force jobs taken away from them.

A further concern is that members of the Cape Corps who have been
integrated into the new SANDF structures feel that they are marginalised.
They feel they are being isolated from doing promotional courses while
soldiers from other integrated forces are fast-tracked with an eye to
future promotions.

We wish to bring to the attention of this House that the integration
process has not benefited all groups and that the Cape Corps is a case in
point. For the sake of justice and the honour of our people, we call on the
Minister of Defence, the hon Lekota, to arrange a meeting with concerned
members of the former Cape Corps to find ways to address these legitimate
grievances. I thank you, Madam Speaker.


                               MAYOR MOKGATLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A M DREYER (DA): Mevrou die Speaker, die voormalige burgemeester van
Mogale City, adv Lentswe Mokgatle, woon reeds 15 maande lank, nadat hy nie
meer die pos beklee nie, op die luukse landgoed buite Magaliesburg wat die
munisipaliteit as amptelike burgemeesterswoning aangeskaf het. Hy het nie
sy aanbod om die eiendom te koop deurgevoer nie, maar hy gaan verder: Hy
weier om uit die burgemeesterswoning uit te trek en hy weier ook om huur of
vir munisipale dienste te betaal.

Mokgatle is dus ’n plakker. Die inwoners van Mogale City dra nou die
finansiële las om ’n oneerlike, gewese burgemeester van gratis akkommodasie
en munisipale dienste te voorsien.

AGB LEDE: Skande!

Me A M DREYER: Mokgatle beskik oor ’n goeie geleerdheid. Vele geleenthede
lê vir hom oop, maar hy herlei beperkte munisipale bronne weg van
diensverskaffing aan duisende arm inwoners na homself toe. Dit is ’n
siniese en selfsugtige uitbuiting van staatsgelde.

President Mbeki het Mokgatle aangestel as burgemeester. Die vraag is nou,
wat is president Mbeki se benadering tot hierdie optrede? Die inwoners van
Mogale City wag gretig op ’n antwoord. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

Ms A M DREYER (DA): Madam Speaker, fifteen months after vacating his post
the former mayor of Mogale City, adv Lentswe Mokgatle, continues to live on
the luxury estate outside Magaliesburg, which the municipality acquired as
official mayoral residence. He has not made good on his offer to purchase
the property, but he goes further: He refuses to vacate the mayoral
residence, and he also refuses to pay either rent or for municipal
services.

Mokgatle is therefore a squatter. The residents of Mogale City now carry
the financial burden of providing free accommodation and municipal services
to a dishonest former mayor.

HON MEMBERS: That’s a disgrace!

Ms A M DREYER: Mokgatle is well educated. Many opportunities are available
to him, but he diverts limited municipal resources to himself, away from
service delivery to thousands of indigent residents. That constitutes
cynical and selfish abuse of public funds.

President Mbeki appointed Mokgatle as mayor. Now the question is what is
President Mbeki’s take on this behaviour? The residents of Mogale City
eagerly await a reply. [Interjections.] [Applause.]]

                           POOR CONDITION OF ROADS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mna L N DIALE (ANC): Mohlomphegi Mmagorena Sepikara, ditsela tša rena tša
mabu tšeo di šomišwago ke difatanaga kua magaeng ga di hlokomelwe ka go
kgorwa. Ke bolela bjalo ke etšwa ga Sekhukhune, mmušong wa selegae wa
Makhuduthamaga, Limpopo.

Ke kopane le Mokhanselara wa Ward 27 motseng wo re dulago go wona wa
Mohloding, ra botšišana gore goreng ditsela di sa kgorwe. Tsela ya
Mohloding e sa le e kgorwa ka kgwedi ya bo lesomepedi. Mokhanselara o re o
ngwadile mangwalo a mmalwa a ngwalela ga mmasepala gomme ga go na phetolo.

Bjale, re kgopela lefapha la Mešomo ya Setšhaba gobane le na le
dikgoratsela, eupša ga di šomišwe ka tshwanelo. Difatanaga tša rena di a
senyega, gagolo motseng wa Mohloding.

Re a tseba gore mmasepala ga o na dikgoratsela le gore o sa beakanya
mananeo a go di reka. Re kgopela thušo go lefapha la Mešomo ya Setšhaba
gore le thuše lenaneong le. Ke a leboga. (Translation of Sepedi member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr L N DIALE (ANC): The hon Speaker, the gravel roads that we use in the
rural areas are not properly maintained. I say this because I am from ga-
Sekhukhune, in Makhuduthamaga District Municipality in Limpopo.

I met the councillor of ward 27 at Mohloding village where we live, and we
both questioned why the roads are not properly maintained. The Mohloding
road was last worked on in December last year. The councillor stated that
he sent several letters to the municipality but there has not been any
response.

We therefore appeal to the Department of Public Works to use their
roadrollers for proper maintenance of the roads. Our cars are getting
damaged, especially in Mohloding village.

We know that the municipality does not have the roadrollers and they are
still working on programmes to purchase them. We appeal to the Department
of Public Works to help in this programme. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                           CRISIS REGARDING ENATIS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP notes with grave concern the
crisis that has unfolded over the past four weeks relating to eNatis–South
Africa’s upgraded transport information system that has cost government and
the taxpayers a staggering R408 million. From the word go, the system was
off to a shaky start, with authorities in most provinces reporting hiccups,
constant technical failures and long queues of angry motorists.

Although we know that teething problems are normal, we are, however,
perturbed by the report that the system was not properly tested before
implementation. It was reported at the weekend that the implementation of
the system was rushed by senior project managers and politicians to meet
unrealistic deadlines. It also seems that the staff of the Department of
Transport has not received adequate training on the new system and is
therefore unable to handle the current crisis.

Furthermore, the Retail Motor Industry Organisation, which represents about
7 800 businesses, has indicated that transactions of vehicles and equipment
totalling more than R1,5 billion cannot be completed as no vehicle
licensing documents can be obtained for submission to financial
institutions. Many businesses are at a standstill and are unable to trade.

The IFP would therefore like the Minister of Transport to clarify the issue
about training and the implementation of the system. The IFP would like to
know when the public can expect the system to be working at full capacity
as it is clearly having a dire effect on the economy. [Applause.]

                           ELEPHANTS IN PHALABORWA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkul M R BALOYI (ANC): Manana Xipikara, ku hangalaka hi xitalo ka swihari
leswi xungetaka nhlayiseko wa vanhu na nhundzu ya vona ku andzile eka
muganga wa Phalaborwa. Vanhu a va ha dyi byi rhelela hikuva va chava ku
onheriwa ni dlayiwa hi swona swihari leswi, ngopfu ngopfu tindlopfu, leti
se ti nga kombisa manyala ya tona hikuva yin’wana ya tona yi dlayile
mutirhi wa le purasini ra swihari ra Grike, emugangeni wa Hosi Maseke, yena
Manana Ida Mbokota Ndlovu, hi siku ra 13 Dzivamsoko 2007. Mhaka leyi yi
humelela kuri leswaku Nkulukumba Sambo wa le Kurhula eka Hosi Majeje u lo
pona ri ahlamile hi ku hlaseriwa hi yona ndlovu yoleyo kwale purasini ra
Grike.

Mhaka leyi yi tisa ku chava lokukulu eka vatirhi va purasi rero, lava va
sindzisekaka ku famba hi milenge va ya emintirhweni ya vona hikokwalaho ko
pfumala swo famba. Ku vula ntiyiso, hileswaku ndlopfu leyi yi nga ho onha
yi ya emahlweni hikuva vini va purasi leri va yimelela hambi loko yi
hlasela vanhu.
Minhlaselo leyi yi tele, na le ka Hosi Seloane, Hosi Shai na Hosi Malatji,
laha vanhu va nga ku onheriweni swinene hi swihari swa muxaka lowu. Hi
matshamelo lawa a swi fanerile leswaku kuendliwa xan’wanchumu ku sirhelela
vutomi na nhlayiseko wa vanhu eka ndhawu ya Phalaborwa. Hofisi ya muganga
yi simekile komiti ya ku kambisisa mhaka leyi na ku nyika swiviko na
swibumabumelo hi ku hela ka nh’weti yoleyi ya Mudyaxihi 2007. Inkomu.
(Translation of Xitsonga member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M R BALOYI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the number of animals that are
scattered and threatening the safety of people and their properties has
increased in the village of Phalaborwa. People are no longer free because
they are afraid of being killed and having their properties damaged by
these animals, especially elephants, which  have now shown their
destructive nature by killing a worker, Mrs Ida Mbokota Ndlovu, of Grike
Game Farm, which is under Chief Maseke’s jurisdiction, on 13 April 2007.
Coincidentally Mr Sambo of Kurhula village under Chief Majeje’s
jurisdiction had recently narrowly escaped an attack by the same elephant
on the same farm.

These incidents have brought great fear to the farm workers who have to
walk to work due to a lack of alternative transport. Truly speaking, this
elephant may continue to cause damages because the farm owners are
defending it whereas it as attacking people.

These attacks are rife and have also occurred in jurisdictions of Chief
Seloane, Chief Shai and Chief Malatji, where people are sustaining severe
damages to their property from these types of animals. Under these
circumstances, something needs to be done to protect the lives and safety
of the people of Phalaborwa. The constituency office has set up a committee
to investigate this matter and to give a report and recommendations by the
end of this month, May 2007. Thank you.]

                      DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF HOME AFFAIRS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M SWART (DA): Madam Speaker, the Department of Home Affairs needs a full-
time director-general to turn it around. As we all know, it’s in shambles.
The new appointee, Mr Mavuso Msimang, cannot be that person if, as was
recently indicated in a parliamentary reply, he holds 22 company
directorships in addition to facing a sexual harassment lawsuit.

Mr Msimang leaves the State Information Technology Agency behind with
numerous loose ends and scandals, such as the one over the annual Sita-
funded luxury junkets to thank senior government officials who are obliged
to make use of the Sita’s services anyway.

The Sita board, despite its lack of funds and its lacklustre performance,
approved almost R4,9 million in remuneration for Mr Msimang for the last
two financial years – more than half of which were performance bonuses.
There is simply no way that such high remuneration levels can be justified
for a part-time Home Affairs director-general.

The hon Minister of Home Affairs must urgently address these matters.
[Applause.]

           COUNCILLORS’ CODE OF CONDUCT DURING CONSTITUENCY PERIOD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs X C MAKASI (ANC): Madam Speaker, one of the constituency-focused areas
for ANC MPs since the beginning of this year was to check compliance by the
councillors with their codes of conduct. Among other things, they have to
report to their community wards at least four times a year.

On average, councillors lived up to what was expected of them, as reflected
in the consolidated report on constituency work. However, there are
challenges for some municipalities which have different approaches to the
establishment of ward committees and interact with communities through
structures such as wards in KwaZulu-Natal and more particularly in the
Western Cape, where the DA’s attitude towards ward committees is so hostile
as to suggest that they exist in a local government dispensation that is
not part of South Africa.

The challenge that we have as a nation is whether these different
approaches in the Western Cape in particular will at all times facilitate
strong interaction between councillors and the general public, to ensure
the realisation of our objective to make local government work better for
our people. I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]


                            NAME-CHANGING PROCESS


                    AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM REPORT


                           POOR CONDITION OF ROADS

                             MOGALE CITY MATTER
                                 CAPE CORPS
                          ANTIPOLLUTION DRIVE OF ID
                           ELEPHANTS IN PHALABORWA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, I hope to satisfy Mr Lee with his
strident calling. Certainly, we would hope, as government, that the process
of name-changing would be an inclusive one. This is indeed the manner in
which the various rules associated with name-changing are set out.

I have to express some disappointment at some of the remarks of the hon
member of the IFP. I think it behoves members of this House, when they
speak in the public domain, not to refer to threats of war and conflict,
but rather to urge our people towards democracy and peace. Whatever the
stringent challenges that may be confronting us, we are committed to
ensuring that the names of places, institutions and other structures in the
country are fully inclusive of the full fabric of South African society. No
leader can stand in this House and threaten a return to conflict and
internecine warfare in response to name-changing processes.

So, I would urge hon members to temper their interaction in the public
domain on this matter and in fact to ensure that they make submissions when
they are called for, and to participate in the democratic process of
indicating their view with respect to names for places throughout the
country.

As far as I am aware, there has been no rejection by government of the
African Peer Review Mechanism, APRM, report. Government has considered the
report. There were aspects of the report on which government felt it needed
to make detailed comments. Those comments have indeed been made and are
being submitted. What the hon member may be asking for might be a broader
reflection, debate and tabling of the report in the country. As the member
is aware, the report is first dealt with by heads of states in their
assembly and the appropriate committee of the AU.
So, government can’t have a public process-if that is what the hon member
was referring to-but there is no sense in which government could be cited
as having rejected the APRM report and process.

On the matter of the roads and the need to ensure that services are indeed
provided, I am sure the hon member who referred to the village in which the
roads are not yet in good order, in Mohlodi, would continue to use the good
offices of his constituency office to engage with the municipality to
ensure that, indeed, the roads are repaired.

On the Mogale City matter, the hon member seemed to be asking the President
to respond to this. I would think the hon member would want to place
questions to the President, if that is her wish. However, it would seem to
me that the Mogale City Municipality should indeed take action to remove
the person from the house if he is occupying it illegally.

Could I also say that, on the matter of the Cape Corps, again the hon
member is able to raise this as a question to the Minister of Defence in
order to get a definitive reply. I am not absolutely familiar with the
matter. It seems to be more appropriate as a question to the Minister of
Defence.

I must congratulate the ID on the antipollution drive that it says it has
taken on. I think we need to do far more as Members of Parliament about
promoting the protection of the environment, and particularly observance by
the private sector of the need to attend to issues of sustainable
development.

The matter of Phalaborwa and the wandering around of elephants is something
that, again, we should ask the environmental services to assist us with so
that the animals are looked after safely, and that members of the public
are also guaranteed safety. I thank you. [Applause.]


            CHRISTIANITY AND RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE IN SOUTH AFRICA



                            (Minister’s Response)


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Speaker, I would like
to respond to the statement made by the ACDP. In some ways, it’s not really
deserving of a response, but on the other hand, what was said here in this
House cannot go unchallenged.

The Jesus Christ that I know about was a man of flesh and blood, who fought
against injustice; who suffered for humanity; who embraced all people; who
was not exclusive; and who embraced people who were rejected by the rest of
society. I think that is the Jesus Christ that most of us here honour and
worship in various different ways. [Applause.]

The majority of ANC members are Christians. The Christians in the ANC are
people who embrace everyone, as Jesus Christ did; who embrace religious
tolerance; who fought for religious tolerance; and who will continue to do
so. [Applause.] They are people who embrace everyone on the basis of equal
rights as equal human beings who deserve equal respect.

As far as I know, we have a Good Friday to celebrate the crucifixion of
Jesus Christ; we have an Easter Monday; we have a Christmas Day; and we
have a holiday the day after Christmas Day. We do not have a single public
holiday for Muslims, for Jews, for Hindus and for Buddhists in our country.
So, I think you really have to rethink what you are saying.

We come from a society where there was no religious tolerance and where a
perverted kind of Christianity was forced upon all of us. That is what we
would like to fight against. It is very dangerous to make statements of
this nature. It is a perversion of Christianity. It is not the Christianity
that any of us can respect. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: That is the end of Ministers’ responses and that concludes the
business for today.

I wish to remind members that Extended Public Committees are scheduled to
start at 15:00 in the Old Assembly Chamber and in Committee Room E249. So,
you can still catch a cup of coffee. Thank you very much.

The House adjourned at 14:49.


