---
title: 'National Assembly - 28 August 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-08-28
---

TUESDAY, 28 AUGUST 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Acting Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Acting Speaker announced that Mr N Singh had been nominated on 23
August 2007 to fill the vacancy caused by the passing away of Prince N E
Zulu.

Mr Singh had made and subscribed the oath in the Speaker’s office.

                             WOMEN’S PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)
The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Acting Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that since Monday, 27 August 2007, women from all walks of
        life in our country convened in Parliament to attend the 2007
        Women’s Parliament;


      2) further notes that this year’s Women’s Parliament meets under the
         theme “Masijule Ngengxoxo Makhosikazi oMzantsi”, simply translated
         to mean “Let’s deepen the debate, women of South Africa’’;


      3) recalls that the Women’s Parliament forms part of celebrating our
         national women’s month and that the aim of the gathering is, among
         others, to create a platform for debate on all aspects that have a
         direct and indirect impact on gender;

      4) extends this people’s Parliament’s warm welcome to all the
         delegates to the 2007 Women’s Parliament; and


      5) wishes the 2007 Women’s Parliament fruitful deliberations and a
         happy stay in Cape Town, particularly those who come from outside
         the Western Cape.

Motion agreed to.

         EMANCIPATION, EMPOWERMENT, EQUALITY AND POVERTY ERADICATION

                           (Debate on Women’s Day)

Nkszn S P RWEXANA: Ndiyabulela Bambela-Somlomo. Singoomama abangamalungu
ePalamente siyabamkela oomama abaphuma mbombo zone zeli loMzantsi Afrika
bezokuba yinxalenye yePalamente yamaKhosikazi. Siyanamkela boomama kwaye
sivuyiswa kakhulu kukuza kwenu nize kuxoxa ePalamente. Siye sazimamela zona
izinto enithe naziphakamisa phaya kwaye ndinethemba lokuba kumhlahla-ndlela
wale Palamente yamaKhosikazi ziza kusiwa iso ezo zinto nanjengokuba uSekela-
Mongameli ebethembisile ngale ntsasa yanamhlanje. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Ms S P RWEXANA: I thank you, hon Acting Speaker. As women Members of
Parliament we would like to welcome the women of South Africa who have come
from all its corners to be part of the Women’s Parliament. We are very
grateful that you have come to participate in the discussions in
Parliament. We have listened to your concerns and I hope that they will be
considered in this unprecedented Women’s Parliament, as the Deputy
President also promised this morning.]

Madam Acting Speaker, the month of August marks a special time on South
Africans’ calendar as women’s month is observed. The date of 9 August bears
special significance as this day commemorates when women participated in a
national march in 1956, petitioning against the then pass laws. That had a
highly positive effect on the development of women.

Central to the role of fighting poverty is the fulfilment of the objective
that the ANC has set itself, namely that of eradicating poverty and
creating work for the poor in order to ensure a better life for all. With
the demise of apartheid in 1994, expectations and aspirations for
improvement in livelihoods among ordinary South Africans and a
socioeconomic development strategy for the first 10 years of democracy also
sought to address disparities created by the apartheid past.

However, despite the socioeconomic development strategy and status of South
Africa as a middle-income country, poverty and inequality are still
widespread and manifest themselves in a high rate of unemployment, extreme
land hunger and a lack of access to basic human needs.

In both urban and rural areas the majority of South Africa’s population
continues to experience conditions of severe deprivation and squalor. A
significant number of South African households continue to be poor or are
vulnerable to being poor. Poverty is perceived by South Africans themselves
to include alienation from the community, food insecurity, living in
crowded homes, usage of unsafe and inefficient forms of energy, a lack of
jobs that are secure and pay adequately, and the fragmentation of the
family.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, there are too many meetings in the
House. As we have said before, we allow the meetings away from the House
and let those people who are interested in the business of the House remain
in the House. Thank you. Please continue, hon member.

Ms S P RWEXANA: Women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities
bear the brunt of poverty. In addition, the distribution of income and
wealth in South Africa is among the most unequal in the world and many
households still have unsatisfactory access to education, health care,
energy and clean water despite concrete progress in redressing the
inheritance backlog since 1994. This is contained on page 264 of the report
of the African Peer Review Mechanism Country Review of November 2006.

The challenges of ongoing marginalisation and exclusion of the poorest of
the poor by organs of society as well as the inadequacy of service
delivery, resulting in poor realisation or the nonrealisation of goals
related to policies and programmes, compel all South Africans to take
charge for change and fight poverty. Below are the gaps that continue to
confront poverty reduction strategies: the absence of a common definition
of poverty; fragmented and unco-ordinated service delivery; existing
poverty reduction initiatives not being co-ordinated between government
departments and between government, private sector and civil society
organs; an inadequate monitoring and evaluation mechanism for measuring the
impact of poverty reduction services; the absence of consistent measurable
social indicators; unco-ordinated participation for nongovernmental
organisations; unstructured mobilisation of parastatals; and
nonprioritisation of poverty programmes for women.

It makes sense for developed nations to talk about poverty reduction so
that they can commit to assisting, but it makes sense for all South
Africans and parliamentarians to commit themselves to poverty eradication
as there can be no better life for all if poverty is still the order of the
day for the majority of South Africans.

The South African Dialogue has equally identified the following critical
issues through research, study tours and previous dialogue events: the
overwhelming majority of the poor are women; conditions for women have not
improved despite government interventions and infrastructure injections;
economic empowerment is still not accessed by women; and there is no
special funding for women’s programmes. This morning the Deputy President
highlighted that Deputy Minister Thabethe is busy with the process of
launching the women’s fund. The existing gender machinery needs to be
strengthened; rural women, children and disabled are the most vulnerable.
Therefore, relating and given the above information it is critical that
parliamentarians, being the representatives and the voice of the people,
should find ways to implement the following: agree on the current poverty
status; agree on the poverty eradication model and formulate an approach
that will be able to target the poor; agree on a basket of services for the
poor; agree on a strategy to work together with nongovernmental
organisations; mobilise government support for social mobilisation and
funding; contribute to the debate on finding a common definition of
poverty; and mobilise women to lead the efforts to eradicate poverty as
they are mostly affected.

A plan of action will be put in place for an organised workshop for
parliamentarians to ensure brainstorming ideas and expectations. The
programme will include matters such as a definition of poverty and social
indications, good practice models, research from other parts of the
continent, funding for poverty programmes and partnerships, building
capacity for women, and special programmes for eradicating poverty for
women, children and the disabled.

In conclusion, President Thabo Mbeki, on delivering the Fourth Annual
Nelson Mandela Lecture in 2006, said that to achieve the social cohesion
and human solidarity we seek, we must vigorously confront the legacy of
poverty, racism and sexism.

It would make sense for all parliamentarians to commit themselves to the
eradication of poverty. Thank you very much, Madam Acting Speaker. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the majority of South African women
are politically emancipated and empowered. Some, however, are still not as
equal as others. Some are free to speak while others are accused of not
being team players when they do speak out. [Applause.] We as women are
politically free but we are still not free of violence, especially of
domestic violence, and we are not free of HIV/Aids.

The biggest problem for most South African women is that poverty,
especially in the rural areas and informal settlements within urban areas,
keeps us from fully participating in the new democratic dispensation. We
are not economically emancipated.

For many, South Africa is seen as a middle-income country, but for the
majority of black rural women poverty and inequality are still widespread
and manifest themselves in high rates of unemployment, the persistence of
abject poverty and the lack of access to basic needs.

The distribution of income and wealth in our country remains one of the
most unequal in the world and it is deeply felt by women, children, the
elderly and those with disabilities. SAWID, SA Women in Dialogue, points
out that violence against women is also a human rights issue, which has a
significant social and economic implication for fighting poverty.

Women experience a wide range of abuse including physical, sexual,
psychological and economic abuse, as well as forced isolation in the home
and other controlling behaviour. This problem is both individual and
social. It is embedded within and emerges from South Africa’s history as
well as from the current unequal socioeconomic and cultural relations.

It is widely recognised that empowered women are a prerequisite for poverty
alleviation and social cohesion. Real transformation which addresses racial
and gender issues uses the power of women at household and community
levels.

Many women attending this year’s Women’s Parliament have told us over and
over again that rural women are not aware of the programmes and legislation
aimed at empowering them that is passed by this Parliament. Rural women are
indeed often outside of the formal information system - economic,
political, social and technological. They end up being trapped in their
communities as a result of a lack of transport, poor communication
facilities and limited finance.

Many of these women are survivors and are not victims that need to be
helped. They need to be consulted and not told what is good for them. They
need to be recognised for their own worth and given the opportunity to gain
access to entrepreneurial skills, project and financial management and
strategic planning. They need knowledge and education. This must be done
together with basic survival strategies such as those relating to food,
water, housing and a basic income.

It would require significant interventions to provide the opportunities
denied the majority of South Africans over many decades. Government needs
to help rural women to help themselves and these women must be given access
to those institutions that can do the job.

Raced-based redistribution policies, such as our current BEE and
affirmative action policies will not achieve this as they do not favour the
poor, nor do they grow the economy. They merely transfer the wealth of the
white elite to the black elite.

Access to finance is vital. Group saving schemes such as stokvels help to
save small amounts of money regularly and collectively and are a powerful
way to mobilise savings activities among women. Many rural women find
informal enterprises to sustain themselves and to clothe, feed and educate
their families.

This spirit of enterprise is something that can be built upon. It is one
thing to provide grants that help cover the basics that women and their
families need to survive, but it is quite another to create a situation
where women will be able to become agents of their own empowerment.

The poor circumstances in which the majority of our rural women live need
to be addressed and need to be addressed now. Poor women also do not need
to be pacified with promises of jobs through an Expanded Public Works
Programme, which, by its very nature, is not able to create real,
sustainable employment.

What we need to do now, if we want to emancipate, empower, equalise and
eradicate poverty, is to move on with these programmes right now. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Deputy Speaker, emancipation, empowerment, equality and
poverty eradication – why only now? We have been talking about gender
equality, eradicating poverty and women empowerment since the end of
apartheid. But clearly, this is a battle that we have not yet won as women
continue to be abused and still live in abject poverty.

The time has come for us to deal with poverty decisively. Government, the
private sector, the NGOs, churches and everyone, even we as women, need to
embark on self-help and self-reliance strategies, that is, we need to help
ourselves. We have done a lot by talking and asking but we are now really
beginning to get tired.

Her Excellency Sheikha Haya Rashed Al Khalifa of Bahrain, said during the
14th International Day for the Eradication of Poverty Conference in 2006,
and I quote:


  Poverty crushes the human spirit, poverty violates human rights. Whenever
  men and women are destined to live in severe poverty human rights are
  violated. However, it is our duty to come together to ensure that these
  rights are respected.

The IFP believes that women are the most precious and delicate creatures in
the world and they must be respected. The government, together with the
relevant stakeholders, must provide for a major increase in the quantity
and quality of resources necessary for the eradication of poverty and to
promote gender equality. These resources must ensure that women and
children are not violated by being raped, sodomised or beaten. They must
not be victims of human trafficking.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the following: In the emancipation
and empowerment of women, eradication of poverty and addressing the gender
issues, government must ensure gender equality and social justice and that
all forms of violence against women be stopped, uphold women’s rights and
ensure that women have access to resources.

Lastly, women must also be catered for with regard to health policies,
reproductive health and actively fighting the HIV/Aids pandemic and
diseases associated with poverty. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu J BICI: Bambela-Somlomo, Baphathiswa ababekekileyo, malungu abekekileyo
kunye neendwendwe zethu ezibekekileyo, i-UDM iyanibulisa emva kwemini nje.
I-UDM iyazixhasa iingxoxo-mpikiswano ezilolu hlobo ngoba ziyakha, kuba
zithetha ngoomama.  Kambe i-UDM ibuhlungu kuba kudala noko sikhululekile
kodwa basekhona oomama abacinezelekileyo. Wofika bethwele iinyanda bevela
kutheza iinkuni nee-emele bevela kukha amanzi.

ILUNGU ELIHLONIPHEKILEYO: Uxela wena!

Mnu J BICI: Hayi mna!

Kwaye basekhona nabo basasokolayo. Noko mayibe kho into ebonakalayo
eyenziwa ngurhulumente ukuzama ukukhawulezisa inkqubo yokubeka oomama kule
ndawo sikuyo. Siyayixhasa yonke into ethethwa ngoomama ngoba ayikho into
eyenzekayo engekho umama. Ikhaya elingenamama liyabanda ngoba abukho obuya
bushushu bukamama. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech
follows.)

[Mr J BICI: Acting Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members and our
distinguished guests, the UDM greets you this afternoon. The UDM supports
debates of this nature because they are about women and are constructive.
But the UDM is disappointed because it is quite a long time since we
attained freedom but there are women who are still oppressed. You will find
them bearing bundles of woods they have collected and carrying buckets of
water on their heads.

An HON MEMBER: You are referring to yourself!

Mr J BICI: No, not me.

There are women who are still suffering. There must be something that the
government can do to speed up women’s empowerment. We support all that
women are saying because without them nothing will happen. There is no
warmth in a home without a mother. They provide warmth in a home. Thank
you. Applause.]]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order!

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, on a point of order: I think that it
is not appropriate for the speaker to be covered on the screen as is the
position now over there.

The ACTING SPEAKER: I think the matter will be attended to.

Ms M R MORUTOA: Madam Acting Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
hon members, distinguished guests in the gallery, on behalf of all of us I
congratulate and thank this Parliament for bringing together women from in
and around South Africa and from different walks of life to grace this
occasion with their presence and to give impetus to the discussions.

The Women’s Parliament takes place at a time in our history when we are
celebrating the 51st anniversary of the famous women’s march to Pretoria in
protest against the extension of the pass laws to African women. Women of
all races from different social backgrounds made a stand for human rights.

I would like to start off by defining what we actually mean by gender and
emancipation of women. By contrast, gender refers to a set of qualities and
behaviours expected from a female or male by society. Gender roles are
learned and can be affected by factors such as education and economics. The
emancipation of women, that is their liberation from religious, legal,
economic and sexual oppression, their access to higher education and their
escape from narrow gender roles, is not easily achieved. The struggle for
sexual equality has a long history and is likely to continue for some time.


South Africa is a signatory to many regional and international instruments
which deal specifically with gender issues. At 19,4% the regional SADC
average for women in parliament is higher than the global average of 15,4%.
Although there are vast differences between countries - for example, from
4,7% in Mauritius to 30% in Mozambique - as a region, Southern Africa ranks
second only to the Nordic countries as far as the representation of women
in parliament is concerned. The relatively high levels of women in
parliament in South Africa, Mozambique and the Seychelles, as well as in
local government in Namibia and the Cabinet in South Africa - where women
make up one third and many are in nontraditional posts - make it possible
to start assessing the impact of women in decision-making in the region.

Strategic objective F1 of the Beijing Platform for Action indicates that
women’s economic rights and independence need to be promoted. However,
women who have been abused or violated can be seen as a wasted resource
because violence jeopardises women’s health and thus constrains their
participation in the labour force. Given that women make up slightly more
than half of South Africa’s population, it is crucial that development
activities tap into women’s skills and capacities if they are to be
effective.

The AU Commission has completed a gender audit which revealed the extent to
which it and its organs have progressed in addressing gender and women’s
empowerment in their policies and programmes. Women must be empowered to
fight and overcome social ills such as poverty, which is directly related
to the absence of economic opportunities and autonomy; the lack of access
to economic resources, including credit, land ownership and inheritance;
the lack of access to education and support services, and their minimal
participation in the decision-making process.

Poverty can also force women into situations in which they would be
vulnerable to sexual exploitation, thus resulting in the current trends of
HIV transmission and prevalence that clearly show that the epidemic is
fuelled by gender-based vulnerabilities. Close to 60% of adults living with
HIV in sub-Saharan Africa are women. Almost 75% of young people living with
HIV in Southern Africa are female. As we know, most of the Millennium
Development Goals face a deadline of 2015 by when the gender parity target
was set to be achieved and South Africa will reach this target earlier than
expected - an acknowledgment that equal access to education is the
foundation for all other development goals.

The Women’s Charter of 1954 was a landmark in the process of asserting the
rights of women and demanding freedom from discrimination on the basis of
gender. But long before that, Charlotte Maxeke, in an extraordinary speech
at a conference in Fort Hare in 1930, described movingly and vividly what
subsequently came to be known as the triple oppression of black women. It
is the most remarkable analysis of the migrant labour system and its
effect, especially on young women. She ended up with an insight that was
truly significant: If you definitely and earnestly set out to uplift women
and children in the social life of Africans you will find that the men will
benefit too, and thus the whole community - both black and white. These are
the challenges.

Mainstreaming is not about adding a women’s component or even a gender
equality component into an existing activity. It goes beyond increasing
women’s participation. It means bringing the experience, knowledge and
interests of women and men to bear on the development agenda.

South Africa is a country where human beings are illegally recruited, held
and also passed on to other countries. In South Africa there is some
legislation which outlaws sexual acts with children, such as the Child Care
Act. The Immigration Act does criminalise trafficking and the sexual
offences Act is being reviewed in order to include legislation and
penalties relating to trafficking.

In 2004, the SA Law Commission proposed an Issue Paper which recommended
protocols to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, but it still has to be authorised by the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development. While legislation
will help, other measures must also be put in place.

Recommendations with regard to all of these include strengthening the
women’s movement in order to propose strategies, mechanisms and plans to
hold government accountable locally and corporations accountable at the
national level; continuing to apply pressure to implement the commitments
made at relevant forums, including the implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals to achieve gender equality and other development
objectives; and integrating gender-specific actions into policies aimed at
fulfilling gender-mainstreaming activities through the identification of
operational and analytic examples of how a gender perspective can be
mainstreamed into the policies.

On the identification of tools that promote accountability in the
implementation strategies, the Engendering SADC Parliaments programme deals
directly with national parliaments targeting and reaching out to both male
and female members of parliaments who are the law-makers, given the fact
that they have the authority to enact laws that can promote gender equality
in the region. Masijule Ngengxoxo Makhosikazi AseMzansi! [Let’s deepen the
debate, women of South Africa!] [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the month of August 2007 was set aside
to focus on our women and all that concerns them. All activities come to an
apex with our Women’s Parliament that is meeting at this time.

The ACDP welcomes all legislation that has been passed by Parliament during
the past years to better the lives of South African women. We salute,
especially, the women who work tirelessly as volunteers in NGOs and other
care-giving organisations to bring relief and to improve the lives of
others. To them all we say is: Thank you.

The ACDP is in full support of women being empowered in society. It is our
earnest desire that women should have more opportunities to earn a living
if they wish to do so and to contribute to their families’ wellbeing.
Certainly in our communities, many new avenues have opened up for women to
work and this has had a marked impact on the general improvement in
communities’ standards of living.

There is however situation in which our efforts appear to be possibly
counterproductive, namely that as we are concerned with improving the lot
of our women, this may inadvertently contribute to a rise in the levels of
spousal abuse. While women are now out there earning a living, their
husbands are frequently still searching for work. Unemployment is
frustrating for anyone looking for work, but all the more so for a husband
who is accustomed to being a breadwinner.

Whilst unemployment does not excuse any man’s violent behaviour, it is in
many cases a sorry truth. What can we do about this? Equality now exists in
reverse. These men were also the victims of discrimination on account of
their race. But opportunities for work for them are much fewer than for
some women. So, they continue to feel marginalised and are much like
bottles of beer rolling around and just building up pressure until they
explode. [Time expired.]

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy President, our
delegates, colleagues and friends, land ownership and the use of land has
always played an important role in shaping the political, economic and
social processes in the country. Past land policies were a major cause of
insecurity, landlessness, homelessness and poverty in South Africa. The
past policies had hard consequences for women, black and rural women in
particular. Women were essentially seen as minors and dependants. Highly
unequal relationships within households, communities and markets that
favoured men over women prevailed and still prevail.

In her address to the Rural Women in Agriculture and Land Initiatives
Summit, the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs said, and I quote:

   Amakhosikazi [the women] still feel the brunt of injustice - they do not
   have access to land, basic infrastructure and access to agrarian
   benefits. No one has felt oppression like women. First it was
   colonialism, then apartheid. Then, to top it all, traditional oppression
   of customs. Women’s rights were violated and still are. They continue to
   experience violent abuse, economic abuse, sexual abuse, gender
   discrimination and inequality.


   Today we are embracing the Age of Hope. Women have and will always be
   involved in agriculture, whether as supporters or as female farmers in
   their own right or as household food producers.

Within the broader context of apartheid land dispossession and
discrimination in terms of the Natives Land Act of 1913, black women were
further consistently denied access to land under rules of customary law of
succession in terms of the Black Administration Act of 1927. This law
provided that all movable property belonging to a black person and allotted
by him or accruing under black law of customs, any woman with whom he will
live a customary union or any house that he shall upon his death devolve
shall be administered under black law and custom. All land in a tribal
settlement held in traditional tenure upon contract conditions by a black
person shall devolve upon his death to one male person to be determined in
accordance with tables of succession.

This highly discriminatory legislation often left grown women in situations
where they were dependent on minor married children and relatives for their
livelihood. Even with liberation and even under the constitutional
dispensation, these discriminatory practices still existed until around
2005, which in substance restricted black women’s capacity to acquire land.
This amounted to the violation of the rights of women - those who were the
most vulnerable.

Secondly, other aspects of discrimination that have impacted negatively on
women’s capacity to acquire property and land is that financial
institutions used to require married women to have permission from their
husbands when applying for home or business financing. This form of
discrimination has been removed from the Statute Book and to a certain
extent in practice.

However, women still comprise a very low number of land and property owners
throughout the world. Recent United Nations estimates show that women own
barely 1% of the land property today. Although the Department of Land
Affairs has encouraged the participation of women in land reform projects,
there has been no concerted effort to mainstream women’s issues in land
reform projects. Recognising these weaknesses when the strategy for the
implementation of land reform programmes is developed, there should be
representation of women - particularly rural women at all levels of
decision-making positions in rural development public institutions; women
should be given a voice at village levels and in village development
structures; women-only land reform projects, land-holding entities and
communities should be established; and information on land reform
programmes should be disseminated - together targeting rural women to
enable them to develop tools that they need to bring about organisational
transformation in rural development structures, particularly those dealing
with issues of access to land and land tenure, policy design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation.

Women are still the primary caregivers of children and the elderly. By
empowering a woman, government is including the whole family in the
economic upliftment, resulting in an automatic multiplier effect.

I’ll skip this.

The Commission on Restitution of Land Rights would also be unable to put
down or to say how many land claimants are women at this stage or how many
of the beneficiaries of the restitution cases that have been settled thus
far in the Land Claims Court are women. We need to collect that data and
not just talk about households.

Uma unganikeza umama umhlaba, ungabona into yamehlo. Uma, kwezolimo, omama
benganikezwa umhlaba, bangayibamba ishisa futhi bakhwele phezu komsebenzi.
Ngikusho ngani lokhu na? Ngikusho ngoba umama akaze adalwe ngothuli
lomhlabathi, indoda eyabunjwa ngobumba. Kodwa umama yena wadalwa ngobambo
olwathathwa ohlangothini lwendoda. Yingakho-ke umama ekwazi ukumelana nazo
zonke izimo. Ithambo ulibeka emvuleni kodwa ulithole liseyithambo, ulibeke
elangeni ulithole liseyithambo, uphinde ulibeke emakhazeni ulithole
liseyithambo. Ngakho-ke omama bayakwazi ukuzimela. [Ihlombe.] (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[If you can give land to a woman you will see wonders. If women can be
provided with land, in agriculture, they can do their best. Why do I say
this? I say this because a woman was not created out of the dust of the
earth. It is the man who was created out of clay. The woman, however, was
created out of the rib taken from a man’s side. That is why a woman is able
to handle all kinds of challenges. You put a bone in the rain and you will
find that it remains a bone; you put it in the sun and it still remains a
bone, and you put it in the cold and it still remains a bone. Therefore,
women are able to be independent. [Applause.]]

Having land rights will empower women and strengthen their ability to fight
for equality, dignity and economic rights.

Omama banamandla. Bayakwazi ukuzilwela futhi basukuma balwa impi yamapasi.
Nanamhlanje singasukuma silwe impi yomhlaba singomama. Omama banamandla
futhi bayakwazi ukuzimela. Yingakho sithi amaphesenti angama-30 omhlaba
okufanele unikezwe abantu. Amaphesenti ayi-15 alowo mhlaba awunikezwe
omama. Uma omama benganikezwa lo mhlaba, ungabona ukuthi bazowusebenzisa
ngendlela ezophucula izimpilo zabantu.

Lesi sihloko esithi Masijule Ngengxoxo Makhosikazi oMzansi sisho ukuthi ake
sixoxe ngale ndaba yokunikezwa kwabantu umhlaba ukuze sikwazi ukuthi uma
sesinikezwe lo mhlaba siwusebenzise ukuze siphucule izimpilo zethu.
Ukhulumile-ke uNgqongqoshe ngendaba yokuthi kukhona izitshalo ezizotshalwa
ezizokwenza amafutha okuhambisa izinqola. Ngakho-ke thina bomama asibambe
leli qhaza ukuze singene kuleli bhizinisi lokuthuthukisa izwe lethu.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Women are powerful. They are able to fight for themselves, and they did so
when they stood up and fought against the pass laws. Even today we can
stand up as women and fight a world war. Women are strong and they are also
independent. That is why we say 30% of that land should be given to the
people, and 15% of that must be given to the women. If women can be
provided with this land, you will see how they will utilise it in a way
that will improve people’s lives.

The theme “Let’s deepen the debate, women of South Africa” means that we
must talk about this matter of handing land over to the people so that,
when we have been given this land, we may utilise it to improve our lives.
The Minister did say that there are plants that will be grown that will
make the fuel for vehicles. Therefore we as women should play a major role
so that we get into this business developing our country.]

In the case of communally held rights, whether formal or informal, the
formation of a new legal entity required by law to take the ownership of
the land being restored or granted in view of the original land also
provides women with the opportunity to gain legal recognition as new-rights
holders. The restitution programme seeks to return land or compensate
people who have been dispossessed of their land through discriminatory laws
since 1913. [Interjections.]
Ngibonga kakhulu.

IPHINI LIKASOMLOMO: Asisekho nesikhathi sokungibonga.

Nkk B M NTULI: Kodwa omama abasuke babambe iqhaza ... [Kwaphela isikhathi.]
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even the time to thank me has expired.

Mrs B M NTULI: However, the women who participate ... [Time expired.]
[Laughter.]]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Madam Deputy Speaker, former President Mandela said:
“Society will never be free unless women are liberated from all forms of
oppression”. Year in and year out the month of August is marked by various
celebrations.

Njalo siyathokoza, sincome futhi sikhulume ngomama minyaka yonke. Kodwa
sekufanele kufike lapho kuphela khona ukukhuluma, sifike lapho senza khona.
Sekuyisikhathi sokuba omama bazikhulule , ngoba banawo amandla
okuzikhulula. Sekuyisikhathi futhi sokuthi omama bakhululwe basizwe
nangobaba ukuthi bakhululeke. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Every year we always rejoice, praise and talk about women. However, there
has to come a time when we stop talking and start doing. Now is the time
for women to free themselves, because they have the power to do so. It is
also time for women to be freed and to be assisted by men to free
themselves.]

This should not just be centred in the workplace, as women are not only
disempowered and marginalised in their workplaces, but in their homes as
well. Discourse, public deliberation and resolutions should evolve from
issues that are discussed during this women’s month. They need to be acted
upon as they significantly affect a large percentage of our society.

Njengoba sihleli nje lapha, sinamakhosikazi amaningi, ayizigidi, abheke
emakhaya ethu. Thina sifika emakhaya sijabulele ukuthi izinto zonke zimi
kahle kodwa lowo nalowo nkosikazi unomndeni wakhe. Simenzelani thina ukuze
akhululeke? (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[As we are sitting here, there are many women, millions of them, who are
looking after our homes. We arrive home and appreciate that everything is
in order, but each and every woman has her family. What are we doing for
her to be free?]

That woman needs to be liberated. That woman needs to have her life
improved.
Thina-ke esingamakhosikazi kufanele sizitshele lokho ukuthi sikhulule
abanye omama ngoba thina sesinikiwe ithuba lokukhululeka. Asigcini lapho,
sihamba singena nakwezinye izindawo. Ngokomnotho, kuyadingeka ukuthi
singene njengomama, kanjalo nasemfundweni. Njengoba sihlangane lapha
ePhalamende labesifazane, sikhuluma ngazo lezo zinto. Amandla akithi sonke
singomama ukuthi sikuthathe lokhu sikuse em akhaya. Akube khona umehluko
emakhaya. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[As women, we should tell ourselves that we have to free other women
because we have been given a chance to be free. That is not all, we also go
to other places. Economically, we need to intervene as women, even in
education. As we are gathered here in the Women’s Parliament, we are
talking about those things. We have the power, as women, to take this home.
There must be a difference in our homes.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President and Ministers, the
UCDP has long subscribed to the emancipation of women, as far back as 1972.
We decided to free women from their shackles of bondage by ending the need
for wives to have their husbands’ consent before taking up permanent
employment in government. It is this party that saw to it that qualified
women got permanent posts in government as against what was contained in
the past apartheid South Africa, where women, on getting married, would
only be appointed to temporary posts.

The UCDP has never been hamstrung regarding the progression of women. We
were the first party in South Africa that, as far back as 1995, had
appointed a woman secretary-general in the north of Limpopo. We set the
pace for others to follow. Similarly, in our time, we were the first
government to have a woman serving in Cabinet. Women are to us the backbone
of the party.

When we had resources at our disposal, women played a prominent part and
role in mobilising poverty eradication. They had food gardens and had jobs
that kept them afloat economically.

Gatelang pele basadi. Tswelelang pele, re tla bona ka ditiro tsa lona.
Dipuo ga di thuse sepe. Basadi tshwarang ka thata ... [Nako e
fedile.][Legofi.] [Let the women progress, your efforts will pay dividends.
More talk and less action does not help. Do not despair, you shall overcome
... [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Deputy Speaker, Deputy President and Ministers
present here, let me start by saying: Train a woman, train a nation. My
speech is dedicated to all the women of the world who played a meaningful
role in the socioeconomic emancipation of humankind. The list is very long.
If I name them, I may be accused of leaving some out. It is only fitting to
give credit to women for the various roles they play. Women have proved to
be pillars of strength in our homes, communities, society and the nation.
Empowering women is empowering a nation.
The PAC observes that many women in our country have made an indelible mark
in the male-dominated world and have successfully taken up leading roles in
business and government, but the majority of our women are still struggling
daily to make ends meet. The emancipation of women is not easily achieved,
but it is necessary and desirable. The struggle for sexual equality has a
long history and is likely to continue for some time.

The PAC’s position is that women should be equipped with the necessary
basic skills and be assisted to open their own small businesses, especially
in the rural areas. Their hard work, dedication and perseverance will
benefit the communities they live in. Improvement in the status of women
has far-reaching consequences and produces fundamental political changes. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Acting Speaker, our Ministers, our Deputy President, we
truly need to inculcate a gender balance in South Africa. Relations need to
be forged that shall bind men and women in the united effort for
sustainable development. Parliament, upon the guidelines of our national
Constitution that advocates gender equality, has passed supportive
legislation and policies that strengthen women’s rights and open roads that
women in a patriarchal society have not trod upon.

With such support, women and men can create a virtuous circle of
sustainability and equity. Without it, they will be trapped and this will
result in a vicious spiral of continuing poverty, high fertility, limited
opportunity and social degradation. We need to steer away from the narrow
belief that sustainable growth is dependent primarily on economic expansion
and development.

The importance of people’s lives and wellbeing, and our surroundings is so
that it shall sustain economic growth and world safety. However, the
Minority Front stresses that for women to empower themselves there has to
be a self-realisation of their self-worth and commitment and a drive to
expand, and individual acknowledgement that the women of South Africa have
the power and the right to be great.

We commemorate all our wonderful women who have helped pave our way to
greatness and we salute all our women for contributing to being great now.
I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, the emancipation and equality of women
remains an issue that challenges certain ethical and customary conventions.
Hundreds of years of perceptions of women built into the value constructs
of society are not easily dismantled by either legislation or the latest
democratic order alone, although these are credible aids towards an
acceptable framework in gender relations.

Customs, beliefs, institutional traditions and other related social factors
provide additional challenges and an exciting discourse around this issue.
However, in the quest for a more equitable dispensation for all, no person
ought to be treated as though they are inferior to another and each one has
a right to be treated fairly with honour and dignity, both male and female.

The empowerment of women starts with transforming perception. One industry
that can help in this regard is the advertising industry. They have been
guilty for many years of perpetuating the perception that women are objects
of desire and utility commodities in marketing strategies. Over the last
few years there has been a downward trend by the advertising industry in
exploitative and demeaning female adverts and we hope that as the message
has gotten through to this industry, the same can be achieved in the wider
society, as long as we do not slow down in our efforts.

The FD believes that women have an equal obligation, like men, to develop
society and that both add value to the work by the distinctive mix of the
two irrespective of the vocation they hold. Society will be free from abuse
and violence if women are free from sexual slavery such as prostitution.
Society will also be free from wars and conflict if women are free from
customary, political and fanatical religious controls.

The FD salutes all women and we commend them for the critical role they
have played in the transformation of our nation. I thank you.

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order! A message for the delegates of the Women’s
Parliament: As you leave the Chamber, you may do so quietly. But, what I do
not understand is what the hurry is, because your programme won’t continue
until this debate has ended.

So, please take your seats, even if I don’t have any jurisdiction in the
gallery. But this debate is also for your benefit. Before we proceed,
calling the last speaker for this debate, we also need to mention to the
National Assembly that we have here two former members of this House who
are now delegates of the Women’s Parliament. They are Mrs Ruth Mompati and
Ms Mita Seperepere. [Applause.]

Mrs X C MAKASI: Hon Acting Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers, Deputy
Ministers, colleagues and friends, our delegates in the gallery ...
malibongwe!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO: Igama lamakhosikazi!

Nksz X C MAKASI: Kungovuyo namhlanje ukuba sibambe le ngxoxo-mpikiswano
ngemini ekudibene ngayo amakhosikazi oMzantsi Afrika eze kuxoxa ngekamva
lawo. Kungovuyo kananjalo ukuqaphela ukuba oomama abaze kuzimasa le ngxoxo-
mpikiswano naMalungu ePalamente ngabantu abayizabalazelayo into yokuba
sikhululeke. Abanye babeziinkumanda abanye bezi-commissar zoMkhonto
weSizwe. Siyanamkela namhlanje kule Palamente yethu; iPalamente yenu.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... praise!

HON MEMBERS: The name of women!

Mrs X C MAKASI: It is a pleasure today that women of South Africa are
gathered here and debating their future. It is a pleasure too to notice
that women who are participating in this debate with Members of Parliament
are some of the women who struggled for our liberation. Some were
commanders and others were MK commissars. We welcome you in our Parliament
today, which is your Parliament.]

The term “glass ceiling” was coined to describe the barriers that allow
women to see the top of the corporate ladder, but prevent them from
reaching it.

Le nyanga sikuyo ka-Agasti, yiNyanga yooMama, oomama abenza umngcelele
ukuya kwiZakhiwo zoMdibaniso. Siyabulela ngokuba urhulumente wamisela le
nyanga njengeNyanga yooMama. Sijonge ekubeni siqinise indima yoomama
kwezoshishino nakwezolawulo kwaye sibabeke kwiqondo eliphakamileyo
lokuzenzela.

Masingalibali ukuba kule Palamente yethu yoMzantsi Afrika sizamile,
kwithutyana nje elincinane, ukuvala umsantsa wokungalingani phakathi
koomama nootata. Namhlanje oomama banegalelo kwaye bayinxalenye yezigqibo
zolawulo. Yiyo loo nto sisithi sibulela oomama abenza umngcelele ukuya
kuStrydom.

Apha eMzantsi Afrika sikwinqanaba leshumi ngokuba noomama abaninzi
epalamente kwiipalamente ezili-130 ehlabathini jikelele. Singoomama
baseMzantsi Afrika sithi xa sizithelekisa noomama behlabathi sizibone
siphambili, siyibetha iKhanada, iAustralia neMelika ngokumelwa ngoomama
epalamente.

Ukusukela kunyaka we-1994 zininzi izinto esiphumeleleyo ngokubhekisele
ekukhululweni koomama emakhamandeleni kodwa kusekuninzi ekufuneka kwenziwe.
Mininzi imithetho ephunyeziweyo efana ne-Employment Equity Act,
iMaintenance Act, iDomestic Violence Act neminye endingayibalanga. Maninzi
namanye amaziko akhiweyo ngurhulumente esenzela ukuncedisa ekuphuhliseni
oomama. Ndingabala iCommission on Gender Equality, SA Human Rights
Commission kunye ne-Office on the Status of Women. Kanti apha ePalamente
sinayo iJoint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life
and Status of Women. Siyasebenzisana namanye amaziko afana ne-UN
Declaration kunye neConvention on Elimination of Discrimination against
Women. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The month of August is the month in which women marched to the Union
Buildings. We are grateful that the government declared this month as
women’s month. We hope to strengthen women’s role in business enterprises
and administration, and place them at a higher level of self-development.

We need not forget the fact that in the Parliament of South Africa we have
tried within a short space of time to close the gap of inequality between
men and women. Today women have a role to play and also take part in
decision-making bodies. It is for that reason that we congratulate women
who marched to Strydom at the Union Buildings.

South Africa is placed 10th in the world out of 130 parliaments in terms of
women’s representation in Parliament. Women of South Africa are leading the
pack in women’s representation in Parliament and we compare ourselves with
countries like Canada, Australia and America.

There are many things that we have achieved since 1994, especially in the
field of women’s empowerment. But there is a lot that still needs to be
done. Many Acts, like the Employment Equity Act, the Maintenance Act,
Domestic Violence Act and other Acts that I have not mentioned, have been
passed. There are many institutions that the government has established for
women’s empowerment. I can make mention of the Commission on Gender
Equality, the SA Human Rights Commission and the Office on the Status of
Women. In Parliament we have a Joint Monitoring Committee on the
Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of Women. We also work in
partnership with other institutions like the UN Declaration and Convention
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.]

You will agree with me when I attest that there is concrete evidence of the
work the government has done to uplift women and place them at policy-
making and decision-making levels. A wide range of government programmes
have been created to pay special attention to the needs of women especially
the marginalised.

A number of international and regional treaties and conventions require
SADC states to achieve gender equality and representivity at all levels of
government and decision-making bodies. As the ANC, we are beyond 30% and we
are on the way to meeting the Millennium Development Goals in terms of
50/50 representation at a decision-making level.

President Thabo Mbeki himself has bitten the bullet with a Cabinet that now
consists of 42% women. As the ANC Women’s League, we applaud our President
for having fulfilled his promises on the emancipation of women in South
Africa. We therefore challenge the DA and other smaller parties to follow
the good example that has been set by the ANC.

South Africa has made significant gains in the representation of women at
the national level where the number of women has dramatically increased.
This placed South Africa at the top of the list in terms of women’s
representation worldwide. However, at ward level women are still less
represented. We need to focus on the local level and ensure that women ward
councillors are elected.

Ndingalilibelanga icandelo leejaji, umkhosi wasemanzini kunye necandelo
lezorhwebo, macandelo lawo asenenani eliphantsi kakhulu lamakhosikazi.
Kufuneka sinyuse inani loomama kula macandelo. [I shall not forget the
judiciary, the navy and trade and industries. These areas still have a low
number of women and we need to work to improve that.]

These women are faced with challenges such as required skills, stereotyping
that assumes women are not capable of handling management positions, past
discrimination that has limited work experience and the perception that
women are less mobile and are therefore not suitable to take advantage of
work opportunities in other provinces.

There is a gap between government and the private sector in terms of
salaries between men and women. Small changes in terms of the work
procedures have been introduced to enable women to work flexible hours and
not be forced to choose between their career and their family.

Women have different needs and their needs have to be accommodated in order
for the process of integration to be successful. There is a need to adapt
the management profile and afford more family employees the opportunity to
occupy positions of influence, enabling women to have a voice both
politically and economically.

Ukuvala, uMargaret Thatcher wakhe wathi: [In conclusion, Margaret Thatcher
once said:]

In politics, if you want anything said, then ask a man; if you want
anything done, do ask women.

Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Debate concluded.

                        DISPUTE BETWEEN SABC AND PSL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M KOMPHELA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC wish to raise serious concerns
over the unresolved matter of the Premier Soccer League’s radio
broadcasting rights. Last Friday’s announcement by the acting CEO of the
PSL, Mr Ronnie Schloss, that the PSL was withdrawing the radio broadcasting
rights from all SABC radio stations is a major setback for the football
fans.
A protracted battle between the PSL and the public broadcaster is not in
the interests of the majority of our people. It seems that the negotiations
between the two parties are riddled with suspicion and a lack of trust and
shifting of the goal posts is the order of the day. It is therefore mind-
boggling and worrying that the SABC and the PSL fail to resolve this matter
amicably.

Rural communities and those who cannot afford to buy tickets or pay for
satellite TV are now left at the mercy of the two entities who ignore the
national interests. Sports, especially soccer, belong to all the people of
this country, not only to the select few administrators of the game. All
proceeds derived out of sports and broadcasting should benefit the people
and supporters of sport.

The ANC thus calls on the Minister of Sport and Recreation and the Minister
of Communications to intervene in this matter to ensure that our people are
not deprived because of narrow, selfish interests. Thank you. [Applause.]

                      SKILLS SHORTAGE IN THE PROVINCES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Chairperson, at the beginning of June the President
said:


   Let me state categorically that our government has not taken any decision
   to reduce the number of provinces.


That is after the Minister of Finance said in May:


   The country does not have an adequate skills endowment to staff the
   multitude of institutions we have created. We must look at the number of
   provinces as well as their assignment of powers and functions.

I am not sure which statement is a collective view  of  government.  Is  the
hon Minister Manuel guilty of “lone ranger” behaviour? It is now clear  from
the questions put by Minister Mufamadi in his  provincial  review  that  the
government is once again engaging in the process of  centralising  power  by
pretending that it is not happening. Thus,  they  are  craftily  doing  away
with some or abolishing provinces all together while distracting the  public
with false promises.

There is indeed a skills crisis in the provincial sphere but if the  ANC  is
willing to employ people from outside its cadres, it will  find  that  there
are enough skills in the country to run the nine provinces effectively.

                 COUNTRY’S READINESS TO HOST 2010 WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Our country’s readiness to host the 2010 World Cup has
been questioned on numerous occasions. But, I have absolutely no doubt that
we will prove the prophets of doom wrong and host the best event yet. It
is, however, imperative that in our efforts to be ready on time and meet
deadlines we do not cut corners and place the lives of workers at risk
unnecessarily.

Inspectors from the Department of Labour, during an unannounced visit to
Durban’s 2010 Moses Mabhida Stadium, ordered construction on the site to
stop after they found noncompliance with safety regulations in certain
parts of the stadium which would have endangered the lives of workers.

They also found that workers have not been adequately trained on safety.
According to the inspector, most of the problems they have encountered at
the Durban Stadium were the same as those in six other provinces they had
visited.  Considering the many dangers associated with the construction
industry, the careless, haphazard behaviour displayed by the relevant
contractor is unacceptable. We do, however, hope that the situation will be
rectified as soon as possible and the relevant safety requirements and
standards adhered to.

This should also be a lesson to contractors that under no circumstances
should the lives of their employees be put at risk unnecessarily. I thank
you.

                        CONSTITUENCY OVERSIGHT VISIT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr F BEUKMAN (ANC): Voorsitter, tydens die kiesafdelingstydperk in Julie
2007 het ons oorsigbesoeke aan staatsdepartemente in die Helderberggebied
gebring ten einde die kwaliteit van dienslewering aan die publiek te peil.

Een van die kantore wat besoek is, is dié van die streekkantoor van die
Departement van Arbeid in Somerset–Wes, wat vir ’n gedeelte van die
Metropool, Boland en Overberg verantwoordelik is. Die kantoor word deur ’n
bekwame kantoorhoof, mev Zulaigha Smith, bestuur, tesame met ’n
gemotiveerde personeelkorps.

Die volgende gevolgtrekkings is gemaak ná die besoek: Daar is ’n proaktiewe
implementering van die strategiese bestuursplan van die departement; daar
is voldoende opgeleide personeel om die kerntake uit te voer; daar is
voldoende hulpbronne en logistieke hulpmiddels vir die uitvoer van take;
die genoegsame beskikbaarheid van rekenaars en die implementering van ’n
nuwe sagtewareprogram bevorder produktiwiteit; personeel word opgelei om ’n
eenstopdiens aan die publiek te lewer; en daar is gereelde oorsigbesoeke
van hoofkantoor en die rekenpligtige beampte aan die kantoor.

Verder het die streekkantoor sy dienspunte na 13 uitgebrei om veral in die
landelike gebiede meer toeganklik vir lede van die publiek te wees.

Die ANC wil graag die Departement van Arbeid en hierdie streekkantoor
aanmoedig om voort te gaan met sy goeie werk, en die amptenare bedank wat
voortdurend streef om kwaliteitdiens aan die publiek te bring.

Staatsdiensamptenare wat die beginsels van Batho Pele uitleef deur hul
optrede, verdien die vermelding en ondersteuning van al die lede in hierdie
Huis. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN (ANC): Chairperson, during the constituency period in July
2007, we conducted oversight visits to state departments in the Helderberg
region in order to ascertain the quality of service delivery to the public.

One of the offices visited was that of the regional office of the
Department of Labour in Somerset West that is responsible for a portion of
the Metropole, Boland and the Overberg. The office is managed by a
competent office manager, Mrs Zulaigha Smith, together with a motivated
staff complement.

The following conclusions were drawn from the visit: The strategic
management plan of the department is being implemented proactively; there
is an adequate number of trained staff to execute core tasks; there are
adequate resources and logistical aids for the execution of tasks; the
ample supply of computers and the implementation of a new software
programme enhance productivity; staff are being trained to provide the
public with a one-stop service; and there are regular oversight visits from
head office and the accounting officer to the office.

Furthermore, the regional office has increased its service points to 13 to
make them more accessible to members of the public, especially in the rural
areas.

The ANC would like to encourage the Department of Labour and this regional
office to continue with their good work, and thank the officials who
continue to strive to provide excellent service to the public.

Public servants whose actions reflect the principles of Batho Pele, deserve
mention and the support of all members in this House.]

                               FLOOR-CROSSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H B CUPIDO (ACDP): Chairperson, it is with deep concern that the ACDP
takes note of the divisive effect that the floor-crossing legislation has
on members and political parties in all spheres of government. It engenders
suspicion and fear of betrayal at a time when members’ minds should be on
the upcoming business of good governance.

The process of floor-crossing was used to register protest at a single
piece of legislation; it was only very rarely used to represent a permanent
change of party. The concept is being abused in the most mercenary way.
Small parties are particularly affected; not only does this cause upheaval
in party relationships, but in practical terms the parties’ budgetary
commitments are drastically affected when office rental and other important
contractual commitments cannot be met because crossing members take their
constituency allowance with them.

Floor-crossing at national, provincial and local levels also has a very
negative effect on the voting public. The trust of millions of voters is
being violated. The vote, for every South African man and woman, is a much
treasured and hard-fought enfranchisement at the very heart of democracy
and it should not be tampered with. This legislation, as it presently
stands, is a disgrace that erodes confidence in voting.

The ACDP calls on government with the greatest possible earnestness to
hasten the process of changing that legislation pertaining to floor-
crossing as a matter of grave urgency. This is what the people are counting
on from government at this moment. Please do not let them down. [Time
expired.]

         JOINT INITIATIVES WITH DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mme M W MAKGATE (ANC): Modulasetilo, Phatwe ke kgwedi ya basadi e re
gopolang bagaka ba rona ba ba neng ba lwela kgololosego le go bona gore
basadi ga e nne basalagae. Ka di 26 Phatwe 2007 maloko a dikereke,
mekgatlho e e seng ya puso jaaka Lizwe, Potchefstroom Community
Correctional Services le Potchefstroom Minister’s Forum ka fa tlase ga
boeteledipele jwa ANC Women’s League, ba ne ba etela lefelo la kgopololo la
batshwarwa ba basadi kwa Tlokwe mo porofenseng ya Bokone Bophirima.

Maitlhomomagolo e ne e le go ba rotloetsa go nna le tshepo, go tiisa
dikgolagano magareng ga bona le bana, masika le setšhaba ka kakaretso le go
bontsha gore setšhaba se ikaeletse go ba abela tšhono ya bobedi.

Re ikuela mo dikerekeng, mekgatlho e e seng ya puso le borakgwebo go tsaya
sekai se, jaaka re itse gore kgetsi ya tsie e kgonwa ke go tshwaraganelwa.
Halala basadi, halala! [Tsenoganong.] (Translation of Setswana member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms M W MAKGATE (ANC): Chairperson, August is women’s month in which we
commemorate our heroes who fought for freedom, to ensure that women do not
just become people who remain at home. On 26 August 2007, church members,
nongovernmental organisations like Lizwe, Potchefstroom Community
Correctional Services and the Potchefstroom Ministers’ Forum, under the
leadership of the ANC Women’s League, visited the Female Correctional
Service Centre in Tlokwe in the North West province.

The main aim was to encourage them to have faith, to strengthen the
relationship between themselves and their children, their relatives and the
nation in general and to show them that the nation is prepared to give them
a second chance.

We appeal to churches, nongovernmental organisations and businessmen to
follow suit, as we all know many hands make light work. Halala basadi,
halala! [Interjections.]]

                            TRAUMA AND THE YOUTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Chairperson, the effects of trauma amongst the youth is
an area not always sufficiently highlighted in our society.

The types of trauma youths may invariably be exposed to are domestic
violence; gang violence; rape and sexual abuse; school violence; and
criminal violence. If these traumatic experiences persist they will have
adverse behavioural effects on young children, creating feelings such as
fear, depression, anger, helplessness and despair, and lead to suicide
attempts.

Such feelings can affect their performance at school and within society,
and their relationships with family and friends. This can continue into
adulthood.

Low service impact, related to trauma care, invariably impacts on the
mental health of the youth. It has been established by the World Health
Organisation that worldwide up to 20% of children present diagnosable with
mental, emotional and behavioural problems that can lead to school failure,
family discord, violence or suicide.

The FD is concerned about the effects of trauma on the mental health status
of our youth and suggests an improved funding formula for established care
centres and the establishment of more trauma and victim centres to deal
with mental health problems due to violence, crime and other forms of
abuse. I thank you.

                  DECREASED TRADE RESTRICTIONS AND TARIFFS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P J RABIE (DA): Chair, a visit by the DA to clothing and textile
manufacturers on 7 August this year clearly illustrated the negative
effects of the Chinese import restrictions on this industry.
Home textiles in particular have in certain cases seen their turnover
decrease by up to 70%. These businesses employ thousands of workers, the
majority of whom are either sole breadwinners or single women.

Ironically, the importation of finished products from China is not
restricted, thus having the effect that the shortfall in local production
is now being made up with imports.

Manufacturers who have succeeded in obtaining extended quotas have only
managed to do so after months of torturous negotiations since the
Department of Trade and Industry has abdicated all responsibility to make
determinations on additional quotas to the South African Clothing and
Textiles Workers’ Union.

Meanwhile, formerly busy clothing and textile manufacturers’ precincts,
such as Salt River, Cape Town, are growing increasingly desolate and
continue to haemorrhage jobs.

If the government wants to assist the recovery of the clothing and textile
manufacturers in our country, it needs to remove the trade restrictions and
decrease the trade tariffs on raw materials as a matter of urgency. I thank
you, Chair.

                  FARMWORKERS IN THE CEDERBERG MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me L N MOSS (ANC): Voorsitter, die Grondwet verklaar dat Suid-Afrika
behoort aan almal behoort wat daarin woon.

Dié doel is slegs moontlik deur middel van boustene soos byvoorbeeld om ’n
beter kwaliteit lewe te gee aan almal wat in Suid-Afrika woon, veral die
plaaswerkers wat nog steeds mishandel en benadeel word deur plaaseienaars
in ’n kiesafdeling in die Cederberg.

Ek wil die volgende ervarings, wat werklik gebeur het in die Cederberg-
kiesafdeling, deel met die Huis. Die Cederberg- kiesafdeling is ’n baie
landelike gebied. Plaaseienaars het deesdae die vermetelheid om werkers en
inwoners van hulle plase af te sit. Die mense woon alreeds amper tien jaar
daar, maar dit word gedoen om die Wet op die Uitbreiding van Sekerheid van
Verblyfreg te omseil.

Soms, as die werknemers of inwoners nie die plaas wil verlaat nie, word die
krag en water afgesit. ’n Voorbeeld van so ’n geval is dié van ’n
pensioentrekker, wat onder ’n afdak bly en wie se vleis toe vrot geword
het. Hy het eendag na my kantoor toe gekom.

Voorsitter, ander voorbeelde is die gevalle van die plase soos Middelplaas,
Groenvlei, Markuskraal, Keerom, Brakvlei en Kleinvlei. Dit is duidelik dat
die wet geïgnoreer word. Uitsettings word deur die hof goedgekeur, alhoewel
daar geen huisvesting beskikbaar is nie en dit veroorsaak ’n lang waglys by
die Cederberg-munisipaliteit.

Die ANC-regering het alreeds heelwat gedoen om programme in te stel vir
plaaswerkers, byvoorbeeld oor menseregte. Ek wil die ANC-regering bedank
vir hul uitmuntende werk wat hulle alreeds gedoen het en by die ANC-
regering pleit dat hulle dié punte van kritiek en die probleme so spoedig
moontlik moet aanspreek. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms L N MOSS (ANC): Chairperson, the Constitution states that South Africa
belongs to all who live in it.

This objective is only possible by means of building blocks such as, for
example, providing a better quality life for all the people that live in
South Africa, especially the farmworkers who are still being ill-treated
and marginalised by farm owners in the Cederberg constituency.

I would like to share the following experiences, which are actually taking
place in the Cederberg constituency, with the House. The Cederberg
constituency is a very rural area. Farm owners have the audacity these days
to evict workers and farm dwellers from their farms. These people have
already been living there for close to 10 years, but this is being done to
circumvent the Extension of Security of Tenure Act.

Sometimes, when workers or farm dwellers refuse to leave the farm, the
electricity and water supply is cut off. An example of such an incident is
that of a pensioner who stays in a shack, and as a result of this action,
his meat went off. He then came to my office one day.

Chairperson, other similar incidents are taking place on the following
farms, namely Groenvlei, Marcuskraal, Keerom, Brakvlei and Kleinvlei. It is
clear that the law is being ignored. Farm evictions are endorsed by the
courts, in spite of the fact that there is no accommodation available and
this gives rise to the Cederberg Municipality having long waiting lists.

The ANC government has already taken action by putting programmes in place
for farmworkers, for example with regard to human rights. I would like to
thank the ANC government for the excellent work they have already done and
appeal to the ANC government to address these issues and problems as soon
as possible. I thank you.]
                     ATM BOMBINGS IN RURAL KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Hon Chairperson, the IFP is extremely concerned
now that it has become apparent that ATM bombers are targeting rural
areas. In recent weeks there has been a spate of ATM bombings at Dube
village, Inanda, KwaHlabisa in northern Zululand; Jozini in Ingwavuma; and
KwaSkhemelele on your way to Kosi Bay - on the Mozambique border. Poorer
communities are being punished by ruthless criminals, who especially like
to target KwaZulu-Natal's rural areas. 

ATMs are provided by private companies and banks to people who live in
poorer communities because they don't have the resources to travel to
bigger towns or cities to make use of banking services. The poor are once
again suffering and we therefore call on the Minister of Safety and
Security to step up all efforts to curb the recent upsurge of ATM bombings.
Police, liaising with various stakeholders, must make sure that they stop
commercial explosives being illegally sold to these callous criminals. I
thank you.

             LAND REDISTRIBUTION AND RURAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr N B FIHLA (ANC): Chairperson, during the past two weeks the national and
provincial Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs played a leading
role in empowering and uplifting rural farm communities in the Eastern
Cape. At Loerie Hoogte poultry farm in the Cacadu district, a R20 million
black economic empowerment project was officially launched by the Minister
for Agriculture and Land Affairs. The project is a joint venture between
Rocklands Poultry and Kamnandi Tradings – a black-owned farmworkers’
company in Loerie. As part of the 10-year contract between the two
entities, Rocklands supplies Kamnandi with chicks and feed, and in turn
Kamnandi rears the chicks and sells full-grown birds to Rocklands.

In another development, the Eastern Cape agriculture and land affairs
department has acquired three citrus farms in the Sunday River Valley, to
empower about 45 farmworkers as part of the land redistribution programme.
The department paid about R33 million for the farms through its proactive
land acquisition strategy. Although the workers are the direct
beneficiaries, they haven’t taken receipt of the farms as yet, as they
still have to go through intensive training, including farm administration
management.

The ANC welcomes these efforts to empower rural communities through
effective land redistribution initiatives and sustainable economic
projects. This will assist greatly in fighting poverty and creating jobs
for rural communities. I thank you.

                         RAPE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Chairperson, on 11 July a man was arrested near
Oudtshoorn for the alleged rape and indecent assault of a 5-year-old girl.
This man was at the time out on bail for the rape of a 13-year-old girl.
How ironic that this could happen under the governance of the ANC who claim
to place the safety of women and children at the top of their agenda.

After the first assault, the man was freed on his own recognisance. In
reply to a question from the DA, the National Prosecuting Authority
indicated that although they had opposed the bail the man was nevertheless
released. Furthermore, the DA established that, according to the most
recent figures the Department of Safety and Security is willing to provide,
an average of two children a day are raped by known sex offenders.

It is clear that repeat rape offenders are contributing to South Africa’s
child rape crisis. Magistrates are repeatedly releasing on their own
recognisance people who are a danger to young boys and girls. It is
therefore necessary to introduce a programme of education and awareness-
raising for magistrates, to ensure that repeat rape offenders are not set
free to continue to prey on our young. I thank you. [Applause.]
                    FARMING ISSUES IN WATERBERG DISTRICT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms R J MASHIGO (ANC): Chairperson, in order to transform our society and
improve the lives of the people of Mabatlane, in the Waterberg District in
Limpopo, the Department of Trade and Industry, through Seda, identified two
co-operatives, entered into a five-year lease agreement with two farms,
secured 24 hectares on each farm, agreed with co-operatives to farm on
essential farms, provided the two co-operatives with farming and financial
management and agreed to pay R1 000 per member until their first harvest.

One of the farms was Maluba farm, which started in April 2006 and consisted
of 10 former farmworkers. Their first harvest was in February 2007 and
their turnover was 126 000. They also started paying themselves R1 000 per
month out of their own revenues. Their second harvest was affected by
frost. They could have harvested their first and second crops for essential
oils.

The other farm was Yarona farm, which started in February this year and
consists of eight youths from the local community. Their harvest will be
ready very soon. It is the objective, Chairperson, of the ANC to ensure
equitable possession of ownership.

                      CO-OPERATION BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Nk B T NGCOBO (ANC): Sihlalo, kuyaqala emlandweni ukuthi uKhongolose avule
ihhovisi endaweni yase ningizimu neTheku. Lokhu kwenzeke kulonyaka, u 2007.
Leli hhovisi liyasebenzisana neminyango eminingi kahulumeni.

Okusemqoka futhi ukuthi likwazile ukuba nokusebenzisana okuhle noMnyango
Wezokuthuthukiswa Komphakathi kanye noMnyango Wezobulungiswa. Le minyango
yomibili ibambisene ukunikeza usizo emndenini wakwa Khanyile, lapho
uSilindile Khanyile enikezwe igunya lokuthi abheke izingane zakubo,
ezineminyaka engu 17, 15 kanye no 13. Ubaba wezingane ubenodlame futhi
wazishiya ngo 2002. Umama wazo, owayehlala ngokugula,  washona ngo 2005.
Ubaba ubuye ngoba esozomngcwaba, waphinde wahamba.

Lezi zingane zingaphansi kukadadewabo. Kodwa ke futhi ziphindile futhi
ezobulungiswa zazikhipha endlini ngoba ubaba efuna ukudayisa indlu yakhe
ebisilele emuva ngeminyaka emibili. Sixoxisana naleli hhovisi
lezobulungiswa ukuthi uma ingabe indlu isidayisiwe, izingane zikwazi
ukuthola ingxenye eqondene nomama wazo ukuze zikwazi ukuphila. Okwamanje
ikhansela lendawo lizibe endaweni thize ukuthi zikwazi ukuhlala. Uma kuqala
ukwakhiwa, ngo Okthoba,  izindlu zomxhaso, zizothola indawo yokuhlala.
Lokhu kukhombisa ubuntu.

Siyayibonga kakhulu ke iminyango ebambisana nomphakathi. Sengathi lokhu
kubambisana kungaqhubeka kukhule zonke izindawo zeNingizimu Afrika.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Ms B T NGCOBO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC has, for the first time in
history, established a constituency office in the Durban South area. This
happened this year, 2007. This office works hand in hand with many
government departments.

What is also important is the fact that it has managed to establish a good
working relationship with the Department of Social Development and the
Department of Justice. These two departments worked together in providing
assistance to the Khanyile family, where Silindile Khanyile has been given
custody of her fellow siblings, aged 17, 15 and 13 respectively. The
children’s father was abusive, and he abandoned them in 2002. The
children’s mother, who was very sickly, died in 2005. The father only
returned briefly for the burial and then left again.

These children, who are now in the custody of their sister, were evicted
from their home by the Department of Justice because the father wanted to
sell it, due to the fact that bond repayments were two years in arrears. We
are liaising with the Department of Justice to enable the children to
inherit their mother’s share of the proceeds when the house is sold, so
that they can buy basic necessities. The ward councillor has temporarily
placed the children in a place of safety. When the project of building RDP
houses commences in October, a house will be built for the children. This
is an indication of ubuntu.

We do appreciate the co-operation between government departments and the
community. May this co-operation continue spreading all over South Africa.
Thank you.]

                            ESKOM AND MAINTENANCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Chairperson, the DA notes with concern that Eskom has
ceased all maintenance work because of falling standards which have led to
10 deaths since 1 April this year.

Reports indicate that in Eskom’s distribution department alone, four people
have died, 54 people have been seriously injured and an additional of 59
people have received medical attention. Another three motor vehicle
accidents also took place.

This is a massive increase over previous years during which Eskom’s annual
death toll used to average between five and eleven people per annum. Whilst
the deaths that have resulted are tragic and completely unacceptable, the
maintenance stoppage is sure to have a detrimental effect on Eskom’s
ability to ensure the security of our electricity supply.

According to the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa’s annual report, power cuts already cost South Africa up to R8
billion per annum, which equates to half a percentage point of Gross
Domestic Product growth, Mr Manuel.

During President Mbeki’s recent discussion with his big business working
group, business leaders such as Saki Macozoma voiced the precise concern
that if the country’s security of electricity supply is not carefully
managed, it could be a constraint to economic growth.

The DA, therefore, requests that the Minister for Public Enterprises brief
this House on this matter as a matter of urgency. Thank you.

                     ATM BOMBINGS IN RURAL KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you, Chair. I thought it would be worth our
while to reflect a bit on the pattern of the ATM bombings that were
referred to by the hon member from the IFP. I think it is actually
significant that criminals have begun to move to outlying areas - like
rural areas and smaller towns – precisely because, in the bigger centres,
both communities and policing agencies have begun to achieve levels of co-
operation that frustrated the activities of the syndicates. Therefore they
move out to the outlying areas because they are more isolated and there are
longer distances to cover.

In any case, crime migrates like that. Where the police move in a certain
direction, it moves in the opposite direction. They do operate like
predators because they always go for the potentially weaker victims. I
think it is very important that we must observe and understand that. It
does mean that there is a need now to engage with communities in more rural
areas, with a view to raising their awareness that the drift of the crime
is going there because it is being driven out of a certain area of the
country.

An issue of ongoing major concern is that the people who supply the
dynamite with which the ATMs are bombed are workers in the mining industry.
It is important that there should be an intervention to mobilise unionised
workers in particular to assist the policing agencies by identifying the
sources and workers who are selling dynamite to the syndicates. Those
workers who are selling the dynamite are, in fact, part of the syndicates
because they are there when the loot is shared.

A second issue of concern is the courts. A fair number of the magistrates
do not seem to take a serious enough view of this kind of offence. That, I
think, has partly to do with the fact that some of the magistrates are
people whom we inherited from the old order, but, to a certain extent, it
has to do with the relaxing of the legislation relating to the handling of
the criminals. We have to find a way, and this House also has a
responsibility to continuously look at legislation to find a way, in which
we can tighten legislation. There is a certain category of crime, such as
the syndicates, that has to be closed in on and we have to tighten
legislation so that, once they are arrested, it must be very difficult for
a member of a syndicate to go on.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon Minister, but your
time has expired.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: There’s a second issue I just want to deal with
that is different from this one.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): We’ve got room for that.

                               FLOOR-CROSSING

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, when September comes, this issue of
floor-crossing always comes up. Of course the newspapers and sister parties
in this House complain. I think we must not forget that we were all in this
House when the legislation was passed and there were objective
considerations. I would like to say from the position of the ANC that we
recognised the need for such legislation. Even though we did not lead it at
the beginning, when the debate was opened we observed that there was a need
for this kind of legislation. The ANC had been misrepresented to the
population of this country for a very long time. It was only as we were
interacting in this House, as we were correctly putting the positions of
the ANC that many members of communities and of other political parties
began to understand that the ghost that they were told about was not the
ANC. [Applause.]

It became important to create space for all kinds of individuals. There
were those who were now recognising the real truth: that, to be able to
move, if they wanted, to the ANC, would be okay; if they wanted to move
away from the ANC to another party, it would be fine. [Interjections.] That
is what democracy is about. Democracy is about the right of citizens,
including members of this House, to change the position in which they are
if they realise that they are working backwards and not taking the country
forward. Why are we terrified of democracy now, all of a sudden? Political
parties must not become political prisons. Certainly, the ANC has no
intention of being a political prison to someone who may have come into the
ANC not understanding it, only to discover afterwards that, in fact, they
don’t belong there, they belong in some other little party somewhere else.
[Laughter.]
So, let us all act in this way. We must act in the interests of democracy.
We must not cry “democracy” when it suits us and reject it when it does
not. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Your time is up, hon
Minister.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: He wants to ask a question and I’m quite willing
to entertain it.

Mr E W TRENT: Is the hon Minister aware of the fact that some of his
comrades in some provinces are offering councillors to have their bonds
paid up and their motorcars paid up, if they come to the ANC?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): What’s the question, hon member?

Mr E W TRENT: I want to know if he approves of that and, if we can produce
affidavits to that effect, whether he would take action against them?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: I can say without batting an eyelid that, if the
African National Congress established that any member of the ANC buys
loyalty or pays people to join the ANC, we will act with immediate effect
and without any hesitation. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Thank you, hon Minister.

                      SKILLS SHORTAGES IN THE PROVINCES
                         RAPE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
                            ESKOM AND MAINTENANCE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, let me deal with a few. The first
would be the statement from the hon Doman. When I said that we’ve created
in the Constitution a series of institutions without necessarily having
considered whether we had sufficient skills to staff them, of course I
started by thinking about the Opposition.

It’s a crying shame that we have to put up with what we do, but I think
that we accept that the Constitution is a product of compromise, and within
that compromise we had diametrically opposed views and we constructed
concurrent functions. If we don’t pause from time to time to consider
whether these are working, I think we fail future generations. In the
address to the NCOP on their 10th anniversary that is essentially what I
did.

There was a particular context, which was that we must evaluate whether the
concurrent functions are working, whether the distribution of powers and
functions is having the desired effect, because if they aren’t, then I
think we must not continue along that trajectory. We must arrest the
situation and try and improve on the efficiency of governance so that the
quality of the public services that our people receive will improve, and I
think that the enemy of a process such as this is complacency.

The second issue I’d like to respond to is that raised by the hon Waters.
Let me say that I share the concern and the moral outrage at the rape of
women and children. The difficulty here, though, is that the judges and
magistrates must serve government regardless of the party in power. The
decisions are not of the ANC. They are decisions of the magistracy, and the
magistracy has a different line of accountability.

They said they weren’t accountable to the ANC, so there’s a wider issue and
I think that we must confer with our colleagues from this House who serve
on the Magistrates’ Commission, and ensure that these issues can be dealt
with. I needn’t remind you that whilst we pass the minimum sentences for
some kinds of crimes here in this House, the judiciary has railed against
the idea because they say that it would limit their independence.

So, these are issues which, in a democracy, we must be able to talk about,
but they’re not party-political issues. I think that they are broadly
societal issues because the nature of the crime is deeply social, and I
think we all share the outrage about it.
In respect of what the hon Van Dyk raised on Eskom and maintenance, I think
that part of what you’re dealing with here is a situation in which
maintenance of some of the high-voltage long-transmission lines was delayed
for too long, and the problem is that the risks increase.

If you look at where the problems are, you’ll see they are at the top of
pylons in the insulators within the transmission system, and this is very
high-risk work. These people have to clamber up and sit suspended tens of
metres above the ground. I think the nature of the maintenance task at hand
changes.

It’s wise that Eskom considers all the safety issues and the safety record,
but it’s not the same as walking around on the ground with a screwdriver
and dealing with issues. We’ve got to understand, if we want a regular,
consistent, low-cost supply of energy, then from time to time these kinds
of issues are going to arise in the maintenance cycle.

We mustn’t cry wolf – I think we must ask that the maintenance be continued
and that it be carried out to ensure consistency of supply; that is all.
Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon Minister.

We have a few more ministerial responses, but I want to appeal to Ministers
to keep exactly to the time.

                    FARMING ISSUES IN WATERBERG DISTRICT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: I want to thank the hon
Mashigo for bringing the essential oils projects in Limpopo to the
attention of the House, especially the permanent and sustainable jobs that
have been created through these projects.

I thought I would use the opportunity to share with this House the fact
that the Department of Science and Technology, using technology developed
by the CSIR – oil distillation units, in this case – have 13 such projects
in various parts of the country that are currently employing 184 people -
also permanent, sustainable jobs – producing a variety of crops and
manufacturing a number of products out of these crops.

To give two examples, in very remote areas where job prospects are
extremely slim - I’ll use Pella and Onseepkans, two very small villages in
the Northern Cape - the hoodia plant amongst other things, is being
cultivated. As hon members here would know, the hoodia plant has appetite-
suppressing properties, which some hon members might be very interested in!
In addition to that, hon Mashigo, we would encourage you to visit the
project in Giyani in Limpopo as well, where, amongst other things, the
essential oils grown in Giyani are used to manufacture candles that have
very powerful mosquito-repellent properties, and therefore help us in our
fight against malaria. Thank you.

                        DISPUTE BETWEEN PSL AND SABC

                      CONSTRUCTION OF ETHEKWINI STADIUM

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, the issue of the dispute
between the PSL and the SABC with respect to the broadcasting of soccer
games in this country seems to be entering into its last phase. The first
phase, members will remember, took up the first six months of this year,
and we must be proud that our departments, the Ministers who got involved
in this, were able to broker a solution.

We did this precisely because we agree with what Mr Komphela says about the
fact that sport is a national asset which must be accessible to as many
people in South Africa as possible. It is not always easy to do that in a
situation which is also driven by finance and commercial interest, and of
course, also driven by personal egos. But we have been able to go beyond
that and we have no doubt that even this last phase of the radio broadcast
issue will be managed efficaciously before the end of this month.
With regard to the other question raised about the eThekwini Stadium, yes,
there is a hiccup in the construction works that has been reported, but it
is being exaggerated, like the other hiccups that we encountered at the
Green Point Stadium, where our detractors have continuously tried to put a
spanner in the works and they lost all the time. In the case of eThekwini,
the LOC and the CEO of the LOC, together with the people of eThekwini, are
on top of that situation. There’s no problem. We will be on time.

         JOINT INITIATIVES WITH DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I wish to
respond to the statement made by the hon Makgate. Firstly, on behalf of the
Department of Correctional Services, I want to congratulate the ANC Women’s
League, the faith-based organisations and others on this initiative, but
also to encourage them to continue throughout the year with these kinds of
initiatives in joining hands with the Department of Correctional Services.

As my colleagues might be aware, our White Paper on Corrections, indeed,
places the issues of corrections, rehabilitation and social reintegration
at the centre of the work that we do, but also we place this responsibility
on society at large and therefore, last year, as I said before in this
House, for the first time in the history of Correctional Services, we
launched Corrections Week where during that week in September - in fact
it’s coming up now very soon - we reach out to society at large to assist
us in this mammoth task.

We also want to take this opportunity as the Department of Correctional
Services to encourage and challenge all members of this House from all
political parties to join hands with us as the Department of Correctional
Services to - as one of our slogans says – make Correctional Services a
place of new beginnings. Thank you.

             LAND REDISTRIBUTION AND RURAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Mhlalingaphambili ...
[Chairperson ...]

... indeed, the Rocklands Poultry Farm is one of the biggest poultry farms
in South Africa, using advanced world-class technology in poultry farming.

Le ke yinkampani esele ingenile phaya kwi-JSE kwaye sisiphumo senye
yeeprojekthi zethu zokuxhobisa abamnyama ababefudula bevinjwe amathuba
kwezolimo. [This company is listed on the JSE and is one of our projects
for the empowerment of black people who were previously denied agricultural
opportunities.]

They have also formed a joint venture with Sifikile black emerging farmers
in the Eastern Cape who are supplying the Rocklands Poultry Farm with grown
birds. The Department of Land Affairs bought farms for Sifikile farmers
through the Elrad Scheme and through that programme the farmers have been
able to start their poultry farms.

Ungekapheli lo nyaka sijonge ukuphehlelela enye iprojekthi enkulu
ebandakanya uSifikile, eya kudla ama-40 amawaka eerandi neya kuba yeyona
projekthi yofuyo lweenkuku inkulu kwiAfrika yonke. Sijonge  ukuqesha abantu
abafikileyo kuma-350.

Kwakhona, ndiyavuya kuba ilungu beliphakamise iprojekthi yokulima imithi
yesitrasi. Amakhosikazi nolutsha luyayithabatha inxaxheba kule projekthi.
Phaya eMaluba Farm naseYarona Farm kukho abantu abafumene imisebenzi
nabaseke ookopolotyeni. Ngayo yonke loo mizamo urhulumente kaKhongolose
uthi: Wagwetywa ndlala! Silwa nentswelo. Sidala imisebenzi ukuze abantu
bakwazi ukulala betyile. Siyabulela. [Kwaqhatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Before the end of this year, we are looking at launching another big
project that includes Sifikile at a cost of R40 000. This will be the
biggest poultry project in Africa and we intend to employ about 350 people.

I feel happy because there was a member who proposed a project to plant
citrus trees. Women and the youth are participating in this project. At
Maluba and Yarona farms there are people who got job opportunities and also
established co-operatives. With all these endeavours the government, led by
the African National Congress says: Hunger is something of the past. We are
fighting poverty and are creating jobs for people to survive. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

The House adjourned at 15:56.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           MONDAY, 27 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

     (a)    Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12D – 2006] – Act No 28 of
         2006 (assented to and signed by President on 17 August 2007).
2.    Membership of Committees

(1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
    Committees:


        Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
        Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons


        Appointed:          Marais, Mr S J F


National Assembly


The Speaker


1.    Membership of Committees

     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
    Portfolio Committees:

        Finance
        Appointed:          Marais, Mr S J F

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
         Corporation Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 187-
         2007].

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    General Notice No 900 published in Government Gazette No 30099,
         dated 20 July 2007: Prescription of a new form for an application
         for a registration certificate or provisional registration
         certificate, and the form of the registration certificate or
         provisional registration certificate: For public comment in terms
         of the Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act, 1965 (Act No 45 of
         1965).

     (b)    General Notice No 955 published in Government Gazette No 30142,
         dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends introducing the National
         Environmental Management Waste Bill in accordance with the
         provisions of Rule 241(1) of the Rules of the National Assembly.

     (c)    General Notice No 956 published in Government Gazette No 30142,
         dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends introducing the National
         Environmental Management Second Amendment Bill in accordance with
         the provisions of Rule 186 of the Rules of the National Council of
         Provinces.

     (d)    General Notice No 957 published in Government Gazette No 30142,
         dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends introducing the National
         Environmental Management Laws Amendment Bill in accordance with
         the provisions of Rule 186 of the Rules of the National Council of
         Provinces.

     (e)    General Notice No 954 published in Government Gazette No 30141,
         dated 6 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends introducing the National
         Environmental Management Integrated Coastal Management Bill in
         accordance with the provisions of Rule 241(1) of the Rules of the
         National Assembly.

     (f)    Government Notice No 711 published in Government Gazette No
         30164 dated 17 August 2007: Correction Notice: Substitution of the
         map describing boundaries of the Vaal Triangle air-shed priority
         area, in terms of the National Environmental Management Air
         Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on Prohibition or
    Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill [B7-2007] (National
    Assembly- sec 75), dated 24 August 2007:

          The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having considered the subject
          of the Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons
          Bill [B7-2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and
          classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
          reports that it has agreed to the Bill with amendments [B7A-
          2007].
                          TUESDAY, 28 AUGUST, 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker


1.    Membership of Assembly


     (1)    The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        death of Mr M Diko has been filled,  with  effect  from  15  August
        2007, by the nomination of Ms Z N Ndlazi.

     (2)    The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        death of Prince N E Zulu has  been  filled,  with  effect  from  23
        August 2007, by the nomination of Mr N Singh.


     (3)    The following Member vacated her seat in the  National  Assembly
        with effect from 17 August 2007:


        Ginwala, Dr F N


2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:
        (a)      Government Notice No 505 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 29996 dated 19 June 2007: Establishment of the  new  Mokala
             National Park, made in terms of  section  20(1)(a)(i)  of  the
             National Environmental Management: Protected Areas  Act,  2003
             (Act No 57 of 2003).

        (b)      Government Notice No 514 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 29999 dated 21 June  2007:  Constitution  of  the  National
             Environmental Advisory Forum, made  in  terms  of  Chapter  2,
             section 6(1)(a)(i) of the  National  Environmental  Management
             Act, 1998 (Act 107 of 1998).

        (c)      Government Notice No 830 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30057 dated 6 July 2007: Notice of intention  to  establish
             the National Framework , made in terms of  section  7  of  the
             National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004  (Act
             No 39 of 2004).


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on
         Social Development for consideration and report:

         (a)     Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA)  for  2005-2006
         [RP 6-2007].

     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report.  The  Reports  of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are  referred
         to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of South  African  Airways
             (Proprietary)  Limited  (SAA)  for  2006-2007,  including  the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.


         (b)     Report and Financial  Statements  of  Denel  (Proprietary)
             Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (4)    The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report  of  the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements  is  referred  to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa (BASA) for  2006-2007,  including  the  Report  of  the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 141-2007].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report:




         (a)     Convention on the Conservation and Management  of  Fishery
             Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), tabled  in
             terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)      Explanatory  Memorandum  to   the   Convention   on   the
             Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources in the  South
             East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO).


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry:

         (a)      Agreement  between  the  Government  of  Sweden  and  the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa on Development  Co-
             operation 1 July 2004 – 30  June  2007,  tabled  in  terms  of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)      Explanatory  Memorandum  on  the  Agreement  between  the
             Government of Sweden and the Government  of  the  Republic  of
             South Africa on Development Co-operation 1 July 2004 – 30 June
             2007.


     (7)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
    Finance:

         (a)     Government  Notice  No  R.  478  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 29958 dated 1 June 2007: Rules made by the Minister
             of Finance under section 771 of the Customs  and  Excise  Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


         (b)     Government  Notice  No  R.  484  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1
             (No 1/1/1337)in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).

         (c)     Government  Notice  No  R.  485  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3
             (No 3/612) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).

         (d)     Government  Notice  No  R.  486  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 29951 dated 8 June 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4
             (No 4/306) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


         (e)     Government Notice No R.492 published in Government Gazette
             No 29966 dated 15 June 2007:  Municipal  Regulations  on  Debt
             Disclosure, in terms of section 168 of the  Local  Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial  Services
             Board on the Road Accident Fund for 2005-2006.

         (g)     Government Notice No 503 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 29984 dated 14  June  2007:  Amendment  of  Schedule  No  2
             (2/290) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964  (Act  No
             91 of 1964).

     (8)    The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on
         Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy:


         (a)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Diamond  Export  Levy  Bill,
         2007

     (9)    The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on
         Finance and  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Provincial  and  Local
         Government:

         (a)     Government Notice No R.493 published in Government Gazette
             No 29967 dated 15 June 2007: Municipal Regulations on  Minimum
             Competency Levels, in  terms  of  section  168  of  the  Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

     (10)   The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on
         Safety  and  Security  and  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Foreign
         Affairs:

         (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of  South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Malta in  respect
             of Police Co-operation, tabled in terms of section  231(3)  of
             the Constitution, 1996.

     (11)   The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on
         Transport for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred  to  the  Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         (a)     Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Urban  Transport
             Fund (UTF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial  Statements  for  2005-2006  [RP  45-
             2007].

     (12)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Transport for consideration and report:
         (a)     International Convention for the Control and Management of
             Ship’s Ballast Water  and  Sediments  –  2004  (Ballast  Water
             Management Convention), tabled in terms of section  231(2)  of
             the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for
             the  Control  and  Management  of  Ship’s  Ballast  Water  and
             Sediments – 2004 (Ballast Water Management Convention).
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 37-2007].

     (b)    Government Notice No 736  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30173  dated  14  August  2007:  Appointment  of  Subcommittee  on
         Amnesty,  in  terms  of  the  Promotion  of  National  Unity   and
         Reconciliation Act, 1995 (Act No 34 of 1995).

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre Foundation
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on  the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 149-2007].
     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum  of  the  Boer
         Republics for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 149-2007].

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the  South  African  National
         Parks (SANparks)  for  2006-2007,  including  the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 173-
         2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of  the  National  Environmental
         Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2006-2007 [RP 158-2007].


