---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 06 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-06-06
---

WEDNESDAY, 6 JUNE 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

        ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                        WELCOMING OF DEPUTY PRESIDENT

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I have been informed that the
Whippery has agreed that there will be no notices of motions or motions
without notice today. We will now proceed to the Questions, as printed on
the Order Paper. As you are aware, we have Questions to the Deputy
President. Welcome, Deputy President, to the House, and thank you very much
for coming.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

     Government progress in ensuring that key components are present in
                           strategic interventions

5.    Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      What progress has been made by Government in ensuring that strategic
      interventions against HIV/Aids, poor health and the general
      vulnerability of the poor, specifically in rural communities, the
      blind and persons with physical disabilities are key components in its
      quest to eradicate poverty through job creation and economic growth?
                                  C1068E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you very much, hon Chair. I’m
going to repeat the question so that you can appreciate how difficult this
question from the hon member is. It says:

   What progress has been made by government in ensuring that strategic
   interventions against HIV/Aids, poor health and the general vulnerability
   of the poor, specifically in rural communities, the blind and persons
   with physical disabilities are key components in its quest to eradicate
   poverty through job creation and economic growth?

That is quite a hard question. Hon member, the question does raise many
questions. It is not possible to answer all of them in an interlinked
manner. So, I’m going to focus on the issues of disabilities and HIV/Aids,
in terms of what we are doing there. This is because we do not have a
policy that specifically targets people with disabilities in rural areas,
or people with disabilities who are HIV-positive or who have Aids. Our
focus is on the rural poor, on people with HIV and Aids, and, of course, we
also have a policy that focuses on disabled people. So, with regard to
people falling into any of those categories, we are able to reach them and
to assist them.

However, there are specific interventions that are targeted at people with
disabilities in the provision of disability grants for people who are not
able to work, because of their disability. Currently, 1 424 817 people are
receiving government disability grants. Government, however, accepts that
people with disabilities do not just want handouts, they want opportunities
to find employment just like the rest of the population.

They are, however, restricted from doing so, very often, because of the
prejudices of some employers. For this reason, we have included the
category of people with disabilities under the designated groups, in terms
of the employment Act. This means that there is a requirement that
preference be given to people with disabilities when applying for
employment.

The country is, however, underperforming in this regard. At a national
conference of disabled persons last year, government looked at how to
improve the situation, and this is currently work in progress. Government
has, in particular, set itself a target of employing a minimum of 2% of its
employees that are disabled people at all levels of the public sector. We
are also making renewed efforts to meet this quota because we have not met
it.

With regard to skills and training, we are prioritising skills training
programmes for people with disabilities, including those already working in
sheltered workshops, in order to enable them to run these facilities as
viable businesses with potential for income generation. We need to do more
to ensure that people with disabilities who want to start their own
business are given support by existing agencies, so that when disabled
people do make these applications they are indeed given priority.

With regard to health care for people with disabilities, government
announced in January 2003 that people with permanent, moderate or severe
disabilities would receive access to health care at public facilities free
of charge.

With regard to the HIV and Aids intervention, I would urge the hon members
also to please familiarise themselves with the National Strategic Plan for
HIV and Aids and Sexually Transmitted Infections for the period 2001 to
2007. It will enrich your insight into the different activities that
government is proposing to deal with to fight the pandemic. Thank you.
  Government assistance to ensure the inclusion of greater co-operation for
                    conflict resolution and peacekeeping

6.    Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      What types of assistance is the Government providing to ensure that
      developments within key international structures such as the European
      Union, the African Union and the United Nations include greater co-
      operation for conflict resolution and peacekeeping in Africa, as well
      as issues of multilateral concern, including an African-driven agenda
      to foster good governance and to address and ensure credible
      democratic processes?
                  C1069E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chair, the question is:


   What types of assistance is the government providing to ensure that
   developments within key international structures such as the European
   Union, the African Union and the United Nations include greater co-
   operation for conflict resolution and peacekeeping in Africa, as well as
   issues of multilateral concern, including an African-driven agenda to
   foster good governance and to address and ensure credible democratic
   processes?

This is another hard question, Comrade VV. I do want to suggest that this
issue should be tackled by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. I was not even
able to discuss it with her because she has been away. I would think that
in order to do justice to it, it would be best if either the Minister or a
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs dealt with this question. I would urge
that you break the question down so that we can do justice to each section
of the question.

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Mgcinisihlalo, umbuto
lebengitawulandzelisa emphendvulweni ngeke ngisakhona kuwubuta, njengobe
selishito nje liSekela laMengameli kutsi lombuto asiwucondzise eNdvuneni
Yelitiko Letangaphandle. Mine ngekwami bengibute ngobe bengitsatsa ngekutsi
Litiko Letangaphandle liyincenye yahulumende loholwa Lihhovisi laMengameli.
Ngako-ke ngeke ngisakhona kuchubeka ngibute lokunye. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I will no longer ask the follow-
up question because, as the Deputy President has said, it is a question
that should be put to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The reason why I
would have wanted to go ahead and ask you this question is the Department
of Foreign Affairs seems to me to be part of the executive branch of
government, the head of which is the President. Therefore I have no further
questions. I thank you.]

Mr A WATSON: The interpreting service is not working again.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Interpreting services? Where are you?
[Interjections.] Are you there?

Ge le le gona, le seke la robala. Le fele le le fao. Morena! [If you are
there, do not fall asleep. You must stay there. Thank you.]

Thank you for raising that issue, Mr Watson.

       Progress with implementation of Asgisa and its future prospects

7.    Ms J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      (a)What progress has been made with regard to the implementation of
      the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa)
      and (b) what are the future prospects of Asgisa?
                                              C1070E


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We now proceed to Question 7, asked by hon
Terblanche to the Deputy President. I don’t see Ms Terblanche in the House.
Should we proceed with the question?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, Ms Terblanche is overseas with the committee, as
you know, but she has asked that the question should be proceeded with.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Deputy President?
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, this question asks about progress on the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa and future plans.

Firstly, I want to restate what Asgisa is and what it is not, just to
ensure that members have greater clarity on our focus areas. Asgisa is a
set of selected programmes of government which are deemed to have the
greatest impact on accelerating and sharing growth. It is not the sum total
of government’s programmes of action, cluster initiatives or departmental
activities; it is a limited programme in that respect. It is also based on
partnership with the private sector and civil society.

So, specifically, Asgisa is a system for prioritising implementation, co-
ordination, monitoring and implementation of selected government
programmes. It is a tool to provide high-level co-ordination where needed.
Programmes were identified in terms of their impact on the binding
constraints on growth. It is not a parallel system of planning or a
parallel budget. All Asgisa programmes are expected to have gone through
the normal planning and budgeting activities of government.

It is interesting to note that, given that Asgisa focuses on an improved
economic environment, according to sources at Absa and Citibank, between
2002 and 2007 the household consumption expectations were 2,6%. The actual
consumption has been more than 6%, an indication of growth. Government
consumption was expected to be 2,4%; while the actual consumption by
government has been 5%, which means increased expenditure. Gross fixed
capital information was expected to be 4,0%, and the actual figure is 8%.
Gross domestic product was expected to be 2,0%, while the actual figure is
2%. So, this, in a way, already shows that the economy is moving in the
desired direction.

I indicated earlier that Asgisa has only identified a limited number of
areas through which it is addressing what is called “binding constraints”.
It concerns infrastructure, and indeed it is not about everything in
infrastructure, but selected aspects of infrastructure, which I will speak
about. It also focuses on aspects of the micro-economy, the capacity of the
state, skills and education, the second economy and sector strategies.

We have identified a set of actions that must be undertaken, in niche focus
areas. In our annual reports, which will be delivered to the pigeonholes of
members – in case members have not received them - we have reported on
progress in more detail. But I will give a summarised version on progress,
especially in infrastructure and skills, because those are the two areas on
which we spent most time in the first year of Asgisa.

To indicate progress in infrastructure, investment in infrastructure grew
to 19,5%, from 15% of GDP. The current growth is at 11% to 13% per annum.
Government infrastructure expenditure is now targeted at R415,8 billion
over the medium term, that is 2007 to 2010. I need to emphasise that, at
the time when we first presented Asgisa, this kind of expenditure was a set
of proposals, but now the money is actually on budget and in some cases it
is already being spent.

Eskom will see a rise in its capex within the next five years. The new
Eskom power station has been approved and upscaled, and tenders are out for
planned nuclear plants. The independent power producers with an interest in
participating in this programme are being identified. So that is one
specific area of Asgisa that we said we would focus on.

Transnet’s five-year capex plans have been revised upwards as well. They
are now at R78 billion, from R32,7 billion. There are nine major investment
areas that have been identified and, with regard to all of them, the
numbers have been firmed up. There are already huge orders for locomotives,
in order to be able to address the challenges of rolling stock as well as
new pipelines that are also going to be built.

The national public transport plan has been finalised and approved, and I
am sure in the debate of the Minister of Transport you would have heard
more details about it. We now have a new two-year budget plan, which is
meant to improve spending performance. In that budget plan there are 19 000
projects, very big and very small, which are part of the capex register of
state-owned enterprises.

I would just like to mention some of the specific infrastructure
deliverables that we can speak about to date. We all know that the Gautrain
construction has commenced. With regard to the King Shaka Airport and the
Dube Tradeport aimed for completion by 2010, all of the work has been done
by KwaZulu-Natal. They are just waiting for the finalisation of the
environmental impact assessment.

The De Hoop Dam, which will open up the region for platinum mining and
tourism in Limpopo, is now also in progress. Sod-turning has already taken
place. The Vaal River augmentation project, which will supply water to
Sasol and Eskom, is under way. There are additional funds to commuter
railroads and public transport. All 2010 stadium contracts have now been
commissioned and building is already starting or is about to start.

Other provinces whose work is also evolving include the Eastern Cape’s
Umzimvubu project. Again, in the next reporting we will probably have more
details to report on that one.

In addition to the progress we have made in the area of infrastructure, we
have focused on skills, as I have indicated. The skills we have focused on
are the skills that are crucial to ensure that young people are work-ready,
as opposed to just being graduates. We have therefore focused on taking
those that already have some qualification, or limited experience, and
helping them to intensify their acquisition of experience in South Africa
or internationally. Hence we have been placing graduates all over the world
and in South Africa.

We now have a total of 4 000 graduates that are placed in South African
companies and we are hoping that at least more than 80% of them will be
absorbed by those companies once they finish the workplace training
programme. We have 700 that have been placed overseas in ICT, finance,
tourism and infrastructure companies.

In terms of education, we have focused on the improvement and capacity of
producing learners that will be able to pursue careers in the scarce
skills. So, in that respect, work has been going on with universities and
schools, led by the Department of Education. In another question that I
will answer today, I will say a bit more about some of the work that the
Department of Education has done and is doing.

The Department of Education has also finished their plan on adult basic
education and training. It is funded and is now ready for implementation.
Early childhood development, which was another area we had identified as
crucial, is now included in the Expanded Public Works Programme, so that we
can increase access to early childhood development activities in poor
communities.
One of the biggest areas of Asgisa was further education and training
colleges. As you know, there was a focus on the rehabilitation and building
of these institutions, so that we can attract a large number of students.
For the first time, we are also offering bursaries to students in the
further education and training sector. This will also increase the number
of students who will qualify as artisans.

Other focus areas in sectors of the economy, which have a growth potential,
include the business process outsourcing or BPO sector. We have focused on
that sector. We have focused primarily on training, provision and
attraction of investors, improving the regulatory environment and on
finding a competitive pricing dispensation for the BPO, which has now been
secured with Telkom.

But, notwithstanding the need, the cost of telephones in South Africa is
something that is still a concern. So, that work is still going on. The
more infrastructure we have in the ICT sector, the more we will be able to
bring down the cost of telephony for the whole economy. KwaZulu-Natal, the
Western Cape and Gauteng have also enhanced their investment climates to
attract BPO businesses.

We have removed some of the challenges in tourism that we identified
through Asgisa. The Airlift Strategy, and therefore the capacity for
different airlines to come into South Africa, was one of the challenges. We
were able to finalise the strategy and it is now being implemented, and we
have seen growth in the number of airlines that are able to come to South
Africa.

The tourism human resource plan has been completed. With all of these
things combined, we have seen the number of tourists reaching the 10
million target that we had set for ourselves. And we think that there is
room to grow even more, but I will await the Minister of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism to guide us regarding the pace at which we can grow in
this sector.

Regarding biofuels, another sector identified in Asgisa, we have completed
the strategy. It has been adopted by government. It is led by the
Department of Minerals and Energy, working together with the Department of
Agriculture. They are also working on regulations in order to make sure
that we are able to secure the demand as well as to manage the supply.

In the future, the areas that we are going to be focusing on in Asgisa, and
currently, include more interventions in the second economy, starting in
particular with young people and with women, who are the bulk of the people
who need these interventions. Education is a crucial component of the
second economy and therefore it is also being prioritised, as is access to
basic infrastructure, because one of the challenges facing many people who
live in the second economy is the inadequacy or lack of infrastructure. We
will report at a later date about the progress that we are making there.
We will also be reporting in future on the issue of capacity and efficiency
of the state, also identified in Asgisa. This year we focused a lot on the
capacity and efficiency in local government. That is ongoing work within
Project Consolidate, where we have placed a lot of people to provide
additional capacity, and we are now seeing that some municipalities, with
the additional help that they have attracted, are able to improve their
performance. We think that we still have a lot of work to do there and we
need to move much faster.

As we move forward with Asgisa, in the next reporting year, hopefully, we
will also be reporting on progress that we would have made with some of the
infrastructure projects that I have said we have already started.
Hopefully, some of the projects would have been completed and will be used
or will be fully commissioned.

I do want to indicate that, for instance, Acsa, which is one of the
important implementers of infrastructure projects within Asgisa, is one of
those that are on schedule in every way. Therefore we will be able to start
using some of the airports or the additional parts of the airports that I
am sure some of you have been inconvenienced by, as you were not able to
use your normal routes as you get in and out of the airports, but I am sure
you understand. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Deputy President. Is there any
follow-up question?
Mr A WATSON: Thank you, hon Deputy President, for that. It was more of a
speech than an answer and it was very comprehensive. On behalf of Ms
Terblanche, however, I must just ask one follow-up question which I have
already stolen for myself.

First of all, Asgisa is all about projects. At the previous session, I
expressed concern about the reported shortages on rolling stock,
particularly regarding the flagship project of Mpumalanga – my province -
the Moloto Rail Corridor that is proposed as part of Asgisa.

Deputy President, the hon Deputy Minister assured me that that is not a
major problem and that it’s being attended to. Today she has reported on
the purchase of locomotives and other stock already. But if you go to
Mpumalanga, you will find that nothing is really happening in the meantime,
as opposed to, for instance, our other flagship, namely the stadium which
has progressed wonderfully.

I have enquired and have found that yes, indeed, there was a preliminary
impact assessment study done. I am now told that the only thing that
brought out ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, can you put your question. Your
time is running out.

Mr A WATSON: I am coming to it, sir. The impact study proved that another
study had to be done. Can the Deputy President please tell us what progress
has been made? Is it going to happen? People are asking us about this every
day. Thanks.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, there were some environmental issues. Of course,
when you do a study, sometime it is because you want to eliminate the
difficulties. When you confirm that there are difficulties, obviously, it
is a bit frustrating. I am planning to go to Mpumalanga myself to meet with
the colleagues, as we are visiting the provinces so that we can see, from a
national level, how we could assist them to fast-track.

We used to have procedures regarding how to apply for environmental impact
studies that were somehow slow. We have now revisited the regulations. I
think, in the best possible way and without compromising the intention of
the environmental impact study, we are going to see how we can assist that
project using the new regulations in order to move a bit faster. Once I
have visited there, I will be able to report to the House.

       Incentives to SANDF members deployed in neighbouring countries

8.    Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether other incentives will be offered to members of the SA National
      Defence Force who are deployed in our neighbouring countries; if not,
      why not; if so, when can this be expected to take place?
                                                   C1071E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, the question asked by hon Mokoena is actually
one of the difficult ones as well. I discussed it with the Minister of
Defence. The Minister of Defence and I are suggesting that the Minister
should rather tackle this question himself, with your permission, hon
member.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That’s fine, Deputy President. The answer you
have given is ok.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I accept that. If the question can be
transferred to the relevant Minister, I would be happy, Chairperson.

   Moral degeneration as possible cause of family breakups or divorces and
                               remedial steps

9.    Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether the large number of family breakups or divorces can be
      attributed to the moral degeneration of our society; if so, what steps
      can be taken to correct this situation?            1072E
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chair, I have misplaced my documents concerning
question 9 ... [Interjections.] I have found them. This question is also
from Kgoshi Mokoena. Again, I do not know what is happening in the House
today. This is the question:


   Whether the large number of family break-ups and divorces could be
   attributed to the moral degeneration of our society; if so, what steps
   can be taken to correct this situation?

I have to start by saying that we have not done a study as government to
prove this. Therefore, it would be pure speculation and I think it would
even be misleading to the House for me to claim that we know for sure that
the divorces in South Africa are caused by the moral degeneration of our
society.

However, I may just say that we are all concerned about the need for us to
strengthen the functioning of families. We are also concerned about the
many activities we undertake, be it in moral regeneration, the different
support systems, the education system, aimed at supporting the families,
the churches, civil society and ourselves – as parents; it’s all about
support. I really cannot say that the government has done a scientific
study about why people divorce. I am sorry. [Laughter.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me thank the Deputy President for her
reply. Arising from the reply by my magnificent, dynamic and always cool
Deputy President, what would be her view on people who claim that
government alone is not doing enough to promote family values? How can we
remove this myth from the minds of people?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy President, I wonder whether you want to
respond to that. It does seem to me that it is actually a new question.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think it is a question that the members of this
House can handle better than I.

Lo umbuzo ofuna abantu abaqinile. [It’s a question that requires strong
people.]

I would ask that maybe we handle it differently, without asking me to
answer it and that you guide us on this.

   Plans to ensure equal benefits of scarce skills for most disadvantaged
                  rural areas through Asgisa and its impact

10.   Mr A J L Moseki (ANC) asked the Deputy President:



      (a)What plans are in place to ensure equal benefits of scarce skills
      through the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa
      (Asgisa) for the most disadvantaged rural sectors and (b) how soon can
      its impact in this regard be expected?
                                  C1076E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chair, I would just like to refer back to the
previous question and request that we liaise with the Questions Office so
that I do not embarrass myself and the members by not being able to answer
their questions. There was a slip-up in the manner in which the questions
proceeded this time. You know that I always look forward to coming here to
answer questions in as much detail as I can.

This question asks the following:


   What plans are in place to ensure equal benefits of scarce skills through
   the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa for the
   most disadvantaged rural sectors? How soon can the impact in this regard
   be expected?

The Department of Education, in particular, and the Department of Labour,
through working with Jipsa and also through its own programme, have been
working on a number of initiatives to improve the quality and the relevance
and effectiveness of education and training throughout the country, but
with a particular emphasis on rural areas.

I would just like you to note two specific programmes, and I am sure that
those of you who follow what is going on in education would probably have
heard some of this from the Minister of Education. The Dinaledi schools aim
to increase the number of learners passing maths and science at higher
grade level. A total of 529 schools are participating. These schools are
mainly in the districts with higher levels of poverty. They range from
schools in the rural Eastern Cape to remote places in the Northern Cape;
and they range from impoverished districts in the North West and Free State
to township schools in Gauteng and the Western Cape and underresourced
schools in Mpumalanga, Limpopo and KwaZulu-Natal. The bulk of the schools
would be amongst the urban and rural poor.

Let me give you some examples: In the Eastern Cape, the schools are in
Idutshwa, Cofimvaba, Mbizana, Lusikisiki and Tsolo; in Northern Cape they
are in De Aar, Kimberley, Upington, Douglas and Warrington; in Western Cape
they are in Khayelitsha, Grassy Park, Langa; in the North West they are in
Zeerust, Boitumelo, Mmabatho; in the Free State they are in Botshabelo,
Sasolburg, Senekal, Phutaditjhaba, Thabong, Futsayhana; in Gauteng it’s
Rethabile, Ivory Park; for Limpopo it’s Groblersdal, Giyani, Polokwane,
Thohoyandou; in Mpumalanga they are in kwaMhlanga, Kanyamazane,
Kwaggasfontein, Dennilton; and in KwaZulu-Natal they are in Nquthu,
Ezingolweni, Empangeni, kwaNongoma and Umgungundlovu.

That should give you a sense of the spread of our focus in the development
of rural education. The scope of this project is therefore designed to get
us to increase the higher grade passes in the sciences from 24 000 – can
you imagine, it’s only 24 000 of all our Grade 12 learners who pass the
sciences at higher grade level! We want to reach 50 000 in 2008, which is
still a modest number.

Many of the scarce skills need to draw from this pool for the different
professions that we want to train for. We are also focusing on the
improvement of the capacity of the university facilities to train in these
areas.

There is another programme also driven by the Department of Education,
called the Quality Improvement, Development, Support and Upliftment
Programme, Qids-Up. This one is aimed at providing primary schools with
resources for effective teaching. In this regard, these are the schools
whose performance is quite low.

More than 5 000 schools have been provided with materials and a further
6 000 will be provided with indigenous language materials to improve
literacy in the foundation phase. As you know, one of the challenges that
we face is that children who come from poor families that speak their
indigenous languages as their mother tongue struggle at school, when they
have to start in a second language.

The project also targets teacher training in maths, science and technology
and in all these initiatives the rural areas are a target for impact. Hon
members are also aware that we have targeted the FETs, as I indicated when
answering the other question. In this regard, we have focused on industry-
based training. We have reformed the curriculum to make the skills
relevant. We have also made sure that there is an investment in the
colleges to make them perform better, and the Department of Education
received R1,9 billion for this purpose, which they are currently spending.

These FET colleges exist all over the country. They have branches in order
to make sure that there is rural outreach. This is very crucial, because
students can choose both short and long courses, many of which will allow
them to have skills that they can use after they graduate.

By the end of last year, through Siyenza Manje, an initiative placed at
DBSA, we had also deployed many of them, together with the Department of
Local and Provincial Government, within the municipalities, mainly in the
rural areas and many of them under Project Consolidate. They are not only
supposed to facilitate service delivery, but also to mentor and assist with
the general enhancement of capacity in those municipalities.

The Expanded Public Works Programme continues to be a critical intervention
for building skills, because many of these programmes also occur in the
rural areas. There is greater collaboration now between the Department of
Public Works and the Setas.

Concerning artisan training, I can confirm that the target of 5 000 we
committed ourselves to reach by the end of this year is already work in
progress. We also have a programme that is called Jobs for Growth, that
mainly looks at co-operatives and microenterprises, and which has also
involved training for production. Many of the people on that programme are
in agriculture and are in the rural areas.

Regarding the placement of graduates and the training that we do, we have
recruited students from around the country, in order to make sure that the
provinces are involved. We have contact persons in the different provinces
to help us with that recruitment. My only concern is that we cannot
guarantee that all those students will go back to the places from where we
recruited them. That is still a challenge for us.

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, Deputy President, from where you stand, do you think
that these Dinaledi schools that you spoke about are adequately provided
for by the provinces; or should they rather be provided for by the national
department so that they are better resourced, in order for them to deliver
on their mandate? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon member, there is never enough money
for these things, talking as a teacher. And again, because of concurrent
powers, I think there is a limit to what the national Department of
Education can do. But I would not stop us from continuously asking for
greater improvement, because, as you know, there is always room to utilise
more resources.

At the same time I will underline the fact that in some cases it is not
just the resources. Sometimes the resources are there and they are not
being used efficiently. But where there is a genuine case of
underresourcing and people are able to spend the resources adequately, I
think we need to raise our voices about better resourcing.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, Deputy
President. Is there any other follow-up question to the Deputy President?

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chairperson, it’s not really a follow-up question, but I
just want to ask the Deputy President whether she can’t have that detailed
response circulated to the House? Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, with pleasure, Madam.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you. Seeing
that there are no other questions, that concludes the questions to the
Deputy President for the day. We want to thank the Deputy President for
being with us in the House.
See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 24 and No 28 – Agriculture and Land Affairs:

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Deputy Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, hon members, members of the executive
councils in the various provinces, mayors and councillors, hon guests,
ladies and gentlemen, over a century ago, Charlotte Makgomo Manye Maxeke
boldly embarked on a campaign to mobilise Africans, especially African
women in rural areas, to fight for freedom and women’s emancipation. She
attained academic advancement when such opportunities were prohibited in
this country for Africans, when she became the first African to qualify
with a BSc degree in America.

With education, she introduced new advanced strategies and programmes to
fight poverty, hunger and deprivation. She led the way for African women to
organise themselves in progressive structures so that they could manage
their own lives and those of their communities. She pioneered and led the
Bantu Women’s League, which was the forerunner of the African National
Congress Women’s League, to fight against colonialism and oppression in our
country. She organised training and community development programmes for
church and rural women under Zenzele women’s groups.

Today, we are honoured to have her great granddaughter, Mmakgoro Mannya
amongst us. Can she please stand up? [Applause.] She has taken the baton
from her grandmother by leading other women in primary agriculture
production and agro-processing, making it possible for those women to have
a sustainable living and also to learn new skills in agriculture.

She is a farmer in Tzaneen, Limpopo, and produces avocados, guavas,
litchis, mangos and fresh vegetables. Her company exports avocados to the
European Union. She got accreditation to export to Europe a year ago. She
also exports guavas and atchaar from her production of mangos, and exports
mango atchaar to Japan. She sells vegetables to the fresh produce markets
of Johannesburg and Cape Town.

Furthermore, the company exports vegetables to Botswana. Her company also
runs Abet and HIV/Aids programmes on the farm to improve literacy skills
and health awareness among farmworkers. The company is 100% black female-
owned. Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Applause]

In renewing our pledge to build a better life for all our people, I am also
carrying on and continuing from where my predecessor, Minister Thoko Didiza
left off. In the years 2004-05 and 2005-06 Comrade Thoko started the roll-
out of the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, initiated
LandCare, implemented the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development
Programme, broad-based black economic empowerment and the Micro
Agricultural Finance Scheme of South Africa, Mafisa, and aligned the
national programmes with provincial programmes and budgets.

Our government dealt with many teething problems ranging from
administration of Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, Casp,
funds; lack of harmony between the Land Redistribution for Agricultural
Development programme and Casp mechanisms; inadequate progress reporting by
provinces and lack of capacity, to social group dynamics faced by some of
the projects.

Determined to overcome these challenges and deliver on our mandate, between
the 2004-05 and 2006-7 financial years the government successfully rolled
out almost 2 500 projects supporting over 167 000 beneficiaries.

From this foundation, we have declared that: Umhlaba awungalali [land must
not lie fallow]. Through Ilima/Letsema and in the spirit of Vukuzenzele, we
have commenced to intensify our support through irrigation schemes, canals,
dams, construction of dairy structures, stock handling, watering
facilities, as well as dipping tanks, so that family farmers could succeed
in their farming activities. This year we will roll out 786 projects to
benefit an additional 60 000 family farmers.
We are trying to ensure that the “dead” assets in the hands of our people
are prioritised through the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
South Africa. These are land and livestock – amaNguni cattle and dipodi
[goats] projects that we have initiated in KwaZulu-Natal, North West, the
Northern Cape and the Eastern Cape to generate income and jobs, through
animal massification by means of improved and increased production,
nutrition and genetic improvement.

To further maximise the use of land while also responding to the global
need for renewable energy, we have completed a draft strategy for crop
production to feed into the national biofuel strategy. The strategy
estimates 10 million tonnes crop production for 3 million cultivated
hectares per growing season, of which 2 million hectares will be in the
former homelands.

We have identified suitable areas to pilot crop production for biofuels -
another Asgisa priority – in the OR Tambo municipality in the Eastern Cape,
in Mkhanyakude municipality in KwaZulu-Natal, in Gert Sibande and
Bushbuckridge Municipalities in Mpumalanga, and in the Qwaqwa rural
development node in the Free State. We will ensure that biofuel crop-
production will not be at the expense of food security, but seek to
stimulate the creation of new jobs, new economic opportunities and new
entrepreneurs, especially in the communal lands and our rural areas.

We have started to resuscitate ailing agriculture settlement projects and
have witnessed a positive turnaround. We have invested R64 million in the
tea estates in Tshivase and Mukumbani, in Limpopo.

Our tea plantations produce the finest quality tea worldwide. We are
investing in a refurbished processing factory where we have settled out-
grower farmers. We are also ensuring that investing in tree planting and
rejuvenation, tea plantations, packing and distribution facilities will
improve production. This project has already created over 2 000 sustainable
jobs in Tshivase.

We believe that if we, as national Parliament, provincial governments,
municipalities and ourselves as the women’s organisations, go out and buy
South African-grown, processed and produced tea, indeed we will succeed in
growing the tea industry in South Africa. We need to go out there and buy
this proudly South African tea, which is amongst the finest and the best in
the world. This is one of the many tea plantations that we are reviving.
Other tea plantations will follow in other provinces, such as KwaZulu-Natal
and the Eastern Cape.

One of the 77 troubled land reform projects in Limpopo is the Mamahlola
Communal Property Association. This 3 500 ha land produces mangos, bananas,
litchis, avocados, macadamia nuts, citrus, guavas and peaches. More than
500 ha of the land are leased to Mondi for a blue gum tree plantation.

Over the past 18 months, the project has been placed under the efficient
management of the South African Farms Management. The fruit is in
production today and is being exported once more. Job losses were avoided
and we have now created 207 permanent jobs in the project, with an
additional 100 seasonal jobs. Through the support of Casp, the Mamahlola
project has replanted 145 ha of bananas, placed 280 ha under irrigation and
piped 4 km of channels.

Next in line in this resuscitation of ailing projects will be the dairy
farms in Alexandria and Ncera farms in the Eastern Cape. We will continue
with the revival of these projects, particularly to empower previously
disadvantaged South Africans. This is a critical industry in our sector,
particularly in the rural areas.

Chairperson, time is a resource we do not have. Towards the end of 2006 we
adopted Operation Gijima to fast-track delivery of services. By the end of
July, we believe the AgriBEE charter will be gazetted, thus paving the way
for a new era that will see the transformation and accelerated growth of
our sector. By the end of the past financial year, the commission on land
restitution had settled 93% of the 79 696 claims lodged. We still have to
settle 5 279 outstanding rural claims. The country is waiting for these
claims to be finalised as soon as possible.
We are putting together all our resources and energy to finalise the
remaining difficult cases that make up 7% of all claims launched, and we
are trying our best to ensure that we meet the tight deadline of 2008. We
have delivered on the biggest land claim ever settled in South Africa to
date - the Tenbosch properties, with a total value of R1,1 billion
involving 32 387 hectares of land. Most of the land is currently used for
commercial farming.

Another significant land claim is the St Lucia Wetlands Park. We will be
handing over this land claim on Saturday, 9 June, this week. The settlement
comprises seven land restitution claims by the local communities of 1 825
families and it covers 22 908 hectares of land. The state has committed R89
million towards the finalisation of this claim and 25% of this amount will
be allocated to the claimants for development.

Lixoshiwe-ke ikati eziko lapho. [That way, hunger is done away with.]

On 19 June, which is the day on which the Land Act of 1913 was passed, we
will be handing over the Tenbosch land claim to the communities in
Mpumalanga. It will be a historic day. As I say, it is the biggest claim,
worth R1,1 billion, and you are all invited to attend that function.
[Applause.]

The commission has always been committed to negotiated settlements.
However, in some instances where negotiations drag on indefinitely the
strategy to shorten the process has been implemented, and that is
expropriation after a period of six months. To date, one expropriation has
been successfully implemented, that is the Pniel community land claim. Let
me congratulate the household members of the Popela community in Limpopo,
in whose favour the highest court in the land, the Constitutional Court,
has ruled that they are entitled to restitution.

We have always understood that the individual farmers acted as though they
were still an apartheid state that disposed of people and turned them into
labour tenants. These people live as a community and the dispossession
divided them and reduced them to scattered individuals. This judgement,
which has been passed today, confirms that all victims of such removals are
legally entitled to land rights and restitution on their ancestral lands.

We have revised the funding mechanism for the Land Redistribution for
Agricultural Development Programme to make sure that we are able to deliver
at scale in our efforts to meet the target of redistributing 30% of white
agricultural land by 2014. In order to accelerate delivery, we will be
applying new land acquisition models such as the proactive land acquisition
strategy and the development of new land acquisition models which have been
tailor-made to respond to the needs of our people.
We will also introduce area-based land reform planning. This is a
fundamental tool for the integration and alignment of land reform to the
strategic priorities of the provinces, municipalities and other sectors.

Over the past eight months, I have reflected on the option of establishing
a special purpose vehicle that could accelerate the pace of land
redistribution. Chairperson, there is no time to spare. My Ministry, in
consultation with other relevant departments and stakeholders, is working
on this vehicle which will be a one-stop shop regarding all land delivery
and agricultural support services. The implementation of the special
purpose vehicle will illustrate the success of the alignment of the two
departments.

Likewise, we do not have time to be caught unaware by natural disasters. We
have refined an early warning information system, and conducted drought
assessments to feed into the National Disaster Management Advisory Forum.
We are continuously studying climate change and we believe that it is
possible that the impact of this can be very damaging to our agricultural
sector.

We have also developed appropriate interventions to mitigate the adverse
impact of climate change. In partnership with the commercial farming
sector, we will review the sector plan, hold a one-day session with the
Presidency and chart the way forward.

Despite various measures put in place by government to improve the working
conditions and tenure security of farmworkers, we are still witnessing
evictions in some parts of the country, which are either legal or illegal.
Surely, we have progressed too far into our democracy and define ourselves
as a humane society to allow women and children to be thrown out into the
open where they sometimes have to spend the night exposed to the cold of
winter.

Equally, as a nation, we condemn all forms of violence, including farm
killings. At my recent lekgotla we decided to implement a radio awareness
communication campaign, especially directed at farm dwellers to inform them
about their rights and what to do when they are faced with evictions or any
other unfair treatment. This campaign would also seek to foster peace and
stability within rural communities.

Women have always played an important role in leading this sector. However,
they have not yet had a voice to represent and advance their interest in
the sector. Through the formation of Women in Agriculture and Rural
Development, rural women now have that voice. In April this year South
Africa hosted the fourth World Congress of Rural Women where over 2 000
delegates from across the globe carved their destiny in the agricultural
sector and declared, “Nothing about us, without us”.

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]
The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Malibongwe! [Let the name of
women be praised!] Similarly, the Ministry seeks to include the youth in
our development programmes. To this end, we are planning a youth summit on
land and agriculture for later this year. As part of the preparatory
process, we will be having winter school sessions and a series of career-
oriented seminars to attract our young people to take a career in
agriculture. The ultimate objective is to hold subregional youth farmer and
female farmer awards.

Chairperson and hon members, I have stated before you my vision, objectives
and targets for the next two years. I need your support to achieve this
vision to fight poverty, create jobs and move a step closer to contributing
to prosperity in the agricultural sector and thus renew our pledge to build
a better life for all our people. Without your support, I will not be able
to accomplish the above vision. You are the vital link between the national
and provincial legislatures that connects with the constituencies and local
government as you take Parliament to the people and monitor programmes, as
implemented in our provinces.

Masibaleke ke, ngoba ixesha lixhatshwe yinja. [We must speed up, because
time is against us.]

Nako ha e emele motho. Ha re matheng, ke nako. [Time waits for no man.
Let’s get going, it’s time.]

Let me thank my Deputy Minister, Adv Dirk du Toit, for his unwavering
support; all the MECs for agriculture for their co-operation and
leadership; and the entire value chain of the agricultural sector for their
contribution and participation towards the success of this sector. I also
thank the agricultural farming community in their entirety for their
commitment and dedication. I thank both the Directors-General for
Agriculture and Land Affairs who have led our Gijima team in both
departments. I thank the staff for their dedication and I also thank the
staff in my office; the Chief Land Claims Commissioner and his team; our
CEOs of the state entities as well as the heads of departments in
provincial departments of agriculture. I thank you. Malibongwe! [Let the
name of women be praised!]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Minister, officials of the department,
MECs, special delegates present here, colleagues, I want to kick off by
quoting from the Book of books. Genesis, chapter 1, verse 29 supports the
authenticity of this subject we are debating this afternoon. I quote:


   Then God said: I give you every seed-bearing plant on the face of the
   whole earth and every tree that has fruit with seed in it. They will be
   yours for food. And to all the beasts of the earth and all the birds of
   the air and all the creatures that move on the ground, everything that
   has the breath of life in it, I give every green plant for food.
And it was so.

An HON MEMBER: Hallelujah!

Rev P MOATSHE: Hallelujah! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mrs P M Hollander): Order!

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, the 2007-08 budget of the Department of Land
Affairs is a substantial testimony of government’s commitment to land
reform and social justice. In early 2005 the President of the Republic of
South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, reaffirmed government’s commitment to land
reform by pronouncing an increase in funding for land restitution and
redistribution.

Subsequent to that presidential directive, the 2005 Land Summit revealed
numerous challenges and impediments that were embedded in the land reform
process, such as the limitations of the willing seller-willing buyer
approach.

In the process of addressing the concerns raised by the Land Summit, the
President announced in 2006 that the government was going to review its
approach to land acquisitions, including the willing seller-willing buyer
approach, the selection of beneficiaries, and was going to ensure maximum
and productive use of the acquired land.

For the 2007-08 financial year, the department has identified the following
priorities: transfer of 3,1 million hectares of land, mainly through public-
private partnership, in order to accelerate and ensure sustainable land
reform; settlement of outstanding labour tenants claims; review of
legislation to provide farmworkers and labour tenants with stronger rights
to curb eviction hot spots through a proactive land acquisition strategy;
acceleration of the finalisation of outstanding restitution claims and
addressing some of the challenges facing the Land Claims Commission.

The process will include the batching of claims with similar circumstances
of dispossession; expropriating land, in line with the provision of the
Constitution and in accordance with section 42(e) of the Restitution of
Land Rights Act, Act 22 of 1994; putting mediation and dispute resolution
mechanisms in place; collaborating with traditional leaders’ structures,
including the Nhlapo Commission on Traditional Leadership Disputes and
Claims; co-operating with other strategic partners to mentor successful
claimants; and improving the accuracy and reliability of geospatial
information to make it more accessible and usable by developing an
integrated database of all fundamental geospatial information.

Through the state land management programme, the department also aims to
ensure that all state land is properly managed, proactively vested and
optimally used to the benefit of previously disadvantaged individuals and
communities. The disposal of state land to communities and municipalities
for sustainable human settlement and the implementation of local economic
development strategies will also receive more attention.

Die departement se begroting het tussen 2003-04 en 2007-08 merkwaardig
gegroei vanaf R1,6 biljoen tot R5,6 biljoen onderskeidelik. Hierdie groei
is te danke aan die versnelling en dienslewering op die gebiede van
grondhervorming en grondrestitusie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

In 2003-04 het die departement se program vir grondrestitusie net 50% van
die begroting uitgemaak. Dieselfde program maak nou 58% van die begroting
vir 2007-08 uit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Between 2003-04 and 2007-08 the department’s budget has grown remarkably
from R1, 6 billion to R5, 6 billion respectively. This growth is due to the
acceleration and service delivery in the fields of land reform and land
restitution. [Interjections.]

In 2003-04 the department’s programme for land restitution constituted only
50% of the budget. The same programme now constitutes 58% of the budget for
2007-08.]

Mmusakgotla, re tshwanetse go tsena mo letsemeng la mantshatlala, re
tshwaragane le kitlano ya baagi ba Aforika Borwa, go kgarameletsa morago
maparego a bohuma le tlala e e aparetseng baagi ba ba dikobo dikhutshwane.

Lefapha la Temothuo le Merero ya Mafatshe le tshwanetse go thusa baagi ka
botswapelo gore lelapa lengwe le lengwe le bue jaaka Motswana fa a re,
tlogatloga e tloga gale modisa wa kgomo o tswa natso sakeng; a bo a re,
kodumela moepathutse ga go lehumo le le tswang gaufi.

Tota dijo ke ditswammung. A setŝheba sa molalatladi (the Rainbow Nation) sa
jale merogo mo ditshingwaneng tsa bona. A lefapha la rona la temothuo le
seka la goga maoto. Ammaruri, mmangwana o tshwara thipa ka fa bogaleng. Ka
na fa ke rialo, ke raya Tona ya lefapha. Ka na fa ke rialo ke baya Tona
mabala ke re, kgakakgolo ga kena mebala mebala e dikgakaneng - go tswa
lefapheng la gago.

Tswayang letsholo la makatlanamane lo itsise baagi go tsenela ntwa
kgatlhanong le tlala le bohuma, tse di batlang go kgokgofatsa le go
gwatlhafatsa bana ba thari. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Chair, we should embark on a hunger busting campaign to push the
frontiers of poverty away from poor people and strive to unite the people
of South Africa.

The Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs should try its best to help
communities so that each and every household can buy into a Setswana saying
that the earliest bird catches the fattest worm; and perseverance is the
mother of success.

The fact that food is from the soil, lays a basis from which the rainbow
nation could be encouraged to use it to plough in their gardens. It is true
that a mother will always protect her child. The Department of Agriculture
should not drag its feet in this regard. By so saying I would like to
compliment the Minister, as the saying goes – a tree is known by its fruit,
the department is proof of this.

Go out with enthusiasm and mobilise people to declare war on poverty and
starvation, which intends to destroy and weaken our children.]

Agriculture has the potential to assist in the alleviation of poverty. It
plays a critical role in producing food for the poor, especially in the
rural areas. One of the challenges facing the agricultural sector is
providing sufficient food for the nation. Besides food security, the other
challenges facing the Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs are
widespread droughts, outbreaks of animal and plant diseases, skewed
participation in the sector and a shortage of skills.

In 2005-06 het die departement se organisatoriese struktuur verander. Die
programme van die departement is van nege tot vyf verander. Die doel van
die verandering was om die werksaamhede van die departement te bespoedig en
te versterk sowel as om kapasiteit te bou om sodoende ‘n beter diens te kan
lewer in die nasionale programme. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[In 2005-06 the department’s organisational structure changed. The
programmes of the department were changed from nine to five. The purpose of
the change was to expedite and strengthen the department’s operations as
well as to build capacity in order to deliver a better service in the
national programmes.]

According to the departmental priorities for 2007, the department’s policy
priorities should inform the department’s budget allocation for 2007-08 and
should be in line with government’s objectives as articulated by the
President in his 2007 state of the nation address.

In the state of the nation address of 2007, the President highlighted the
following strategic objectives, which have a direct bearing on the
agricultural sector: development of overarching strategies to prioritise
key interventions in agriculture and agro-processing; intensification of
programmes to address challenges in the second economy, with particular
emphasis on taking further practical action to improve access to
microfinance - including access to the Apex Fund and the Micro Agricultural
Finance Scheme of South Africa; and, expanding assistance by way of
irrigation, seeds and implements to small and co-operative farmers. In line
with the National Industrial Policy Framework, government will intensify
the implementation of customised sector measures to facilitate, inter alia,
investments in biofuels.

The Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, Casp, provides post-
settlement support to targeted beneficiaries of land reform and other black
farmers who have acquired land through private means. The implementation of
Casp lies with the provincial departments of agriculture, while the
Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs are national transferring
departments of agriculture, as required for administering and monitoring
expenditure and nonfinancial outputs in the provinces.

Lastly, since its inception, implementation of Casp has been hampered,
owing to lack of capacity in provincial departments, lack of proper
planning, long procedures and lack of alignment with other government
programmes. The Casp recharged implementation plan was adopted in 2005 to
address these challenges and to ensure effective implementation.

Mafisa is the financial leg of Casp and is responsible for the provision of
micro financial services to emerging farmers. Some of the challenges in
implementing the scheme’s grants are the mindset ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Moatshe, I see
your time has expired. Thank you.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, we support this Budget Vote. We thank the
Minister and she has our support. We will run with it to deliver the goods
on the ground. Hallelujah! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!
[Interjections.] Order!

Mnr A WATSON: Agbare Voorsitter, agb Minister, agb lede, agb besoekende
lede van ander provinsies, provinsiale wetgewers, veral my ou bankmaat, die
agb Minister Dowry hier langs my, ek is sommer lus om die storie van
Saggeus en dinges te vertel, maar ek glo nie die Voorsitter gaan my so baie
ekstra tyd gee as wat sy vir die agb voorsitter gegee het nie.

Maar agb Voorsitter, in die meeste lande waar landbou ‘n belangrike
komponent van die ekonomie is en met grond as die natuurlike bron van die
bedryf, word debatte normaalweg oorheers deur produksie, bemarking en
optimum grondgebruik. In Suid-Afrika het die ANC-regering klaarblyklik
vergeet van hierdie belangrike aspekte om ‘n groeiende ekonomie te
bevorder. Of hulle verkies dalk om dit te ignoreer soos wat Zimbabwe ook
gedoen het, want elke gedagte en alle aandag word toegespits op
grondverdeling en swart bemagtiging ten alle koste. Maar ons het dit al tot
vervelens gesê en ek sê dit nou weer: Die DA ondersteun die doelwitte van
grondhervorming en bemagtiging ten volle, maar ons verskil drasties van die
ANC se doelwitte van getalle as die maatstaf van sukes. Die DA glo dat
meetbare volhoubaarheid in die landbou die belangrikste doelwit moet wees.

Die vestiging van nuwe boere moet gepaard gaan met behoorlike opleiding en
met die betrokkenheid van gevestigde boere in die eng-georganiseerde
landbou. Dis goed dat die Minister sekere suksesvolle projekte vandag hier
uitgewys het, maar die regering is herhaaldelik daarop gewys dat talle nuwe
boere nie die mas kan opkom nie omdat hulle gewoonlik ‘n totale gebrek aan
kennis en ondervinding het. Intussen verlaag hierdie mislukkings natuurlik
die voedselproduksie in ons land en omdat die Regering nie genoegsame
aandag aan die landbou gee nie, verlaat boere nou hul plase teen ‘n
skrikwekkende tempo.

My kollega, dr Kraai van Niekerk, het Maandag in ‘n verklaring hier in die
Parlement daarop gewys dat 20 000 boere die afgelope aantal jare hul plase
verlaat het. Nie net skep dit ‘n groeiende tekort aan landbouprodukte nie,
maar dink net aan die duisende plaaswerkers wat daardeur hul werk verloor
het en ‘n heenkome kwyt is. Dit is goed en wel van die Minister van Arbeid
om voortdurend verhoogde vergoedings vir plaaswerkers op boere af te dwing,
maar dan moet die Regering in die eerste plek sorg dat die bedryf wat hulle
so belas lewensvatbaar is en in die toekoms so sal bly.

Ek het ongelukkig nie genoegsame tyd om oor die totale spektrum van
voedselproduksie te kan praat nie en daarom wil ek net vir ‘n wyle
stilstaan by melk en ek glo dat daar niemand in dié Huis is wat met my sal
redekawel oor die belangrikheid van dié produk nie. Ons hoor en lees nou
daagliks van dreigende tekorte aan melk en melkprodukte in Suid-Afrika.
Terwyl die winkelrakke reeds vol is van ingevoerde suiwelprodukte, sal dit
‘n sware dag wees as ons vars melk moet invoer ... (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, hon visiting
members from other provinces, provincial legislators, especially my former
bench-mate, hon Minister Dowry sitting next to me, I feel like telling the
story of Zaccheus and whatshisname, but I do not believe the Chairperson
will give me as much extra time as she gave the hon chairperson.

But, hon Chairperson, in most countries where agriculture forms an
important part of the economy, and, of course, with land as the natural
resource of the industry, debates are normally dominated by production,
marketing and optimal land use. In South Africa the ANC government would
seem to have forgotten about these important aspects for promoting a
growing economy. Or maybe they choose to ignore it, like Zimbabwe also did,
because every thought and all attention are concentrated on land
distribution and black empowerment, at all costs. But we have said this ad
nauseum, and I say it once again now: The DA wholeheartedly supports the
objectives of land reform and empowerment, but we differ drastically in
respect of the ANC’s objectives of numbers as the yardstick for success.
The DA believes that measurable sustainability in agriculture must be the
most important objective.

The establishment of new farmers must be accompanied by proper training and
with the involvement of established farmers in the tightly organised
agricultural industry. It is good that the Minister identified certain
successful projects here today, but it has been pointed out repeatedly to
the government that many new farmers fail to succeed, because they are
usually completely lacking in knowledge and experience. Meanwhile these
failures, naturally, decrease the production of food in our country, and
because the government is not giving adequate attention to agriculture,
farmers are now leaving their farms at an alarming rate.

On Monday my colleague, Dr Kraai van Niekerk, pointed out in a statement
here in Parliament that 20 000 farmers have left their farms in the past
few years. Not only is this creating an increasing shortage of agricultural
products, but just think of the thousands of farmworkers who lost their
jobs and their homes as a result of this. It is all very well for the
Minister of Labour to continually force farmers to pay increased
remuneration for farmworkers, but then the government should first make
sure that the industry that they are encumbering so heavily is viable, and
will remain so in future.

Unfortunately I do not have enough time to be able to speak on the whole
spectrum of food production, and for this reason I would just like to dwell
for a moment on milk, and I do not believe that there is anyone in this
House who would argue with me about the importance of this product. We are
hearing and reading daily about imminent shortages of milk and milk
products in South Africa. While shelves in shops are already filled with
imported dairy products, it will be a bitter day when we have to import
fresh milk ...]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Watson, there is
a point of order.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on a point of order: I don’t
know, it might be the interpretation, but there is something which the
member said, that this government is doing like the government of Zimbabwe.
I missed that part. Maybe the member can clarify that for us. The
interpretation was not good.

Mr A WATSON: I said “maybe”.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Proceed, hon Watson.

Mr A WATSON: ... ’n wonderlike dag van melk en heuning. Maar Voorsitter,
wat is die rede vir hierdie dreigende tekorte? Wel, dr Van Niekerk het in
dieselfde verklaring waarna ek vroeër verwys het ook genoem dat gemiddeld
vyf suiwelboere per week die land verlaat. Die Melkprodusente-organisasie,
MPO, sê dat dit nader aan sewe tot agt melkprodusente per week of ten
minste 30 per maand is. Kan u dink wat die impak hiervan klaar is, maar nog
verder sal wees in die toekoms? Ek kan vir u ‘n ellelange lys van
statistieke voorhou wat ek van allerhande organisasies verkry het, maar ek
glo dat hierdie syfers reeds iewers op die lessenaar van die Minister lê.

Maar kom ons kyk na enkele gegewens. Dit is vir my skokkend dat in hierdie
land, waar ons daagliks moet hoor van stygende pryse, die produsenteprys
van melk sedert 2005 verlaag is met 20% per liter tot die huidige vlak van
R1,80 per liter. Dit is die prys wat kopers aan melkprodusente betaal en
dit is teenoor die geraamde produksieprys van tussen R1,80 en R1,90 per
liter. Dis ‘n totale verlies. Vandag weer styg die prys van brandstof met
23c per liter, maar in die kafee in Pleinstraat was daar gister nie melk
nie. Die eienaar sê die verskaffers ondervind ‘n tekort aan voorraad en kan
nie aan hom lewer nie.

Verstaan mooi, Minister. Ek pleit nie vir inmenging in ‘n vryemarkstelsel
nie, maar die Regering het ‘n plig om die landboubedryf te beskerm en ‘n
plig om te sorg dat bekostigbare voedsel wat terselfdertyd ook voordelig
vir die produsente moet wees, plaaslik verbou word.

Ek het gisteraand by ‘n bekende kettingwinkel stil gehou en vir ons ietsie
gekoop waaraan ons vandag hier in die Parlement kan herkou. Die besondere
kettingwinkel spog dat hulle altyd die beste pryse aanbied en ek glo dus
dat ek ‘n billike prys vir hierdie produkte betaal het. Maar voordat u my
nou uit die Huis wil verwyder, Voorsitter, moet ek verduidelik dat ek met
“herkou” dit nie in die letterlike sin van die woord bedoel nie. Ek wil hê
die Minister moet saam met ons “herkou” aan die pryse wat ek vir die items
betaal het en nie die produkte self nie.

Voorsitter, hier voor my het ek ‘n bottel water en ‘n bottel melk wat ek
gekoop het. Ek het die etikette daarvan verwyder sodat ek nie van
advertering beskuldig kan word nie. Vir hierdie bottel melk het ek R3,99
betaal en vir die bottel water het ek R4,29 betaal. En dit is vir dieselfde
volume. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A WATSON: ... a wonderful day of milk and honey. But Chairperson, what
is the reason for these imminent shortages?  In the very same statement I
referred to earlier, Dr Van Niekerk mentioned that on average five dairy
farmers are leaving the land every week. The Milk Producers’ Organisation,
the MPO, says it is closer to seven or eight milk producers weekly, or at
least 30 per month. Can you imagine what the impact of this already is, not
to mention what lies ahead in future? I can show you a list of statistics
as long as my arm that I acquired from all kinds of organisations, but I am
sure that these figures are already lying somewhere on the Minister’s desk.

But let us look at a few facts. I find it shocking that, in this country
where we hear daily about rising prices, the producer price of milk has
been decreased since 2005 by 20% per litre to the present level of R1,80
per litre. This is the price buyers pay to milk producers, while the
estimated production price is between R1, 80 and R1,90. It is a complete
loss. Today the fuel price increased again by 23c per litre, but yesterday
there was no milk in the café in Plein Street. The owner said that the
distributors were experiencing a shortage in supply and could not provide
him with milk.

I want you to understand me correctly, Minister. I am not appealing for
interference in a free market system, but the government has a duty to
protect the agricultural industry and a duty to ensure that affordable
food, that at the same time should show a profit for the producers, is
cultivated locally.

Last night I stopped at a well-known chain-store and bought us a little
something to ponder on today here in Parliament. This particular chain
store prides itself on always offering the best prices and therefore I
believe that I paid a fair price for these products. But before you try to
have me removed from the House, Chairperson, I must explain that I do not
mean the words “ruminate on” in the literal sense. I want the Minister to
“ruminate on” the price I paid for the products, and not the products
themselves.

Chairperson, in front of me I have a bottle of water and a bottle of milk
that I bought. I have removed the labels from them so that I cannot be
accused of advertising. I paid R3,99 for this bottle of milk and for the
bottle of water I paid R4,29. And that is for the same volume.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Hon member,
your way of producing these bottles here affects the House.

Mr A WATSON: I’ll put them away immediately. [Interjections.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: [Inaudible.]

Mnr A WATSON: Dit is ‘n implikasie wat jy moet verduidelik. Maar ek sal vir
jou later ‘n kans gee daarvoor, mnr Sulliman. Voorsitter, die man het my
beledig.

Hoe is dit moontlik dat water duurder as melk is? Die houers is plastiek en
hulle het soortgelyke skroefproppe. Ek aanvaar ook dat dit net soveel kos
om water in die bottel te kry as wat dit kos om melk daarin te kry. Nou wat
op aarde maak die water meer waardevol as die melk?

Kan u dink hoe lank dit vir die kalfie geneem het om ‘n koei te word wat
hierdie gesonde melk produseer het? Dan praat ek nie eers van die duur saad
van haar pa en die ingewikkelde inseminasieproses nie. Kan u dink hoeveel
word daagliks spandeer op daardie koei se weiding, byvoeding,
gesondheidsorg en higiëne? Daarby ook nog die omheinings, die melkproses,
die stalle, die arbeid en ja, sy self drink ook water.

Daarenteen, as jy die verspreiders kan glo, dan kom hierdie gebottelde
water glo uit geheime grotte en die water is kwansuis honderd persent
suiwer, maar tegelyk ook ryk aan alle moontlike soute en vitamienes. Ek
verstaan dit nie. Daar is egter deesdae so baie soorte water te koop, dat
indien dit waar is dan is ons land vrot van geheime grotte en fonteine. Ek
glo dat ons drinkwater in Suid-Afrika in elke geval só higieniës is dat die
meeste van die bottels op die winkelrakke direk uit die krane volgemaak
word. [Gelag.] Ek het nagelaat om vanoggend my leier te vra wat water tans
hier in Kaapstad kos. Maar dis mos ondenkbaar dat water duurder as melk is.

Die Regering, in besonder die Minister, moet dringende aandag gee aan die
probleme van die landbouers in ons land en ek sluit af. Ons moet produksie
en lewensvatbaarheid van die boerderybedryf verseker en verbruikers
aanmoedig om markverwante pryse te betaal vir gesonde, vars voedsel. Die
alternatief is ‘n totale vernietiging van die landbousektor, die verval van
die voedselketting en voor ons weet waar ons is, dan betaal ons tien maal
meer vir ingevoerde gepasteuriseerde melk in plaas van die lekker vars melk
wat ons het. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A WATSON: That is an implication you have to explain. But I shall give
you a chance to do that later, Mr Sulliman. Chairperson, the man insulted
me.

How is it possible for water to be more expensive than milk? The containers
are made of plastic and they have similar screw-on caps. I also assume that
it costs exactly the same to get water into the bottle as it costs to get
milk into it. Now what on earth makes the water more valuable than the
milk?

Can you imagine how long it took the calf to grow into a cow that produced
this healthy milk? And then I am not even mentioning the expensive sperm of
her father and the complicated insemination process. Can you imagine how
much is spent daily on grazing, food supplements, health-care and hygiene
for that cow? Add to that the fences, milking process, sheds, labour and,
yes, she even drinks water.

In contrast to that, if one can believe the distributors, this bottled
water comes from secret caves and is ostensibly 100% pure, but is at the
same time also rich in every possible type of salt and vitamin. I do not
understand this. However, there are so many types of water on sale today
that if that was true, our country must be full to overflowing with secret
caves and fountains. I believe our drinking water in South Africa is in any
event so hygienic that most of the bottles on the shop shelves are filled
directly from the taps. [Laughter.] I forgot to ask my leader this morning
how much water costs at present here in Cape Town. But surely it is
unthinkable that water is more expensive than milk.

The government, and in particular the Minister, must give urgent attention
to the problems of the farmers in our country, and I want to conclude. We
must ensure production and viability of the farming industry and encourage
consumers to pay market-related prices for healthy, fresh food. The
alternative is the utter destruction of the agricultural sector, the
collapse of the food-chain, and before we know where we are, we will be
paying ten times as much for imported pasteurised milk rather than for the
nice, fresh milk we have now. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I want to
remind the hon members of this House that there are service officers here,
hon Sogoni, to pass on messages. Please don’t do the work of the service
officers. Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: May I ask you to rule on the insinuation by hon Sulliman that
I carry brandewyn [brandy] around with me like, perhaps, he does.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Watson. Hon Sulliman, would you please withdraw your remarks.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: I withdraw.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you.

Mnr C J VAN ROOYEN: Voorsitter, ek wonder of die agb Watson gehoor het van
’n vryemarkstelsel? Dit is hoekom daar ’n verskil is tussen die water- en
die melkpryse.

Voorsitter, agb Minister, Adjunkminister, agb lede, kamerade, in die ANC se
belydsdokument “Gereed om te regeer”, word daar verklaar, “alle mense is
geregtig op grond en behuising”. Die dokument beklemtoon verder dat die
staat ’n belangrike rol moet speel in die verkryging en herverdeling van
grond. Om dit te kan doen moet die staat die mag hê om op verskeie maniere
op grond besit te kan neem, insluitend regmatige onteiening.

Grond was een van die laaste drie aangeleenthede wat deur Kodesa
onderhandeling aangespreek was. Gegewe die kompleksiteit van
grondhervorming en die gepaardgaande sosiale en politieke verwagtinge moet
die belangrikheid daarvan vir die groot meerderheid van mense in die land
nie onderskat word nie. Om te misluk is dus nie ’n opsie nie ter wille van
hulle wat hulle lewens neergelê het om ’n beter lewe vir almal te verseker.
Die mense wat grondhervorming probeer vertraag of wil wegwens, moet hulle
dus maar gereed maak vir ’n vasberade regering wat nie ’n duim gaan toegee
om sy doelwitte vir ’n beter lewe vir almal te verseker nie.

Die oorgrote meerderheid Suid-Afrikaners is dit eens met die regering dat
grondhervorming belangrik en onomkeerbaar is, maar daar is wel nog ’n
minderheid wat dit teenstaan. Vir hulle wil ek sê moet nie die wil van die
mense onderskat nie. Ek wil selfs so ver gaan deur te sê dat
grondhervorming die basis van nasionale versoening is.

Kommersiële boere het ’n belangrike rol te speel in grondhervorming.
Eerstens om betrokke te wees in die opheffing van nuwe opkomende boere deur
middel van mentorskappe, en tweedens om grondhervorming te sien as ’n stap
in die normalisering van verhoudings en goeie buurmanskap in Suid-Afrika.
Daar is hoë agting vir die kommersiële boere in die regering. Dus nooi ek
alle kommersiële boere om aktief deel te word van grondhervorming en om ’n
positiewe bydrae te lewer in hierdie verband.

Ek wil graag die Vrystaatse Landbou-unie gelukwens met hulle proaktiewe
inisiatief deur self ’n grondhervormingstrategie te ontwikkel en ek hoop
dat die Vrystaatse Departement van Landbou wat hierso is vandag hulle deel
sal doen om dié inisiatief te ondersteun en ’n sukses daarvan te maak. Geen
grond in die Vrystaat word huidiglik vir onteiening geoogmerk nie, en ek
wil dit graag herhaal: Geen grond in die Vrystaat word vir onteiening
geoogmerk nie - want die pers hardloop altyd met hierdie goed weg.

Die regering se erns en vasberadenheid ten opsigte van grondhervorming word
duidelik weerspieël in die feit dat daar vir die volgende drie jaar
R7 miljard begroot word vir restitusie en R7 miljard vir grondhervorming.
’n Saak wat egter nie direk in die begroting genoem word nie en wat, myns
insiens, dringende aandag nodig het is die vestiging van lewensvatbare
boerderye en die nodige kundige bystand aan die nuwe boere. Gesien in die
lig van die beoogde versnelde grondhervorming sal die befondsing van
sodanige bystand aan nuwe boere in die toekoms ooreenstemmend moet toeneem.
Daar sal dus gewaak moet word teen onderbegroting.

Dit was ontstellend om te verneem dat die euwel van plaasafsettings na al
die jare nog steeds met ons is.
’n AGB LID: Dis ’n skande!

Mnr C J VAN ROOYEN: Volgens die Menseregtekommissie het plaasafsettings die
afgelope dekade toegeneem. Baie van hierdie afsettings was gedwonge en
teenstrydig met die Grondwet sowel as met die Handves van Menseregte. Die
gevolg van hierdie afsettings is ongekende lyding op sosiale- en
gesondheidsvlakke, wat ook onskuldige kinders en weerlose oumense raak.

Stories soos dié van die weduwee, Sarah Beukes van Rawsonville, druis teen
alle menslike waardes en beginsels in. Nadat haar man aan ’n MIV-verwante
siekte gesterf het wat haar ook met die virus besmet gelaat het, is sy van
die plaas waar sy gewerk het afgesit. Die enigste heenkome wat sy vir haar
en haar kinders kon vind was toiletgeriewe op ’n nabygeleë sportveld waar
sy, tesame met ander afgesette plaaswerkers van die omgewing, in haglike
omstandighede beskerming teen wind en weer moes soek.

Selfs een plaasafsetting is een te veel. Het die tyd nie dalk aangebreek
vir die regering om ’n algemene moratorium op die afsetting van
plaaswerkers te plaas tot tyd en wyl die gebreke in die huidige wetgewing
reggestel kan word nie? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, I wonder if the hon Watson has heard of a
free-market system? That is why there is a difference between the prices of
water and milk.

Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, hon members, comrades, in the
ANC’s policy document  “Ready to govern”, it is declared that “all people
are entitled to land and housing”. The document also emphasises that the
state should play an important role in the acquisition and redistribution
of land. To be able to do this the state should have the power to take
possession of land in various ways, including lawful expropriation.

Land was one of the last three issues that was addressed in Codesa
negotiations. Given the complexity of land reform and the accompanying
social and political expectations, its importance to the vast majority of
people in the country should not be underestimated. Failure is therefore
not an option, for the sake of those who laid down their lives to ensure a
better life for all. The people who are trying to slow down land reform or
wish it away should therefore prepare themselves for a resolute government
that will not give an inch in its objective of ensuring a better life for
all.

The vast majority of South Africans agree with the government that land
reform is important and irreversible, but there is still a minority who
opposes it. To them I want to say, do not underestimate the will of the
people. I would even go so far as to say that land reform is the foundation
for national reconciliation.

Commercial farmers have an important role to play in land reform. Firstly,
by being involved in the upliftment of new emerging farmers by means of
mentorships, and secondly by seeing land reform as a step in the
normalisation of relations and good neighbourliness in South Africa. There
is high regard for commercial farmers in the government. I therefore invite
all commercial farmers to become actively involved in land reform and to
make a positive contribution in this regard.

I would like to congratulate the Agricultural Union of the Free State on
their proactive initiative in developing a land reform strategy themselves
and I hope that the Free State Department of Agriculture, which is present
here today, will do its part in supporting this initiative and making a
success of it. No land in the Free State is currently earmarked for
expropriation, and I would like to repeat this: No land in the Free State
is earmarked for expropriation – because the press always run away with
these things.

The government’s seriousness and resolve with regard to land reform is
clearly reflected in the fact that for the next three years R7 billion has
been budgeted for restitution and R7 billion for land reform. A matter that
is not mentioned directly in the budget and that, in my opinion, needs
urgent attention is the establishment of viable farms and the necessary
expert support to new farmers. In the light of the intended accelerated
land reform the funding of such support to new farmers will have to be
increased accordingly in future. Underfunding should therefore be guarded
against.

It was upsetting to learn that the scourge of evictions from farms is still
with us after all these years.

An HON MEMBER: It is a disgrace!

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: According to the Human Rights Commission evictions from
farms have increased in the past decade. Many of these evictions were
forced and inconsistent with the Constitution as well as the Bill of
Rights. The result of these evictions is unparalleled suffering at social
and health level, which also affects innocent children and defenceless old
people.

Stories such as that of the widow, Sarah Beukes of Rawsonville, flies
against all human values and principles. After her husband died from an HIV-
related illness which also infected her with the virus, she was evicted
from the farm where she was working. The only refuge she could find for
herself and her children was an ablution block on a sports field nearby
where she, together with other evicted farmworkers from the area, had to
find shelter from the elements in appalling conditions.

Even one eviction is one too many. Has the time not come for the government
to place a general moratorium on the eviction of farmworkers until such
time as the flaws in the legislation have been rectified?]

During the Select Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs’ hearing on
farm evictions in February this year, the Human Rights Commission
highlighted three areas that need urgent attention. The first one was the
lack of legal services to farm dwellers to claim and enforce their rights;
secondly, lack of emergency services and programmes for farm dwellers who
have been evicted; and, thirdly, lack of land programmes and support for
farm dwellers in terms of the Extension of Security of Tenure Act.

Then it was further noted that the Extension of Security of Tenure Act was
largely a procedural piece of legislation and therefore did not adequately
protect the rights of farmworkers. It was also noted that young and old
farmworkers were becoming more vulnerable as farm owners found ways to
avoid the provisions of the Extension of Security of Tenure Act, Esta,
which is totally against the intentions and spirit of the Bill. This matter
needs urgent attention.

In conclusion, Minister, the ANC supports the Budget Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M E MTHIMKHULU (KwaZulu-Natal): Hon Chairperson, our hon Minister
Xingwana, MECs from other provinces, hon members of the NCOP, distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen, ngiyanibingelela [I greet you].

Ukuze silwe nendlala siyinqobe, futhi sinqobe nezifo ezihaqe imiphakathi
yakithi, ikakhulukazi ezindaweni ezisemakhaya, kumele kube khona
ukubambisana phakathi koMnyango Wezolimo Nezemihlaba nemiphakathi ehlomula
ezinhlelweni zikahulumeni.

SinguMnyango wezolimo esifundazweni saKwaZulu-Natali, sesiqoke izinhlelo
zemisebenzi ezine ezimqoka kakhulu uMnyango ozosebenza ngazo kulo nyaka
wezimali futhi ezinomthelela kokuningi. Lezo zinhlelo yilezi: uhlelo
lokutshalwa kwamakhowe, uhlelo lokuvuselelwa kwemfuyo, uhlelo lokusiza
abantu ngobuningi babo kwezolimo nasemigwaqweni eya ezizindeni zentuthuko,
nohlelo lokuqinisekisa ukuthi kuhlale kukhona ukudla okwenele. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[In order to fight hunger and defeat sicknesses that have engulfed our
communities, particularly in rural areas, there must be co-operation
between the Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs and the communities
that benefit from government programmes.

As the department of agriculture in KwaZulu-Natal, we have selected the
four most important programmes which will be used by the department in this
financial year and will have an impact on most issues. Here are the
programmes: the programme of mushroom planting, the livestock
rehabilitation programme, the programme of assisting the masses in farming
and the roads that lead to developmental structures and the programme that
would ensure that there is always enough food.]

Regarding these flagship programmes, the department believes that, when
implemented, they will have the greatest economic impact within the
shortest possible time. We have allocated more than R500 million of our
budget in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework budget cycle to realise the
objectives as set out in these aforementioned programmes.

SinguMnyango wezolimo nezemvelo KwaZulu-Natali, sihlose ngalezi zinhlelo
esengizibalile ukuba sikwazi ukusiza abalimi abasacathula ukuthi nabo
badlulele kwesinye isigaba sokulima, bancintisane nabalimi asebesimeme
ukuze kupheze ukuthi abalimi bakithi kulokhu kuthiwa basafufusa ngaso sonke
isikhathi, kube kuthiwa basafufusa into engapheli. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[As the Department of Agriculture and Environmental Affairs in KwaZulu-
Natal, our aim with the above-mentioned programmes is to be able to assist
up and coming farmers to pass to the next level of farming, and compete
with seasoned farmers in order to stop the notion of always referring to
our farmers as novices, they are said to be novices forever.]

Just last week, I addressed a group of emerging goat and sheep farmers at
the Royal Agricultural Show in Pietermaritzburg, where I stressed again the
importance of them graduating from being subsistence livestock farmers to
being commercial farmers. Through our livestock rehabilitation programme,
we remain optimistic that we will be able to realise the objectives we have
set for ourselves during this financial year.

The programmes that will be supporting livestock rehabilitation include dip
tank rehabilitation, with an emphasis on the support of rural contractors,
veld management, animal primary health care, formation of livestock
associations and co-operatives, marketing and value-adding – which is very
important - and, lastly supply of indigenous livestock. The core objective
of the livestock rehabilitation programme is to increase commercial
participation in livestock by emergent farmers to around 20% over the MTEF
period.

Let me now address the issue of inadequate allocation to the Comprehensive
Agricultural Support Programme, Casp. Firstly, hon members, let me briefly
sketch the background to what I have just said. Since 1994, the land reform
programme has been transferring land to beneficiaries through the
Settlement Land Acquisition Grant, Slag, which was later revised and
replaced by the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development programme,
LRAD, and other subprogrammes whose objectives are to redistribute
nonagricultural land.

The challenge of supporting the Settlement Land Acquisition Grant
beneficiaries became evident even prior to the introduction of LRAD. The
introduction of Casp was already a challenge in meeting the demand of
supporting the land reform beneficiaries. The Casp budget has always been
inadequate, considering that part of this amount has been transferred.

Our province has always spent up to 100% of funds that were allocated in
the previous financial years, where only 88% had been spent. Owing to
limited funding, some projects had to be broken up into three-year funding
cycles. For example, if a project had funds approved for R300 000 for each
year, an amount of R100 000 would be released for the duration of three
years. The province of KwaZulu-Natal is therefore sitting with a backlog of
projects which date back to 1994.

The biggest challenge in supporting land reform projects is that delivery
of land is going to escalate to more than three times the normal rate. In
order to realise a balance in future, the following is suggested:
preplanning of the projects which have remained as a backlog whilst
providing funding for new projects; and engaging financial institutions in
funding projects with potential; engaging investor and/or donor funding.

At present, the province has estimated a reform backlog to the tune of
R143,5 million. So, in supporting this Agriculture Budget Vote, I will
plead with hon members to consider the pertinent issues that I have alluded
to, if we are to meet the set target of redistributing 30% of the land by
2014. Hon Chairperson, hon members, I thank you so much. Siyabonga.
[Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, hon members, I am pleased to see that the
allocation of the Land Affairs budget has increased from R3,3 billion in
the 2006-07 adjusted appropriation to almost R5,7 billion this year. This
is a welcome increase. I hope that these additional funds will be spent
wisely and assist the department’s aims and objectives.

I am, however, disappointed that the allocation for agriculture has
decreased by 8,4% from R2,37 billion in the 2006-07 adjusted appropriation
to R2,28 billion in 2007-08. This is particularly disappointing,
considering the important role that agriculture plays in rural areas.

Access to fertile agricultural land as well as assistance with farming is
particularly important to many people who live in rural areas of our
country, as they rely directly on land for their livelihood. The various
crops that these growers harvest are not only vital for their food security
and to stave off hunger, they are also sold to earn an income to provide
for the everyday needs of the household. Crop failure therefore directly
affects their food security as well as their living standards. It is for
this reason that the department as well as the various stakeholders must do
their utmost in providing the necessary assistance that is needed to ensure
the sustainability and growth of the many people in rural areas who rely on
agriculture for their livelihood.

The department plays a leading role in the economic and social development
of many people in our country. The upliftment and promotion of many small
farmers is necessary, if true broad-based black economic empowerment in the
agricultural sector is to be achieved. These farmers should be afforded the
support, both financial and technical, that is needed for them to prosper.
The department has provided various types of support and mechanisms to
assist farmers, but I do believe that assistance to small-scale farmers
should be increased, if their chances of survival are to be increased, as
well as their economic success.

The large farms operated by co-operatives are not always successful in the
promotion of development as they are focused more on increasing their
profit rather than on the development aspects of farming. An option that
should be considered is to divide the farms which have been reclaimed
during the restitution and land reform processes into smallholdings of
between four and five hectares, with lively production competition and co-
operative marketing under the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme.


A return to farmers’ associations may also ensure food security in
households as well as an income, through the selling of the extra produce.
Regarding the poor, unemployed youth who are out of school and unemployed
or retrenched able-bodied people, the soil provides a source of survival
and economic existence.

Mfundisi, wami: Haleluya! [My Pastor: Hallelujah!]

Research and mentoring has to be conducted by the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research, and the Agricultural Research Council in order to
promote agriculture for local engagement and export, for example mushrooms
- as mentioned by “usbari” [my in-law] – for pizza making, and soya for our
consumption and marketing to the Far East.

Promotion of indigenous food through competitions is recommended. People
have to relearn that ground and cooked wild maize, wild spinach [imbuya],
and black jack [ucadolo] provide a well-balanced meal. Wetlands should now
engage in planting grass that is used for arts and crafts, such as palm,
incema [rush], amagceba [marsh rush] and others. Their demand is great,
especially in areas where agricultural land is limited - like Emsinga.
The IFP supports these two Budget Votes, but we believe that the relevant
departments should be allocated more funds. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M C MOKITLANE (Free State): Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister,
colleagues from other provinces and hon members of the NCOP, I think the
Free State must say upfront that it supports the Minister’s budget.

The Free State department of agriculture has, in the application of its
mandate and strategic vision, aligned itself with the national vision of a
united and prosperous agriculture sector. We are indeed on course within
our task to build a legion of farmers, who will not only embrace modern
agriculture but will go a step further to translate their farming
enterprises into social and economic institutions that will push back the
frontiers of poverty. This, without abandoning our mission, we will do by
focusing more on youth and women.

We are also going to work very hard in bringing farmworkers on a par with
other citizens of the province and country, by actively involving them in
issues that directly affect them within the sector. We believe that
farmworkers form a sine qua non of agriculture. In other words, agriculture
cannot happen without them. So, we have already started with consultation
processes in the province, through which we want to hear the legitimate
voice of farmworkers regarding their development and involvement in the
agricultural economy as well as for dealing with a myriad of challenges
that are facing them.

Hopefully, after thorough consultation, we are going to hold a provincial
conference on development and empowerment of farmworkers from the
agricultural perspective in September this year. We believe we will emerge
from the conference with the framework document that will give us guidance
into how to build a better life for farmworkers and the farming
communities.

Towards the end of this month we are going to hold a youth summit in which
representatives of youth formations from all five districts in the province
and from within and outside government sectors will converge to formulate
the strategic direction for youth development and economic empowerment
within the agricultural sector, in line with national youth policy and our
economic growth and development strategy. Because the hon Minister has
already alerted us today in her speech about a motion on the part of her
department in that direction, we, as the provincial department, will find
mechanisms to synergise our efforts in the province with that motion.

We have already started formulating a mechanism through which we will be
able to identify agriculture graduates in our province, with a view to
encouraging them to swell the ranks of the department and those of the
private sector entities, where their skills are most needed. We believe
that the skills audit among young people in the province who have
agricultural qualifications will form a solid basis for us to get actively
involved and inculcate an agrarian spirit among black young people in
particular, and to strengthen our resolve to make Free State a leader in
agriculture.

I think it is also important to mention to this honourable House that we
will continue with the development and installation of irrigation systems
at Oppermansgronde and all other areas in the Gariep district to unleash
the economic potential for emerging farmers in that particular area and to
ensure opportunities for job creation and economic development, economic
growth and beneficiation of agricultural products in that area.

Our unit for special programmes is geared towards maximum youth
participation within the sector, in that we have mounted a campaign that
does not only disseminate information, expose and familiarise agricultural
activities to young people but also co-ordinates activities with the Free
State youth commission. We also intend to involve municipalities in our
forums in seeking ways and means of mobilising the youth for social change.


Our commitment to women’s development and empowerment in agriculture is
also in focus as we begin to mobilise women under the aegis of the women’s
organisation. I am sure the provincial structure for this organisaton has
been fully installed, is active and provides basic information and
orientation of women to ready them to enter the agricultural industry fully
prepared, so that they are able to reap maximum benefit from the ventures
they undertake.

It is also important to mention that we are awake to the reality of the
mammoth task of land redistribution, and our contribution and support to
this cause is real. We are in continuous consultation and co-operate with
the provincial office of the Department of Land Affairs in trying to seek
quicker and more effective methods of implementing the progressive land
acquisition strategy in our own particular dynamics of the province.

Part of the reason for doing this is to conduct an audit for state land and
land in private hands, and for verification and updating of information so
that informed and accurate decisions can be effected. As we do this, we
believe that the Casp grant meant for land and agrarian reform will be
receptive to the developmental needs concerning the land acquired. This
should be so because we refuse to set up our people to fail, who want to
participate in agriculture.

The commonage policy that we have just developed will be the tool that will
assist in the good management of commonage land and will be a litmus test
for people engaged in small-scale production to graduate and train to
become commercial farmers. As the department, this will provide us with the
opportunity to further support farmers more systematically as the commonage
policy has a whole range of elements that make commonage land use critical
in the development of the agricultural sector. We have had a meeting with
all mayors in the province to try to inculcate a spirit that begins to say:
It’s important that they should begin to develop ordinances around
commonage management.

Finally, we have also realised that the ability of the department to
deliver hinges on skills that we have in the department. For this reason,
we have increased our intake of scarce skills to build technical capacity
to enable the department to deal with some of the services which are
essential for the department.

I believe that the effort on the part of national government to try and
show parity, particularly around technicians and scientists in the
agricultural sector, has gone a long way in assisting us in being in a
position to maintain the skills levels which we have at the present moment.
It has also gone to the extent of ensuring that the people are further
motivated in our department and are actually able to wake up in the morning
with verve to go to work. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr K BATYI (Gauteng): Hon Minister, your Deputy, MEC’s from other
provinces, hon members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, the hon Khabisi
Mosunkutu, the Gauteng MEC for agriculture, conservation and environment,
on whose behalf I stand here, requested me to tender his sincere apology
for not being here.
Indeed, it is an honour to rise in this House and to call for the
endorsement of this Budget Vote speech of the Minister of Agriculture. I do
this confident that the budget presentation by the Minister will indeed
significantly contribute to the banishment of poverty, racial bigotry in
land ownership and gross victimisation of farmworkers and farm dwellers.

To confront the ugly face of poverty, thousands of Gauteng residents wake
up each day looking forward to nurturing their community gardens,
shattering the myth that Gauteng is a barren, concrete jungle. Thousands
more will certainly benefit from the initiative to beautify and grow food
crops that the Minister referred to in her Budget Vote speech. During this
financial year, over 300 farmers benefited from the department’s
Comprehensive Agriculture Support Programme and the Land Reform for
Agricultural Development subprogramme.

We are of the view that the livestock massification project and the
expansion of Casp, as reported here in this budget policy presentation,
will indeed see more urban farmers coming into being out of the policies
enshrined in this Budget Vote policy document.

Similar to other provinces, Gauteng has its fair share of forces of the
past who don’t identify with the nonracial, nonsexist, human-centred policy
position of the new South Africa. These forces, at the drop of a hat,
illegally and inhumanly evict countless farm dwellers and farmworkers. This
is still true, especially in places such as Dibeng and Metsweding in
Gauteng.

The creation of a one-stop land rights management facility will contribute
immensely, not only in terms of the reduction of racial bigotry in the
farming sector. This proposal will further assist in building a truly
nonracial and prosperous nation, and also corner those racists who are
still trapped in the past.

In our Premier’s state of the province address, he said, if I may quote:

   The Gauteng department of agriculture, conservation and the environment
   will be developing agricultural hubs to settle emerging black farmers and
   to help them grow their enterprises. The launch of the first hub is
   planned to take place during the first quarter of the next financial year
   in Metsweding. Working with the Gauteng Provincial Land Reform Office, we
   aim to settle around 50 farmers per annum in these agricultural hubs.


As a result of what our Premier said in his state of the province address,
the implementation of the agricultural development strategy is on course.
Yes, urban agriculture is not merely an urban legend. On 22 May 2007, we
established the first provincial agricultural hub, a nucleus of
concentrated agricultural activities aimed at producing mixed-market
agricultural products, not only for local economic consumption, but also
for the international market. The launch of this hub, which will be
followed by the establishment of other hubs, was made possible by the
collaboration between the Metsweding District Council and the Land Reform
Office of the national Department of Agriculture and the provincial
department.

It is with this in mind that we hail the proposed establishment of area-
based land reform planning, as we have indicated that the agricultural hub
concept entails a close working relationship with local municipalities.
This land reform initiative will enhance our provincial strategy as is
expected from the emerging global city region that Gauteng is. We will
closely work with municipalities to enhance their own integrated
development plans, as envisaged by this land reform initiative.

As a government that is committed to gender equality, we have been working
on making farming for women a profession. As a result, many women farmers
are looking at farming as a profession. Every year, we honour those women
who have done extremely well with the support of the Gauteng government. We
say ...

... amaqobokazana angalala endleleni, yazini kunyembelekile. Mathol’
anyongande kukudlelana! [... well done to the working women. We thank you!]

As you well know, Gauteng attracts people from other provinces and with
that they bring their agricultural experiences. Yet we are still seen as an
urban province. Hence we have just taken the route of promoting small-scale
farming as a way to go in those regions that are more urban, with the
exception, of course, of Sedibeng and Metsweding.

In conclusion, I wish to remind all of us of an observation made by our
South African Nobel laureate five decades ago. Addressing a conference in
Queenstown, in 1953, Chief Albert Luthuli remarked, and I quote:


   You will agree that the masses of African people live in abject poverty
   in both rural and urban areas, and so many Africans find themselves
   landless and homeless. They find themselves suffering from hunger,
   malnutrition and disease.

In endorsing the Minister’s budget policy presentation, I hope that you too
will agree that the concerns raised then still abide and that this budget
policy presentation will indeed further redress and minimise the concerns
raised by Chief Luthuli. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon MEC’s, hon members of
this House, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I want to congratulate our
guests who are here from Zeerust, and our lady who is doing so will over
there. I will propose that, for 2008, she must be the woman of the year.
Malibongwe! [Praise!]

It has been noticed by the ID that plans are in place to prevent the waste
of agricultural land and livestock by inexperienced farmers who have
received farms, like Madek in Victoria West, in the Northern Cape. It is
such areas which contribute to further soil erosion. The plan of including
expertise now is welcomed and undisputedly a step in the right direction.

The Minister of Water Affairs has mentioned that a water pipeline is to be
extended from the Orange River to Colesberg. Is it going to be used to
assist farmers as well? This question is asked through the Chair to the hon
Minister.

Deserted farms exist in the Northern Cape, which also contribute to the
physical degradation of the land. Are there any plans in place to address
this? I am sure that our previously disadvantaged people would be
interested in these farms if their owners have no use for them.

In the area of Britstown there are small farmers who imported goats. Are
these farmers properly trained and what support structures are in place?
When corrective measures are taken in relation to black economic
empowerment, is it right to take a step backwards again by taking the land
from the small farmers and including a previously advantaged person? Surely
such measures will irritate the small community involved. The ID believes
discipline is essential in such cases. It happened at Britstown in the
Northern Cape.

The biofuel industry is going to make demands on agriculture as well. The
ID believes that the Minister and the department are accordingly geared
towards facing this situation.

It has also come to the attention of the ID that, during the
Riviersonderend elections, people were prevented by the owners of certain
farms from recruiting for membership. Rights are infringed in those areas.
I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr J J DOWRY (Western Cape): Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon members of this
House, during his state of the nation address this year, President Thabo
Mbeki reminded us yet again of our mandate to liberate our people from the
scourge of poverty in all its manifestations and to eliminate all its
offshoots, and so did the hon Minister in her Budget Vote speech.
Therefore, I rise on behalf of the Western Cape to fully support this
Budget Vote.

The agribusiness sector has developed and tabled its strategy with regards,
to growth and development in the Western Cape. The eight themes, as
contained in the sector plan for growth and development are not only in
synergy with the programmes and emphasis of the department, but they are
also in line with the objectives of Asgisa or they will support the
objectives of Asgisa towards reaching a growth rate of 6%.

In die Wes-Kaap is daar in die eerste 10 jaar van ons demokrasie 43 000
hektaar grond aan voorheen benadeelde persone oorgedra, maar met ‘n
verskerpte poging in die laaste twee jaar het ons 168 000 hektaar oorgedra.
Dit is egter nog ver van die 383 000 hektaar wat ons jaarliks tot 2014 sal
moet oordra, indien ons die 30% doelwit wil bereik. Ons moet bou op die
suksesverhale en groter klem lê op die mentorskap as ons daarin wil slaag
om nuwe boere volhoubaar te vestig. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[In the first 10 years of our democracy 43 000 hectares of land was
transferred to previously disadvantaged people in the Western Cape, but
with an intensified effort over the past two years we have transferred 168
000 hectares. This is, however, still far from the 383 000 hectares that we
have to transfer every year up to 2014 in order to meet the 30% objective.
We have to build on the success stories and greater emphasis must be placed
on mentorship if we want to succeed in establishing sustainable new
farmers.]

Our sustainable resource management programme completed 41 irrigation
projects, 57 infrastructure projects on farms and 203 technology transfer
projects. Regarding LandCare, amongst others, 113 farm plans were approved
for farming purposes. The farmer support and development programme
completed 73 food security projects, 143 projects were completed through
the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme and six projects were
completed through the provincial infrastructure grant.

This translates into the following: 495 farmer settlement beneficiaries
were supported; 954 emerging farmers and 166 commercial farmers were
trained; 12 mentorship programmes for emerging farmers were established;
more than 5 800 emerging farmers and more than 1 800 commercial farmers
were given advice on request; and, we have also established 103 community
gardens with 2 000 beneficiaries.

In meeting the technology needs of our clients, a total of 204 technology
development projects were also executed. The department of agriculture in
the Western Cape developed a strategic plan for farmworkers. Through this
plan, we are harnessing the resources of government under the leadership of
agriculture to attend to these very crucial matters pertaining to the total
farmworker community.

The extremely high level of domestic and export support that farmers in
developed countries receive is putting South African farmers at a total
disadvantage and on an exceptionally unequal playing field. In some
countries, notably Japan, Norway, Switzerland and South Korea, more than
two-thirds of farmers’ income is in some way or another derived from
government support - you can actually call them public servants. However,
good arguments exist to maintain that these levels of support will not
necessarily disappear but will most probably just be continued in another
guise. This is an issue that I believe should receive more attention,
especially if you want to keep our grain farmers on the land.

Die veranderende omstandighede in die aanvraag na landbouprodukte beteken
dat die prys van produkte onbepaald onder druk gaan verkeer. Die
veranderende wisselkoers maak dit onmoontlik vir produsente om behoorlik te
beplan terwyl die penetrasie van tradisionele markte deur ander mededingers
daagliks ‘n faktor is waarmee rekening gehou moet word. Die landbousektor
is een van die primêre bewakers; ook van ons natuurlike hulpbronne and
biodiversiteit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The changing circumstances in the demand for agricultural products mean
that the price for products will remain under pressure indefinitely. The
fluctuating exchange rate makes it impossible for producers to plan
properly while the penetration of traditional markets by other competitors
makes it a daily factor that has to be taken into consideration. The
agricultural sector is one of the primary guardians also of our natural
resources and biodiversity.]

Since 2004, the ANC government in the Western Cape has done much to push
back the boundaries of poverty. The strategic plan for farmworkers is
designed to address the plight of the most vulnerable members of our
society. During the past year there were many incidents that led to an
emphasis being placed on the plight of 220 000 farmworkers in this
province, with an estimated 1,5 million dependants.

The eviction of farmworkers, both legal and illegal, often results in calls
to come to the aid of families living next to a road or under a bridge with
their children and their few belongings. I engage extensively with various
role-players on the critical issue of security of tenure. The Premier of
the Western Cape has appointed a task team to investigate the extent of the
problem and to look into the role of various departments in the province,
in addressing this problem.

We are on record as asking for the review of the Extension of Security of
Tenure Act in order to deal with the intricacies of land tenure and we know
that this is one of the priorities of the Minister.

I want to reiterate that I believe the processes are flawed, in that some
magistrates do not adhere 100% to the regulations as set out in the
Extension of Security of Tenure Act before granting a final eviction order.
Regarding this matter, my attention was drawn to a Human Rights
Commission’s report that reached the same conclusion.

There is something wrong in our farming community when you have had 645
applications for evictions from farms in the Western Cape over the last
three years. Of these applications, 222 were granted and 10% of the
applications were set aside by the Land Claims Court. The question arises
as to whether the remaining 423 became illegal evictions or what happened
to these people’s constitutional rights.

As a housing solution, farmworkers’ agrivillages seem to be the right
option. We will need the full co-operation of all departments and spheres
of government to succeed. Farmworkers will gain access to full title to
property in this way. As much as we acknowledge the contribution of the
majority of farmers to improve the circumstances of the workers, there are
still too many reports of incidents of maltreatment of workers and
noncompliance with the minimum wage structure, and health and safety
regulations. It is high time that other departments, such as the Department
of Labour, assist us with regulating labour issues on farms.

At the start of the 2007 academic year a total of 154 first-year students
enrolled for our higher education programmes. Of these, 24 are women and 38
are black. Students from agricultural colleges are excluded from getting
financial assistance through the National Student Financial Aid Fund.
Therefore, we support the 38 black students with bursaries to study in
agriculture and carry approximately 50% of the total cost of R1,1 million.
A further 28 black students obtained the national certificate in
agriculture through our learnership programmes. This year, 60 students from
the farmworker community will benefit from our learnership programmes. We
aim to increase this number with another 100 during the course of this
year.

I believe that delivery on accelerated land reform and the administration
of the Extension of Security of Tenure Act is hampered by the structure of
the national Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs under one
Ministry, whilst the same does not apply in the provinces. Yet we are held
responsible for matters related to land affairs. The linkages with the
provincial land reform offices must be clarified through a structured
relationship, if we want to achieve the land reform targets that we have
set for ourselves.

I want to conclude by saying that I agree with the Minister on her approach
and I believe that our strategy remains the only reliable way to overcome
poverty, unemployment, inequality and social fragmentation. Ours is the
correct strategic path in realising our vision for making agriculture a
home for all, as is contained in the words of the late iNkosi Albert
Luthuli.

I do not have time to read that quote, but he said, way back in the
fifties: “This country is not yet a home for all its people.” And I want to
say that these words are still relevant in this time that we are living in,
because if we look at farmworkers and we look at this vulnerable community,
we must admit that they are still far from the new South Africa. We must do
everything in our power to reach them and also to give them a taste of the
new South Africa. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Ministers, hon members, it would not be
an overstatement to say that the agricultural industry has problems. We’ve
heard this. We’ve seen the mass exodus of farmers. We have heard a figure
of 20 000 since 1990 being mentioned, which puts our food security at major
risk. Besides not being profitable, severe drought in some areas has added
to the problem.

In broader macro terms, the economy is being undermined as food inflation
increases due to the scarcity and the reliance on imports. What are the
issues? The issues here are low import tariffs and the dumping of cheap
agricultural products by richer nations, whose farming sector is heavily
subsidised. We heard that South Africa is facing a milk shortage; the wine
industry is facing a global glut.

Hon Minister, we need to protect our farmers with subsidies. Our interest
rates - I said this the other day – need to drop severely in order for
farmers to make it. I did say that this privilege was given to white
farmers during the apartheid era and I do not know why we are not doing it
now. Where possible, jobs must be protected, especially in the Western Cape
where the province produces 55% to 66% of exports and agriculture is a core
pillar of the province’s economy. Jobs in the rural areas are under threat.


I think our MEC is doing a fantastic job in the Western Cape and I want to
laud him here. Hon Minister, you must be commended for speeding up the pace
of land reform through expropriation. I’m happy when I hear that a farm has
been expropriated. And I think that the domino effect will be that people
will come to their senses now and know that they cannot play around.

I want to say, however, Minister, that in the Western Cape we are under
stress, where land claims are concerned. This refers in particular to the
Southern Suburbs, where very few claimants have actually got their land
back. Besides the poor service of the provincial land claims commission,
other reasons cited include insufficient capacity to handle the processing
of claims. I would like you, Minister, to look into that urgently. I think
that the metro is also not helping in this regard in that they don’t want
black people in leafy suburbs.

Land tenure rights remain, and we’ve heard about that issue of farmers
running amok and pushing labourers off their land. We’ve heard about the
Extension of Security of Tenure Act. I think we need to get tough and a new
law has to come about. We cannot have our people on the streets like this.
Land rights and access to land are integral components of empowering
disadvantaged rural workers. We want to say that the UIF supports the
Budget Vote fully and we support the work you are doing. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, officials
from the department, this Budget Vote crystallises our land and agrarian
vision that is based on the expansion of ownership boundaries in
agriculture, fast-tracking land redistribution for the advancement of our
African agricultural heritage and the cultivation of an endless breed of
entrepreneurs in the sector. The challenges of poverty, unemployment,
underdevelopment, landlessness, disease, ignorance and crime could worsen,
should we fail to build our rural economies. It is, indeed, about time for
us to build our vision of a united and prosperous agricultural sector.

The hon Minister said that ours is to act as custodians of sustainable
agriculture in a very challenging era of global warming. Hence it is our
responsibility to cultivate a new breed of agricultural experts in each
multifaceted discipline, by embarking on targeted efforts of fusing
indigenous knowledge with the skills at the disposal of our rural masses.
They are the ones who are largely perceived as survivalist
microentrepreneurs in tattered rags.

We fully agree with and support the Minister in her quest for livestock
massification. The initiative will certainly revive local economies and, as
stated by the Minister, transform dead assets into gold. This is indeed an
era of African agriculture, the revival of shared wealth heritage. Without
any doubt, we find ourselves challenged to consolidate and advance the land
and agrarian ideals as we find them in the Freedom Charter.

There is a need to ensure that we grant support to the deployment of
technocrats and relevant experts in various fields, and to assist the
various municipalities in this particular regard. This would include,
amongst others, representation in agricultural activities and agro-
processing opportunities in all our municipalities and our districts.
Furthermore, this would also include the appointment of agricultural
technicians for each local municipality to advance and support identified
areas.

Of course, we know that this is quite a challenge, but we think it is an
area that needs to be looked at by the department. Then there is the
inclusion of agricultural projects in various municipal IDPs, because we
still find that – especially when we conduct our provincial weeks and when
we take Parliament to the people – there is no integration between the
municipalities, districts and provinces. This also comes out through the
response of the agricultural departments in provinces.

The department needs to ensure that agriculture participates and plays a
key role in the interventions in the second economy, and in linking the
second and first economies, including aspects that we have identified and
which serve as focal points of Asgisa. We noted, for instance, during our
programme in the Northern Cape, that the department had set itself a set of
objectives which we are quite interested in monitoring.

These objectives are: to develop further the already registered goat co-
operatives and the improvement of the genetic material of goats; to develop
further participation of emerging farmers in the ostrich industry; to
accelerate land reform, taking into consideration the identified
challenges, that is, of course, the question of willing buyer and willing
seller; to fast-track the Nguni cattle project; exploration of the natural
organic cattle farming in the newly incorporated area in the Northern Cape;
to finalise the feasibility studies in agro-processing ventures and ensure
that the agriBEE charter is implemented in the province; to popularise the
Micro Agricultural Finance Scheme of South Africa - Mafisa, the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme – Casp, and the LandCare
Programme, because that appears to be one of the key challenges, since our
people are unable to get information on how to access Casp, Mafisa,
LandCare and so forth.

We all agree that, central to the achievement of the 2014 goals and
fighting poverty is the question of land reform. Our land and agrarian
reform is informed by these very same principles regarding the fight
against poverty, people’s participation and economic development.

Our past year’s programme of Taking Parliament to the People has exposed us
to the kind of conditions that our people are faced with daily. With regard
to the programmes that have been put in place for our people, it is very
clear that our people are ill-informed, as I said earlier on, or that the
department does not have a clear and vigorous programme for going out into
the provinces to popularise the kinds of programmes that it has.

Our programme has also exposed us to instances where we have found that
support given to members of the community is only at the initial stages and
after that, people are left on their own. It is important to have follow-
ups to ensure that the kind of programmes we give to our people are able to
translate into actual development-type projects.

There is a great need to assist emerging farmers in all sectors and, in
this regard, I have noted that the hon Watson raised a very important
point. I found it quite interesting that the DA finally agreed with some of
the issues that the ANC has been raising and the kind of state that we want
to build. As we have characterised it, we are building a development-type
state. Of course, that is a state that will be able to intervene and assist
our people, and be biased towards assisting those actual beneficiaries who
come out of the land and agrarian transformation programme.

It is quite interesting that the hon Watson did not speak to the issue
related to the extent to which monopoly capital has played itself out, and
how it seeks to undermine the very same programmes that we want to engage
in, in our country. Regarding the very same issues of the milk shortages or
even the suppression of the farmers by monopoly capital, I find it quite
contradictory that the hon Watson quite comfortably avoided speaking about
that.

A typical example I want to talk about is that of the granddaughter of
Comrade Maxeke. Right now we have a situation where Woolworths is selling
avocados, but where do they get them from? Do they buy their avocados from
her? I don’t know, hon Watson, but there is a particular place where they
buy their products.

Of course, there are very good examples that were put in place in the
country and there are very well-run co-operatives that deal with
agricultural products. To what extent does capital or the private sector
buy into this programme, as compatriots and as patriotic business of South
Africa and also to infuse some sense of co-ordination and ensure that
whatever they have seeks to contribute towards the development of those who
are emerging, not to contribute towards their suppression by way of price
control, thereby killing them in order to monopolise that area of prices? I
find it quite interesting that we are not sticking to those kinds of
things. But I think it is important that we need to talk about this.

I want to speak to the issues related to intergovernmental relations, and I
thank the Minister’s department in the Northern Cape. They came in to
assist the municipality of Pokwani during the roll-out of the human
settlement programme. There was a serious problem concerning the
municipality acquiring land for human settlement purposes and your
department did intervene. I think that’s one good example of
intergovernmental relations and how this can be further developed and
entrenched in our programme of transforming our country.

Chairperson, as the ANC, we support the Budget Vote of this department.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, let me thank
all the hon members who have supported these two Budget Votes. We hope
that, in the spirit of this patriotism, we will be able to move together
and work together as we implement and monitor our plans for the coming
year.

I also want to thank the chairperson for opening with the Book of books. We
have come a long way together, because many years ago we worked for the SA
Council of Churches. I want to remind him that we used to start with
Genesis, chapter 1, verse 24, which says: “We are all created in the image
of God.” We are all created in the image of God, both men and women, and we
are created equal.

I agree with him. Indeed, we are reviewing the willing-buyer-willing-seller
principle. We are looking at other strategies that will fast-track land
reform. I have alluded already to the special purpose vehicle, the SPV. We
are also looking at forms or strategies that will help us limit or have a
ceiling in terms of land acquisition.

There are people who have 20 farms, while there are people who are
landless, who are homeless. I think this cannot be fair. We are also
looking at various strategies and proactive land acquisition; we are
looking at possibilities of land tax; and we are looking at various
strategies. We will be coming to the committee to share some of these ideas
with them later in the year.

I agree also with the Chair concerning the budget allocation, in that,
indeed, it should be informed by the priorities set forth by the President
for the 2006-07 financial year, as outlined in his state of the nation
address, and also in terms of the priorities identified in this Budget
Vote. Of course, this is required by the Public Finance Management Act.
Indeed, as the Ministry, we are working on this.

I also want to say to Mr Watson: I would have thought that, with the new
guard in leadership, there would be a breath of fresh air and not just the
old whining and old scratched record - a litany of complaints. For the DA,
it seems to me it is still business as usual: fighting for white privilege
and white interests and maintaining the status quo.

I think it has not dawned on them yet that it is now time for
transformation. Yes, land is very important. It is not important just for
10% of the population that continues to own over 80% of the fertile,
agricultural land. It is also important to the other 80% that is poor, that
is starving, that is homeless and that is landless.

I think, as government, we are not discriminating against anyone. We are
servicing all farmers, black and white. In the loan book at our Land Bank,
90% is servicing white commercial farmers. I don’t think we can really
complain that white commercial farmers are neglected in this country. Our
Agricultural Research Council, our Perishable Products Export Control
Board, our National Agricultural Marketing Council – all our structures –
are actually servicing, mostly, white commercial farmers. All we are saying
is: Let us look all around us. Let us be fairer and let us distribute the
resources and the services more fairly, particularly to those who were
previously disadvantaged.

On the Zimbabwe issue, of course we know the same old story, but my
observation has been that there is also a lot of artificial amnesia around
this issue. Lancaster House is forgotten. Regarding the commitments and the
promises of Lancaster House, nobody is talking about that today. I’ve just
said that we are paying billions of rands for one land claim. This year we
have paid R1,1 billion.

Now, for poor countries, where do they get all the money to buy the land to
ensure redistribution if they do not have the necessary support? I am just
saying: Let us put the whole matter in perspective and let us be objective
and rational when we talk about these matters.

I also want to say that South Africa has its own laws. South Africa has its
own Constitution, and land reform and land restitution are based on the
laws of South Africa and are prescribed in terms of the Constitution of the
people of South Africa – nobody else.

I also want to advise Mr Watson that we have very clean and pure water
coming out of our taps. We must drink our tap water. Can you help me, Mr
Watson? Advise your friends who are exploiting our people by overcharging
them for water. There are no water farmers that I can speak to. So, I would
like to appeal to Mr Watson to talk to his friends to stop overcharging our
people for water. I’d also like to advise our people to drink our tap
water. It is the safest; it is the cleanest that I have ever drunk.

Regarding milk, I think Comrade Tau has answered very well, but I just want
to say: Let us remember that we have had deregulation in this country; we
have had privatisation which has resulted in conglomerates and cartels.
This is the natural product of capitalism and the free-market system, which
I thought the DA supported and promoted very much. However, if the DA wants
government to interfere in the market, we are waiting for the instructions.
[Interjections.]

To Mr Van Rooyen, thank you very much for your input. On the Extension of
Security of Tenure Act, I want to say, yes, I agree with you – it is not
protective of farmworkers. Yes, we have to look at the shortcomings. We
have to look at the loopholes there. Indeed, we have the prevention of
illegal eviction Bill that is being tabled in Parliament and that is
sponsored by the Minister of Housing, but for implementation it will come
to Land Affairs, as per Cabinet agreement.

I would like to say: Let us work together with the housing select committee
and portfolio committees and ensure that the loopholes in the Extension of
Security of Tenure Act and in the Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act are
closed through the prevention of illegal eviction Bill that we are tabling
in Parliament this year. We believe it will go a long way in protecting our
farmworkers and farm dwellers. So if we work together we can actually
ensure this happens.

To the MEC from KwaZulu-Natal: Thank you very much. I think these are
critical programmes: mushrooms, livestock - amaNguni and food security that
will really help us fight poverty and unemployment in our country. I’m
sure, even as the national government, we have a lot to learn from you.
Those mushrooms are feeding children and families and educating young
children, because the programmes are run by women, most of them being
single, unemployed women. Also, in terms of your amaNguni project, there is
a lot that we are already beginning to diversify and roll out in the
country.

MaMchunu, siyabonga. [Thank you.] Soya is very important. Not only is it
food, but for biodiesel it is the main energy seed that you are going to
use in South Africa.

To the MEC from the Free State, I would like to say that livestock
massification, food gardens and food security, and the area of women and
youth, are all areas that we need to move in.

Regarding Gauteng, we have teams that are working on area-based planning
from the Department of Land Affairs. They are available to work with the
different provinces and municipalities, and I’m sure they have already
started in some of the municipalities such as O R Tambo, Mbombela, and in
KwaZulu-Natal and other areas – although, of course, we don’t have enough
person power there but they are doing their best. Their projects are
already assisting in housing planning and in other industrial developments
in our municipalities.

The water affairs Minister and his department are very close to us. We are
talking to each other. We have joint teams that are looking at how water
can be used and how water rights can be redistributed fairly to ensure also
that agriculture and our farmers benefit from that.

I have already alluded to evictions and the law – prevention of illegal
eviction – that we are putting in place. We are also looking at legal aid
that will assist farmworkers and inform them about the laws and their
rights. We are also appealing to members to use their constituencies to
advise and inform our farmworkers about their rights and the laws. Also,
there are lawyers that are made available by the Department of Land
Affairs, and we can get more information from the department in terms of
how we can assess this legal service.

We are also working with the Deputy President, our departments, the SAPS,
justice, housing, the trade unions and the farmers’ unions to address the
issue of the human rights of farmworkers, and that includes evictions. We
hope that in the near future we will come out with a comprehensive plan of
how we can assist.

Regarding the issue of bursaries, again, that is very important. I know
that in the department we have about 250 bursaries we have given out, and
we are looking at having about 1 000 bursaries per year by 2010. We also
look to members to assist us in informing young people that agriculture is
a very important career. It is one of the noblest professions in the world
today.

Important issues raised by our MEC here in the Western Cape are the area of
fighting poverty and the area of ensuring that we address the evictions. We
are saying that land reform is the one way we can fight evictions, once and
for all. We are looking for land where we are going to settle farm dwellers
and farmworkers, and we believe that, through sustainable human
settlements, we will be able to address all their socioeconomic needs. We
will not be working alone here. We will rope in other departments – Health
for clinics, Housing, Education – to ensure that the needs of the people
who are settled wherever, are also taken into consideration.

We want, therefore, to say – as Mr Tau has said – that it is important to
take agriculture to our municipalities. It must be part of our integrated
development plans, IDPs; it must be part of our local economic development
programmes, LEDs. We have to work on this together with our provinces.
Again, the Department of Land Affairs, as I said, has started with the
planning and also the surveying of the land regarding what must happen
where. I think also, perhaps through the MPs and the MECs, a lot more work
can be done to improve in this area.

Lastly, I want to thank the Chair and the select committee for the support
that they have given to our government and also to the Ministries, and to
both the Department of Land Affairs and the Department of Agriculture.
Sometimes you whip us, and that is not very nice. But, I think, it actually
helps us to move faster and to deliver to our people.

What has also been raised is the importance of intergovernmental co-
operation that is already happening in some of the provinces where you find
that the Department of Land Affairs, the commissioners and the Department
of Agriculture sit together with the MEC and plan and assist in co-
ordinating the work. As the MECs and different departments, we are sitting
together and working out a strategy of how we can actually ensure a much
more co-ordinated programme, not only in agriculture but also in land
administration. This is because I cannot have 100 eyes. The MECs are there
on the ground. They can oversee some of these programmes, and we believe
that will assist us to speed up the process of delivery to our people.

So, I want to say to the MECs, to the hon members: Thank you very much for
the support, particularly for being with us here and supporting our budget.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you very much, hon Minister.
On behalf of the Council, I just want to take this opportunity also to
thank the Minister, the Deputy Minister, the MECs and the special delegates
for participating today.

I also want to welcome the hon Minister of Transport and the MECs from
various provinces and special delegates.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 33 – Transport:

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Chairperson, hon members of this House, my
colleagues, the MECs of transport from various provinces, ladies and
gentlemen, my intention today is to elaborate on and deal with issues that
relate to implementation, co-ordination and integration tasks across the
three spheres of government.

The Department of Transport faces challenges of ensuring the provision of a
safe, reliable and affordable transport system in South Africa and of
implementing our programme at the various levels of government. Enhancement
of our institutional arrangements and the rationalisation of procedures are
required to achieve the improvement of our collective performance, which is
fundamental in meeting our objectives of increased investment, job creation
and poverty alleviation.
All these objectives translate into an improved public transport system and
transport infrastructure, as well as the reduction of the costs of doing
business in our country. As you may well be aware, our budget allocation
for this financial year is the cornerstone towards the achievement of the
above objectives and creating a transport legacy for South Africa. It may
be useful for the House just to note the budget allocations for this
current Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period.

The following budget allocations will benefit public transport over the
MTEF period: an amount of R8,5 billion for passenger rail infrastructure;
R5,5 billion is for national roads infrastructure; R19,2 billion for
airports infrastructure; and R9,2 billion has been set aside for the public
transport infrastructure grant for the 2010 Soccer World Cup. The
implementation of the 2010 Transport Action Plan is well on track and the
host cities have already submitted detailed plans that have already started
to be implemented, regarding all those physical projects. All these
projects are funded through the public transport infrastructure and systems
grant.

The provincial 2010 Soccer World Cup projects in host cities and their
budget allocations include the following: Rea Vaya in Johannesburg, at a
cost of R329 million and integrating trains, taxis and buses for 2007; the
inner city distribution and bus rapid transit networks in Tshwane at a cost
of R104 million for 2007; in Nelson Mandela Bay, the Khulani Corridor - a
bus rapid transit project costing R200 million in the next three years; the
bus rapid transit in the Klipfontein Corridor along the N2 Airport City in
Cape Town; the Warwick Junction in Durban inner city; and the road
infrastructure upgrading projects in Limpopo.

Outside of this Budget Vote there is an additional R3 billion that has been
allocated through the provincial infrastructure grant for the Expanded
Public Works Programme focusing on rural access roads.

On issues of public transport, I want to indicate to this House that the
essential feature of the public transport strategy 2007 to 2020 is the
phased extension of mode-based vehicle recapitalisation into integrated
rapid public transport networks. These networks will comprise an integrated
package of rapid rail and bus rapid transit priority corridors, especially
in major cities of South Africa.

There are, of course, catalytic projects in implementing this public
transport plan. The goal of these catalytic projects is to initiate the
implementation of integrated rapid public transport networks in targeted
municipalities simultaneously with the current nationwide roll-out of
accelerated modal recovery interventions.

The integrated rapid public transport network package will require a city-
wide transport authority-controlled network of rapid public transport
corridors together with feeder systems of smaller buses, taxis, bicycles,
pedestrian access as well as metered taxis and park-and-ride facilities.
This service will have high frequencies of approximately 5 minutes during
peak periods, 15 minutes off peak along trunk corridors, as well as between
16 and 24-hour operations. Full special needs and wheelchair access for all
trunk corridor rail and road vehicles will also be implemented.

On the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme, I would like to indicate to this
House that this programme is on track and its physical implementation
commenced on 28 October last year at Botshabelo, in the Free State. To
date, more than 4 271 old and unroadworthy taxi vehicles have been
physically scrapped in all nine provinces of this Republic, with a total
amount of R213 550 million given to operators as a scrapping allowance.

The acceleration of the programme will ensure that 80% of the taxi fleet
will be recapitalised by 2010. We will also now focus on the 18 000 old
vehicles through law-enforcement initiatives and encourage their owners to
recapitalise in order to meet our target for 2010.

The process of conversion of permits to licences is well on track and more
than 100 000 operating licences have been approved by operating licensing
boards. Provinces will have to ensure acceleration of the uplifting of all
these licences.

I want to put it on record that, as government, we condemn the violence
that we have seen in Gauteng recently. The Department of Transport is
working closely with law-enforcement agencies to bring those responsible to
book. This is clearly a reflection of resistance to regulation of the taxi
industry, particularly route rationalisation.

The taxi violence will not stand in the way of ensuring that we regulate
the taxi industry in South Africa. My department is already developing a
law-enforcement and compliance plan with the Road Traffic Management
Corporation as part of the regulation of the taxi industry which, as we
know, is an integral part of the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme.

On the other hand, we will be extending the bus subsidy to an integrated
road-based public transport subsidy framework which will also benefit the
taxi industry, but only in a regulated environment.

Progress has also been made in the preparatory work for implementing road-
based public transport contracts with the publication of the model tender
and contract documents last year. In this regard, public transport services
are already being designed, based on existing transport plans in provinces.

You will recall that in December of last year, Cabinet approved the
National Rail Plan, a consolidation of regional rail plans which specifies
and quantifies the specific infrastructural and rolling-stock interventions
required to implement the rail plan strategy. In terms of commuter rail
infrastructure, a short-term - that is three to five years - funding
requirement of R4,5 billion that relates to an annual requirement of R1,8
billion has been identified to fund specific infrastructure interventions
on priority commuter rail corridors.

We want these services to be felt by the majority of South African people
so that their social wellbeing can be improved and they can have access to
economic opportunities. These regional rail plans were developed in
consultation with provinces and metropolitan authorities, taking into
account strategies set out in the metropolitan authorities’ integrated
transport plans. These regional rail plans clarified the role that the
commuter rail should play in the context of an integrated approach to
public transport.

Special attention is also being given to the improvement of security
measures within the rail environment. The strategy includes a co-operative
agreement with the SA Police Service to invest in security-related
infrastructure required for the establishment and roll-out of a dedicated
railway police unit. The roll-out of police members is on course, with 700
railway police currently active and 5 000 members will be in place by 2010.

To date, the construction of police stations in Cape Town, Retreat,
Bellville and Philippi have been completed. Construction has also started
in Durban, Reunion, Cavendish, KwaMashu, Tshwane, Denneboom, Mapobane,
Germiston, New Canada and Johannesburg. The Cape Town network has already
seen a 31,6% reduction in crime-related incidents and fare evasion has been
reduced from 9% to 4%.

I also want to mention that early this year we appointed the board of the
National Ports Regulator. This is a major milestone in the transformation
of our maritime industry and will go a long way in contributing to economic
growth, promoting equity of access to ports and monitoring activities of
port authorities to ensure that they perform their function in accordance
with the National Ports Act. For the first time in our country, we will
have an independent body whose primary function is the economic regulation
of activities in the maritime sector.

In anticipation of an increased number of air travellers for the 2010
Soccer World Cup and beyond, the Airports Company of South Africa, Acsa,
has commenced a five-year investment programme in all major airports in the
country, totalling R19,2 billion. All provincial airports are being
upgraded to meet the increased influx during 2010 and beyond.

It has been projected that Acsa would handle more than 31 million
passengers by 2012. The following improvements have been proposed to
accommodate the predicted increase in the movement of passengers and cargo
between 2007 and 2010: O R Tambo International Airport - R2,65 billion;
Cape Town International Airport - R714 million; Upington - R33 million;
Bloemfontein - R43 million; Durban - R65 million; the new Durban airport at
La Mercy - R1,5 billion; East London - R91 million; George - R15 million;
Kimberley - R8 million; and Port Elizabeth - R52 million.

Members of my department and the Auditor-General have a scheduled meeting
on Monday, 11 June, to discuss the management report which has been the
subject of media discussion recently concerning the eNatis, and we will
thereafter issue a joint communiqué and provide much-needed clarity and
details on this specific matter. However, I can confirm here today that the
period during which the audit was conducted was June 2006, when the current
eNatis was still under construction and, largely, the challenges were
overcome during the migration process from the Natis to eNatis.

Also, the challenge relating to the capacity of the vehicle registration
functionality of the eNatis system, which we experienced in April and May
of this year, is a thing of the past. As I stand before you today the
system is stable and operating optimally, performing in excess of 500 000
transactions per day.

I also want to state that we have invoked clause 26, together with schedule
15, of the contract with the service provider which commits the service
provider to ensure the smooth transfer of the system to government and
systems optimisation. Within the next 30 days we shall finalise a transfer
management plan and we are confident that the transfer will take place
within a capped period of 12 months.

Let me indicate that, regarding the monorail, I have since met with the
Gauteng provincial MECs of finance and transport, following their public
announcement of the monorail project. [Interjections.] We have all agreed
that the proposed monorail would be put on hold until such time as the
necessary process, including consultation, has been undertaken. We also
agreed that the proposal should be open, transparent and that it must take
into account approved and funded transport plans aimed at enhancing the
efficiency of the current rail, bus and taxi operations within the public
transport system.

This means that Gauteng province will review the proposal and develop a
sound business case. Thereafter, there will be broader consultation with
national, provincial and local government. The proposal will be subjected
to the normal processes of government and then submitted to myself for my
consideration.

In the period under review, Cabinet approved the road infrastructure for
South Africa which is intended to embody the roads policy in South Africa
and a blueprint for roads development planning and provision of all roads
authorities. The budget of the SA National Roads Agency has increased from
R2,1 billion in 2005-06 to a projected R11,5 billion in 2009-10, which will
allow us to expand the footprint of roads in our country.

As I have already indicated, the National Treasury has granted an
allocation of R3 billion for the EPWP road construction, which will include
labour-intensive road construction and maintenance over the current MTEF
periods. Our three concession contracts, the N3-N4 Platinum Corridor and
the N4 Maputo Development Corridor, continue to facilitate improved trade,
tourism and intergovernmental relations, thus providing faster, safer and
more reliable transport as well as building the economy of our country.

The department, together with Sanral, will continue with its public-private
partnership concession programme. It is currently developing projects such
as the N2 Wild Coast toll highway between Durban and East London. The Wild
Coast road was identified as one of the areas for strategic development, in
accordance with government’s spatial development initiative strategy as
long ago as 1995. It will not only give access to the untapped potential of
Pondoland but, in so doing, address the primary inequality, namely lack of
access, that has led to this being the most impoverished region of South
Africa. We expect to see the construction of this important road starting
before the end of the year.

The Sani Pass road project at the border of South Africa and Lesotho brings
in regional co-operation and integration, as articulated in the SADC
Protocol on Transport, Telecommunication and Meteorology. The total cost of
this project is R160 million and on the South African side, the footprint
of this initiative will extend as far as Pietermaritzburg, which is a town
with the potential to provide a variety of economic services to Lesotho.

The Department of Transport has developed integrated rural mobility and
access project implementation plans for three nodes. The areas that need
maintenance are: Sekhukhune, in Limpopo, a cross-border development between
Limpopo and Mpumalanga; O R Tambo in the Eastern Cape; Umkhanyakude and
Umzinyathi in KwaZulu-Natal. At O R Tambo Municipality the department has
targeted eQawukeni and Port St Johns, Thombo, as key focus areas for a
variety of nonmotorised transport initiatives, including freight logistics
co-ordination.

In conclusion, Chairperson, ladies and gentlemen, I must stress that
interventions within our road networks should influence transformation and
strongly bridge the gap between the first and second economies. Our public
transport services should meet the ever-increasing demands of commuters and
provide a car-competitive solution in order to reduce congestion on our
roads.

Hon members, I would also like to take this opportunity to thank you,
particularly the members of the select committee and the MECs of transport
in the various provinces for their very active participation throughout the
year. We are looking forward to a very healthy debate today since I am no
longer an acting Minister of Health. Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister. On behalf of the
Council, may I also thank you for participating in our summit when you were
acting Minister of Health. Thank you very much; we really appreciate it and
more so since you accepted the invitation at the last moment. Thank you.

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, hon members, hon Minister, I don’t know how we are
going to be healthy, but I think we can be healthy.

Once more, this august House is afforded an opportunity to engage on one of
the most important policy debates in this country. I say this because it is
only through the movement of our people, goods and services in the country
that we shall observe economic growth and development. Therefore it is
important that the country should be in a position to provide such
infrastructure that will enable and co-ordinate such movement in an
efficient, economic and safe manner.

For the past year, we have observed stability brought into the transport
sector by the department, although it was not an easy one. The passing of
the National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill put the Taxi
Recapitalisation Programme in motion, although it did not come easy, owing
to the lack of understanding and, in some instances, sheer ill-informed
resistance. The department, together with some provinces, was able to kick-
start the programme.

The committee has noted the snail’s pace implementation owing to a slow
start in big provinces such as Gauteng. We have, however, been informed by
the department that, during this financial year, we will see greater
participation in such provinces that will be able to make the department
meet its targets.

Our outreach programme to provinces, that is Taking Parliament to the
People, provincial weeks or committee oversight visits to provinces and our
interactions with operators, has presented us with new challenges that
these operators experience. The most important and common of these amongst
all operators is access to funding.

In most instances, the operators, as we all know, owing to the dual nature
of the South African economy, are trapped in the second economy. They do
not have bank accounts and if they do, their credit standing is not good.
If it is in good standing, you will find that they are blacklisted and,
therefore, it becomes difficult for them to use their scrapping allowances
as a means of putting down a deposit for a new vehicle.

I think that is one of the key pleas that has been coming out. They were
asking: “How can Parliament assist us?” They said: “We want to scrap these
cars, but we don’t have the means.” Some of them would not even say that
they were blacklisted but would just lambast the banks and so forth. If you
really intervene, you would then get to see that the poor operator had been
blacklisted, hence the support against the blacklisting of people by the
credit bureaus.

Today we are reminded by the hon Minister of his clarion call made in the
year 2005, which he termed: From Road to Rail. When making that call, we
take it that the Minister was responding to the extent to which our roads,
especially national roads, were getting congested by trucks, therefore the
incapacity of our roads to carry larger volumes.

At present, as previously noted, most of our people still rely on road
transport to travel in the country. Hence, of course, this is not the only
reason for fatalities on our roads but it contributes to that. We believe
that our people need to be encouraged at all levels regarding this project
in order to use the rail transport in particular, because, obviously, they
will not be able to afford the flights, due to the skewed economic
position.

We have also noted that those that heeded the call of the Minister were
very disappointed concerning the level at which they got services,
particularly with regards to rail services. I raise this because of the
unreliability of our Shosholoza Meyl. It is always late and therefore
people can hardly plan their journeys properly, apart from the fact that
waiting rooms at the stations are always congested, unhygienic, with
unfriendly security officials.

Having raised this aspect with the department, we were assured that the
process of taking over Shosholoza Meyl by the department was at an advanced
stage, as the Minister said. We hope that through that process, the
department will then be able to inject new life into this instrument which
our people rely so much on. We, therefore, wish the department to speed up
this process in order for us to be able to join the Minister’s call on our
people to get on Shosholoza Meyl and get off the roads.

Linked to this, we have also observed a clever move by some businesses in
the country. We have noticed that most, if not all, of the truck companies
are exploiting the inconsistent licensing regime. Some of these truck
companies operating from Gauteng and the Western Cape prefer to register
their trucks in the Eastern Cape and the Northern Cape because it is
cheaper there, and then use those trucks where their businesses are
registered. While noting that vehicle licensing is a municipal function, it
is our belief that if some sense of consistency is brought into this entire
licensing regime, we will then be able to curb some of the problems that we
are experiencing.

Let me take this opportunity to thank you, hon Minister, for finally having
included Upington and for officially announcing it today. Since I am from
the Northern Cape, it is our belief that this is one aspect that will be
able to bring about some sense of economic life in that area of Upington.
It will also contribute to the level of skills development and the
retention of young people in the area. It will revive the economic
activities in that particular area.

The department is promoting infrastructure investment in the transport
sector in order to contribute towards job creation and the use of labour-
intensive construction methods. This objective will be co-ordinated through
the implementation of the road infrastructure strategic framework. We have,
as a committee, agreed with the Minister of Public Works that we will lobby
the Minister of Transport and that all his infrastructure projects must
have a heavy influence through the principles of the Expanded Public Works
Programme in order to expand the foundation of our job creation and so
forth.

Through these programmes, as a committee, we are convinced that we will see
long-term job creation for community members, decreased unemployment in our
communities, development of small businesses and co-operatives, upliftment
of the community by providing them with infrastructure that they will use
for a very long time, and improvement of the condition of existing roads
infrastructure by routine and periodic maintenance. We, as a committee,
believe that having established these co-operatives, informed by the
principles of the Expanded Public Works Programme, maintenance will then
also serve as that instrument of a long-term basis of economic activity for
these areas.

We will transfer skills by providing training for the communities involved
in the Expanded Public Works Programme. One of the key areas identified by
the director-general was the fact that the budget allocation and
expenditure in the Department of Transport reflects a steadily increasing
trend for programmes and priority placed on the transport sector by
government. The Department of Transport will, through its promotion of
infrastructure programmes, in the main, ensure that all its programmes and
others that will be coming through its intergovernmental relations also
work towards ensuring that the EPWP is taken into account.

Let me take these last few seconds just to say that one of the things that
we have observed with the director-general was the fact that there is a lot
of money that provinces are getting through Treasury, for transport
purposes. I hope the MECs are here, just to ensure that whatever they get
they build into the national objectives of transport, and in particular
rural transport. I think the hon Dlulane will speak more on that.

We think that through such an exercise, we will not then see money lying in
provinces for purposes of road infrastructure development but not being
utilised. The national department is then left with the entire burden of
responding to the nation as to why our roads are not being upgraded,
especially the N12 between Kimberley and Johannesburg. Thank you very much,
Chairperson - before you stop me.

Nksz B N DLULANE: Sihlalo obekekileyo, Mphathiswa obekekileyo, baPhathiswa
abalapha kunye nawo onke amalungu ale Ndlu, kuqukwa nabathunywa
abakhethekileyo, kuluvuyo kum ukuthabatha inxaxheba kolu hlahlo lwabiwo-
mali lwalo nyaka-mali wowama-2007-08.

Ndiyabona ke ukuba kukho uchatha, kwaye ndinomnqweno wokuba nibe
ngathinithi xathu kwingxowa yezothutho. Nditsho kuba noko kudala sisenza
isankxwe ngomcimbi wazo. Ndikholelwa ekubeni xa sithetha ngezithuthi
zikawonke-wonke sidibanisa nezi zisemaphandleni nasezifama.

Xa Mphathiswa, lisithi isebe lakho liza kwabelwa esona sixa-mali sikhulu,
ama-62,4 ekhulwini, mali leyo ezizigidi zezigidi zeerandi ezili-9,9, esiya
kwabelwa ezothutho zikawonke-wonke kwisabelo esipheleleyo sonyaka-mali wama-
2007-08.

Kwakhona, sithi huntshu! ngeziseko zoluntu kwezoololiwe okanye i-passenger
rail infrastructure, kodwa mna njengomthunywa ophuma nosinqa sakhe
siseMpuma Koloni, andanelisekanga yinkcazo nengxelo yololiwe oza kudula-
dula phakathi kweMonti noMthatha. Uvuyo lwathi lwakhona xa kwakupapashwa lo
loliwe, kodwa asikamboni.

Liyazi ke isebe ukuba lisishiye noko umnqwazi ungaqinanga yinkcazo
abasinike yona ekomotini. Ngaba lwenziwe ngokwenene uvavanyo lwempumelelo
lweli linge? ndibuza kuba namhlanje ukhona noMphathiswa wePhondo laseMpuma
Koloni. Xa besibuza ukuba uya kude ube kho nini na lo loliwe Mphathiswa
uRadebe, iminqwazi yethu ayiqinanga yimpendulo esiyifumeneyo.

Sifumanisa ukuba asazi ukuba uphando lwempumelelo lwayo lwenziwe njani xa
kukho ezi ngxakana basixelela ngazo. Ukuba ke nina nobabini, nomntakwethu
utat’uMhlalo, ningakhe nisanelise ngeempendulo ukuze kuqine iminqwazi,
singavuya.

Sihlalo obekekileyo, kulo chatha simfumanayo, langa isebe lingabonelela
abantwana basemaphandleni ngokunjalo nabasezifama. Siyayibona indlela
abahlupheka ngayo, behamba imigama emide ngeenyawo ukuya ezikolweni,
kumaqhwa, benganxibanga zihlangu.

Mphathiswa uRadebe, ndiyabona ukuba kukho nto obuthetha ngayo, yokuba kukho
imadlanyana engangezigidi zezigidi ezi-3 zeerandi engabonelela la maphandle
anje ngeli ndiphuma lulo naphaya kuwe kwaZulu-Natala. Loo nto khange
siyifumane kula nkcazo besiyinikiwe, nto leyo eye yasihlupha ngoba asiva
kuthethwa ngezothutho emaphandleni.

Kodwa ke xa bendibhala, ndilungiselela ukwenza igalelo lam kule ngxoxo,
ndiye ndathi urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC ongowabantu bonke unayo indlebe
yokuphula-phula. Ngokubhekisele kwezi zikhalazo endigqiba kuzibeka apha,
ndiyazi ukuba uza kuzihoya. Kodwa lingatshonanga elanamhlanje ndiva wena
sele uphendula kuza kuba kho ubonelelo phaya kooomaQawukeni naphaya kooPort
St Johns, eThombo. Ndicinga ukuba le ntetho yam ilapha ngentla
iyaphenduleka kule ntetho yakho ugqiba kuyenza. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms B N DLULANE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, Ministers present and all
the members of this House, including the special delegates, it is a
pleasure for me to participate in this debate on the Budget Vote for the
2007-08 financial year.

I notice that there is an increase, and I wish that you could add more to
the budget for transport. I say this because we have been complaining for
quite some time about this matter regarding transport. I believe when we
talk about public transport we include those that are in the rural and
farming areas.

Your department, Minister, has stated that it is going to allocate the
largest amount, 62,4%, which is R9,9 billion, to public transport, of the
full budget allocation for the 2007-08 financial year.

Again, we say well done with regard to the provision of the train
infrastructure or the passenger rail infrastructure for the people, but as
a delegate who comes from and was born in the Eastern Cape, I am not
satisfied with the explanation and the report regarding the train that will
travel between East London and Mthatha. There was joy when the announcement
about this train was made, but we have not seen it yet.

The department is aware that they left us unsatisfied with regard to the
explanation they gave us as the committee. Was the research about the
success of this initiative really done? I am asking because today the MEC
from the Eastern Cape is present. When we asked when this train is going to
operate, Minister Radebe, we were not satisfied with the response we got.

We discovered that we do not know how the research concerning its success
was done when there are problems like these they are telling us about. If
the two of you, you and MEC Mhlahlo, can give us an answer that will
satisfy us, we would be happy.

Hon Chairperson, regarding the increase that we are getting, I wish the
department would make provision for the children in the rural areas and
also those on the farms. We see how they are suffering, walking long
distances to school, in the cold, without shoes.

Minister Radebe, I remember that you mentioned something, that there is a
small amount of money, which is about R3 billion, that can provide
assistance to these rural areas like the one that I come from and your
KwaZulu-Natal. That we did not get from the explanation that was given to
us, and that worried us because we hear nothing concerning transport in the
rural areas.

But, as I was writing, preparing my contribution on this debate, I said
that the ANC-led government, that is for everybody, does have ears to
listen. With regard to the complaints that I have just mentioned here, I
know that you will respond to them. Just before the end of today I hear you
telling us that there will be provision for places like Qawukeni and Port
St Johns, Thombo. I think what I have said above is being answered by the
speech you have just made.]

Our communities in rural areas face transportation burdens daily that limit
their participation in the mainstream economy thus entrenching their
isolation. The problem is not transitory; socioeconomic and political
relations in South Africa are characterised by dualism between urban and
rural areas, developed and developing rural areas and between women and
men. This dualism is damaging. Unless radical interventions are introduced,
it is likely that our rural areas will continue to reproduce this dualism
which leads to socioeconomic deprivation.

We need to join hands to ensure that we solve this transportation problem
in our rural areas, because the reduction of this burden will also be
viewed as an indicator of the success of interventions aimed at improving
the quality of rural life. It can only be accomplished by first
understanding the nature of this burden and how the responsibilities for
transport are distributed between men and women; and by looking at who has
the greater burden and how this creates special gender-specific needs.
Rural communities perceive transport not as a problem in itself but always
as part of a far more general sociopolitical and economic problem.

Decision-makers, including ourselves, have grossly underrated the
significance of understanding the needs of rural communities as a basis for
a generative, innovative solution to rural transport and development.

Mphathiswa, ubukhe wasixelela apha ukuba kukho izabelo ezikhoyo, kanti ke
yena utata uTau uthethe kakhulu ngezi zokubhabha. Mna ke ndinombuzo wokuba:
Ngubani oza kukwazi ukusijongela ukuba phaya emaphandleni kukho izithuthi
eziza kube zilungiselelwe ukuba zisetyenziswe nangabantu abakhubazekileyo?
Andikayiva kakuhle impendulo ngokubhekisele koko, Mphathiswa. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Minister, you have told us that there is an allocation that is available,
whereas hon Tau spoke a lot about aviation. My question is: who is going to
see that transport is made available to people with disabilities? I have
not heard a clear answer with regard to that, Minister.]

We need to improve the material conditions of rural women in order to
improve access. The first step is to understand women’s travel needs and
the extent to which lack of access constrains the fulfilment of those
needs.

It is also critical to investigate how gender and gender relations affect
transport deprivation and how more appropriate and more gender-sensitive
interventions can help reduce this deprivation. Priority should be given to
ensuring continuous and hardened tracks and paths to enable efficient cart
and bicycle transport to the nearest major routes.

This budget reflects our collective efforts as a nation to transform our
transport system to a more efficient and sustainable medium that supports
growth and equitable access to opportunities and development. As you are
aware, practice is the only criterion of truth. It is through practical
action that transport will become the heartbeat of the economy and social
development, and deliver jobs and shared growth.

We have begun to take the necessary and real steps for a lasting legacy in
transport, not just for 2010, but also for the benefit of our society
beyond 2010.

Mhlekazi, ndifuna ukukuva uthetha ngesa sikhululo seenqwelo-moya othi xa
ugoduka usiya emakhaya, ukhe uqale ususe iinkomo neebhokhwe phambi kokuba
ihlale inqwelo-moya, le yaseMthatha. Andikakuva kakuhle ngokubhekisele
kuso. Uthethile nangesiya siseMonti, Mntan’enkosi.

Likhona ixesha esade sancama saya kwehla phaya eMonti ngoba sasisoyika ezaa
nkomo nezaa bhokwe ziqala zidediswe phaya eMthatha. Ndiyakucela ke
kuMntan’enkosi ukuba ancedisane notat’uMhlahlo sibonakale esa sikhululo
ukuze sifakwe kuhlalo lwabiwo-mali.

Besikhe sathenjiswa ke nangesiya siphaya eBulembu, eBhisho - kuthiwa
yiBulembu na kanene? Andazi nokuba uMphathiswa lo wam, uThobile Mhlahlo,
unayo kakuhle na imali ukuze asiphucule esa sikhululwana. Ibikhe yangathi
siza kakuhle, kodwa ndinethemba lokuba uza kusichazela ukuba kuqhubeka
ntoni na. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Sir, I want to hear you talking about that airport when you go home. In
the rural areas you have to clear the cows and the goats from the runway
before the plane can land – like at the Mthatha airport. You also talked
about the one in East London, Your Highness.

There was a time when we gave up and we ended up landing at East London
because we were scared of those cows and goats that have to be removed at
Mthatha. I am appealing to you, Your Highness, to assist MEC Mhlahlo so
that the airport can be seen so that it can be included in the budget.

Promises were also made about the one that is in Bulembu, at Bhisho – is it
called Bulembu? I do not know whether my Minister, Thobile Mhlahlo, has
enough money to develop that small airport. There were signs of
improvement, but you are going to tell us what is going on.]

Unity in action for better transport is the lasting legacy we could give to
Dr Phillips and all our fallen heroes. May he rest in peace!

Xa ndihlala phantsi, siyabulela kwisebe lakho, Mphathiswa. Oko lathi laba
khona ndatsho ndayeka ukuthetha ngezothutho emaphandleni. Siyabona nokuba
uhlengahlengiso kushishino lweeteksi okanye i-taxi recapitalisation, uze
nalo kakuhle. Enkosi nakuwe, Mlawuli-Jikelele, nakubo bonke
abakungqongileyo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[In conclusion, we are grateful to your department, Minister. Ever since it
came into existence, I have not stopped talking about transport in the
rural areas. We can also see that you are handling taxi recapitalisation
well. Thanks to you as well as the director-general, and to your
subordinates. [Applause.]]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo noNgqongqoshe, boNgqongqoshe bezifundazwe, unwele
olude! Udaba esizokhuluma ngalo wudaba oluthinta imiphakathi eminingi
kakhulu. Kubi nje ngoba sikhuluma ngalolu daba amathunzi esewuka, amathunzi
ezintaba eselingana. Abantu abasezwa-ke ngoba abasekho omabonakude
nabezindaba sebelele manje, ngakho-ke abantu abasezukuzizwela ngokwabo
mathupha. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson and Ministers, provincial MECs, long live! The
issue that we are going to discuss affects too many communities. The only
snag is that we are discussing this whilst it is getting late, at sunset.
People will not hear this because television and media personnel are asleep
now, therefore people will not hear for themselves then.]

Since the Department of Transport positions itself as being the heartbeat
of the South African economy, it is no doubt part of our lives. An
effective transport system is essential to the wellbeing of any country or
community, but the effective operation of that system depends on the
interrelationship of a number of factors which include governance,
responsibility and funding.

The transport system serves not only as a conduit for mobility, but also as
a vehicle for economic growth, poverty alleviation and social inclusion. We
are aware of the preparations for the 2010 Soccer World Cup. The government
needs to improve the quality of transport operations and to broaden access
to affordable public transport. It is very important that the transport
legacy remains good after the completion of the World Cup event.

The allocation of R15,9 billion for the 2007-08 financial year has
increased by 15,4% compared to the previous financial year’s budget of
R13,7 billion and the annual increase of 10,3%.

Kufuna ukuba lukhunyana kancane. Ngizwile ilungu elihloniphekile lithinta
laphayana maqondana nodlame olubonakalayo eGauteng. Sengathi sizoba
nenkinga uma sibhekene nayo i-taxi recapitalisation. Uma ngisenesikhathi,
ngizothinta lapho maqondana nokuthi yini engiyisolayo kulokho. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[It is a bit difficult. I heard a hon member touching on the violence that
is looming in Gauteng. It looks as if we will have a problem when facing
taxi recapitalisation. If I still have time, I will look at that with
reference to what I find fault with.]

The IFP is still waiting to see how the Ministry and the Department of
Transport will transform the taxi industry through the Taxi
Recapitalisation Programme, since the budget allocated for taxi
recapitalisation has declined from R530 million in 2006-07 to R332 million
in 2007-08. This reduction may have an impact on the continued viability of
the project.

The IFP welcomes the move to restructure public transport subsidies, but
the other worrying factor is that we do not hear much about subsidisation
of the taxi industry. The only compensation that they will get is that R50
000 scrapping allowance for taxi owners wishing to scrap their old taxis.
Compensation of that magnitude will not even serve as a deposit for a new
vehicle. I am afraid that we will see quite a lot of people leaving this
industry and becoming the employees of those who will have the means to buy
the new vehicles that meet the standard requirements of a public vehicle
laid down through government specifications.

However, we welcome the incorporation of a further 3 000 km of provincial
roads into the national road system and that has added to the increase in
expenditure.

Uma sengibuyela kulolu daba esikhuluma ngalo lwe-taxi recapitalisation,
kukhona umdlalo oke waba khona kumabonakude. Angazi-ke noma abaningi
bawubona yini na. Ubukhuluma ngayo le-taxi recapitalisation kodwa ubugxile
kakhulu nasekukhulumeni ngoNgqongqoshe wezokuthutha KwaZulu-Natali.

Kulowo mdlalo kade kulingiswa izenzo ezenzeka ngempela emgwaqweni, lapho
abantu becathamelana ngogaqa lukaBathonyile futhi becathamelana ngenduku
yegwala. Abalingiswa kade bethi, “Loya uyithengeleni leya nqola? Uyena
osezochitha umsebenzi wethu ngoba usethenge inqola entsha. Yingakho-ke
thina singeke sisaba nendlela yokusebenza ...”

USIHLALO WOMKHANDLU KAZWELONKE WEZIFUNDAZWE: Sesiphelile-ke isikhathi
sakho.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Kodwa-ke kunjalo kukho konke esengikushilo. I-IFP isakuxhasa
Ngqongqoshe, ithi: Qhubeka usithole lesi sabiwomali. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[When coming back to the issue of taxi recapitalisation that we are
discussing, there was a drama that was aired on the television. I do not
know if most of the people saw it. It was about this taxi recapitalisation,
but was mainly concentrating on the MEC for transport in KwaZulu-Natal.

That drama portrayed exactly what is happening on the roads, where people
ambush one another using an assortment of weapons and guns. The characters
were saying, “Why did that one buy that car? He is the one who is going to
destroy our business because he has bought a new car. That is why we will
not have ways of working ...”

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Your time has expired.

Mr M A MZIZI: But all of what I said is true. The IFP still supports you,
Minister. It says: Go on, get this budget.]
Mr S J MOHAI (Free State): Chairperson, Minister of Transport, hon Jeff
Radebe, colleagues from the provinces and hon members of the NCOP, it is a
pleasure to participate in this policy debate on the Transport Budget Vote
at a time when transport occupies a very central role in our efforts to
bring about shared economic growth, more so when the majority of our people
are confident that work is under way for the provision of a safe and
reliable transport system in South Africa.

Our slogan “Transport - the heartbeat of South Africa’s economy” augers
very well for this year’s national government theme, that is “Renewing our
national pledge - a national partnership to build a better life for all”.
This is because, at the core of building a better life for all is the 2014
vision of halving poverty and unemployment. This programmatic slogan of
“Transport - the heartbeat of South Africa’s economy” therefore positions
us and properly locates our role as a transport portfolio in the economic
activities that are already dominating the government’s programme of action
in this second decade of freedom.

Accelerated infrastructure development for building a better life for all
was our central theme that we announced when we tabled our provincial
budget. In this input we will therefore highlight our work with regard to
transport infrastructure and measures to improve transport services in the
province.

Our current budget allocation for roads is the single largest allocation
and alone it accounts for 58% of our entire departmental budget for this
financial year. Whilst we appreciate this substantial raise, we continue to
acknowledge that it is still not enough, considering the huge backlog we
have in our roads currently, which we estimate to be at about R8 billion.

Another factor that has to be seriously taken into account is the
escalation of the market prices in the construction industry. The
significantly increased traffic volume of freight and private vehicles on
our roads, in recent times, has also had a negative impact on the roads.
The Free State tends to be seriously affected, because we are
geographically located at the centre of our country.

Our strategic approach for addressing overloading and traffic growth on our
roads includes the following: construction of a traffic control centre
which includes permanent weighbridges at strategic points and to complement
an effective overloading control plan through the utilisation of mobile
weighbridges.

During the past financial year, as part of our efforts to improve our road
network infrastructure, we overspent about R279 million on our roads. This
budget allocation and expenditure are deeply rooted in our policy
trajectory of utilising infrastructure development as a catalyst for
economic growth and development.

Since April 2006 a total of 309 km of secondary roads have been
regravelled, 315 km of roads were paved and eight bridges were repaired. As
part of this project, we have increased our road construction and
maintenance in less developed rural areas of our province.

The importance of developed road infrastructure in economically less
developed rural areas cannot be overemphasised. It will lower the costs of
economic activities in the agricultural sector and help revive other
industries that have potential in our rural areas. Road infrastructure
development in rural areas helps ease the movement of people and delivery
of social services, such as education and health. These improvements also
help people with easy access to main corridors as well.

The other social and economic benefits that have accrued from our roads
project execution is that we have increases and continue to increase the
Expanded Public Works Programmes in terms of labour intensiveness,
contractor development and skills development. We are therefore
implementing learnerships that are covering 114 learner contractors who are
involved in construction and maintenance of roads. On completion of the
learnerships, we will have clear exit opportunities that will empower
learner contractors further.

In order to sustain the momentum generated by the winning of the access
road of Makwane as the best EPWP project in the country, we have further
allocated five roads to ensure that we duplicate the same model. The
department, as part of road safety measures, has commenced with the
construction of 19 km of palisade fencing along the N8 corridor in the
Thaba Nchu area.

Also, as part of our improving access and mobility in rural areas, we
welcome a feasibility study that will be conducted in one of the rural
districts in our region, Thabo Mofutsanyane, as part of the presidential
nodal point. Once this feasibility study is completed, it will also help us
respond in a much more thorough way, in terms of social access and for
rural communities to access markets.

Three projects stand out as our main transport infrastructure projects in
the province. These are the N8 road development corridor, the Mangaung
transport intermodal facility and the Harrismith freight logistics hub. The
N8 corridor development will also include the utilisation of commuter rail
services between Bloemfontein, Botshabelo and Thaba Nchu.

Our pre-feasibility study indicated that already there are more than 40 000
people travelling on this road on a daily basis. This study also showed
that the introduction of an integrated public transport network with
commuter rail serving the line between Botshabelo, Thaba Nchu and
Bloemfontein will bring about greatly reduced passenger fares, safer
community trips and would also reduce the current operational subsidy
requirements for buses in favour of commuter rail. We are working with the
national department and the SA Commuter Rail Corporation to get the project
to unfold speedily.

It is also pleasing to report that we have made tremendous progress towards
concluding the interstate bus line negotiated contract, which includes
partners in the taxi and small bus operators regarding the mainline
subsidy.

The construction of Bloemfontein intermodal connecting rail, bus and taxi
services will be one of the major infrastructure projects as we move
towards the 2010 Soccer World Cup. A total budget of R230 million which is
being made available will be managed by the Mangaung municipality as the
host city. We are however playing an active and collaborative role in this
project. The actual construction of the project is well co-ordinated
together with the province.

The Harrismith logistical hub is certainly one of the transport
infrastructure projects that will give concrete expression to the slogan
“Transport - the heartbeat of our South African economy”. It will link well
with both Durban and Johannesburg through the entry corridor. This is a
project we are pursuing in partnership with the national department and it
is one of Asgisa’s projects in the Free State.

We are about to conclude a process of establishing a provincial databank
which will serve as an important tool for management of freight in the
province, and we hope to launch this freight databank during the month of
October, which is known as Transport Month.

Since the launch of the taxi recapitalisation in October last year, we have
surged ahead with the actual implementation of taxi recapitalisation. I can
say that the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme in the province is firmly on
the agenda and we are making progress in that regard. We are also
responding to the challenges as they arise, as the Minister has indicated -
challenges such as the slow pace of uplifting operating licences, and we
are working together with the provincial taxi council in this regard.

The process of formulation of the transport master plan has been initiated
by the national Department of Transport and has been warmly embraced in the
province. We are active participants in this process.

In conclusion, as we said when we began this input, the achievement of the
economic and social goals of the 2014 vision remains our strategic task. We
dare not lose focus. We will therefore work harder to position transport as
a greater contributor to shared growth and development. Under the visionary
leadership of Minister Radebe, we are confident that we will rise to the
challenge. The Free State therefore endorses this Transport Budget Vote as
tabled. Thanks. [Applause.]

Mnu A WATSON: Sihlalo, sendikhona. Ndiyabulisa, Mphathiswa namalungu ale
Ndlu. Uyazi, kule nyanga iphelileyo ndacela uMphathiswa andincede ngaba
bantu abaneenwele ezinde abasebenza eNamibia naseBotswana.

Zange abe nandlela yakundinceda, ndiyakholwa ngenxa yokuba ndandithetha
ngesiNgesi. Ngoku ndicela ngesiXhosa. Mhlawumbi uza kundiva namhlanje.
[Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I am here already. I greet the Minister and
Members of this House. You know, last month I asked the Minister to help me
regarding the whites who are working in Namibia and Botswana.

He could not help me. I believe it was because I was speaking in English.
Now I make my request in isiXhosa. Possibly he will hear me today.
[Applause.]]

I am, of course, hon Minister, referring to the question of transport
operators involved in transborder freight. It must be acknowledged that
road freight has become extremely competitive and only those within the
industry who are well managed and staffed by competent and well-trained
employees can survive.

It must further be acknowledged that, with the enormous growth in road
freight, the industry has become a major employer and therefore an
important role-player in job creation and alleviation of poverty. Clearly
therefore, hon Minister, your department has a duty to protect those
deployed and employed in the industry whilst facilitating and encouraging
growth through interaction with other departments.

Last year I alerted you to the fact that trade with our neighbouring
countries is growing by the day and cross-border freight has consequently
become big business and, therefore, also big employers. I further pointed
out that our South African freight operators are being disadvantaged to the
benefit of their opposition transporters from across the borders. This is
because of the inappropriately heavy cross-border levies imposed by our
neighbouring states whilst their own carriers are not levied when leaving
their home countries and we do not levy them when entering South Africa,
which gives them a distinct advantage over our own entrepreneurs.

Your explanation Minister was that we have a duty towards uplifting and
building our SADC neighbours. Whilst accepting that, they must surely also
have a duty towards us. Swaziland and Lesotho, for example, have moderate
cross-border levies but the same cannot be said for other countries. The
levy for the trip into Namibia, for example, was R1 000 when I addressed
this matter with you last year. That levy is now close to R1 300, which
amounts to an increase of 30% in the past year.

I know that these visiting transporters pay toll fees in our country but,
good heavens, Minister, so do our road freight operators pay levies in our
country! I ask you: What has happened to “Charity begins at home?” My plea
to you, hon Minister, is therefore that cross-border levies for freighters
entering our country must at least be matched to ensure level playing
fields for all the competitors or alternatively, we must negotiate a free
trade agreement in this regard, but I leave it up to you.

While speaking about borders and seeing that you referred, hon Minister, to
security that is being upgraded, one of my colleagues has pointed out to me
that the trains leaving our country are not searched at the borders but
they are searched at Germiston and this leaves the field wide open for
contraband and all sorts of illegal actions taking place. Maybe you would
like to have a look at that.

The increase in road freight is, of course, in part due to the systematic
collapse of our rail transport operations and rail infrastructure - a
problem that I must admit we must lay squarely at the feet of the previous
government. This has had a further particularly negative impact on my
province of Mpumalanga which is the pantry, playground and powerhouse,
particularly of South Africa.

Now, why do I say that? I say that because, simultaneous to the rail
collapse came an increase in the use of electric power and particularly
electricity from coal-fired power stations. Therefore Mpumalanga, being the
powerhouse of the country, not only because of all our power stations but
also because of our massive reserves of high quality coal, was hit hard.

But, Minister, you know best of all that coal is heavy. It has to be
transported by road and those heavy loads destroy our roads. The result of
this is the near total destruction of many of the roads in Mpumalanga,
especially in the southern highveld regions around towns such as Ermelo.
This was clearly caused by the onset of a national crisis and Mpumalanga
cannot be expected to foot the bill for the rehabilitation and maintenance
of these roads.

We have been advised, Minister, that an agreement has been reached between
the national Department of Transport - your department - and the Mpumalanga
provincial government but certain delays are being experienced. In the
meantime, the so-called toll routes are deteriorating at an alarming rate
and deadly motor accidents are not only destroying vehicles, but are also
maiming accident victims and even costing lives. We ask you, hon Minister,
what is causing this delay? Maybe you can answer that for us.
Modulasetulo ke rata ho bua le ausi Beauty. O lla ka Boema fofane ba
Mthatha, na wa tseba hore moo ke hlahang teng, e leng Lesotho, ha re na
dikoloi. Re na le dipere, ditonki le difofane feela. Jwale, re rutile
diphohofolo tsa rona hantle. Ha di ntse di itsamaela fatshe mona, ha di
qala di utlwa modumo o reng: “driiii” di a tseba hore ke sefofane. Hobane
dikoloi ha di yo, di a itsamgela feela. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph
follows.)

[Chairperson, I would like to address myself to my sister, Beauty, who is
complaining about the Mthatha airport. Did you know that where I come from,
which is Lesotho, we don’t have any cars? We only have horses, donkeys and
aeroplanes. As a result, our animals have been well trained. When they are
out grazing, as soon as they pick up the sound of an engine, they know that
it’s an aeroplane. Because there are no cars around, they roam about
freely.]

Hon Minister, it is late in the day so we must have some smiles. I have
heard that the hon Minister of Health, as you have also announced, will be
back on her job tomorrow. So, hon Minister, you can now at last put away
your part-time stethoscope and thermometer. So, please, will you use some
of the extra 50% of time available to you to attend to the important
matters that we have raised here today? I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M L FRANSMAN (Western Cape): Chairperson, Minister Radebe, hon Speaker,
members of the NCOP, comrades, friends, in its State of the World’s Cities
2006-07 report, the UN-Habitat appraised the effort of a number of
countries for what it described as an exemplary commitment to large-scale
slum upgrading and service provision. This is the United Nations report. In
South Africa we refer to slums as informal settlements. But, whatever the
name given to them is, conditions are essentially many times the same -
whether they be on the outskirts of Nairobi, Kenya, Manila, Cape Town, Rio
de Janeiro etc.

The encouraging news for South Africa and for this government specifically
is that in our efforts to improve the lives of the many millions of our
citizens, we still feel that the effects of racial discrimination and
deprivation have not gone unnoticed. The UN report says that South Africa’s
informal settlement growth has fallen markedly.

Members and comrades, at the risk of being biased, I believe therefore that
our national transport department has thrown its energies into fighting
poverty with an even greater commitment than the city fathers and mothers
of Rio de Janeiro and other areas. And I think much of that credit has to
go to our hon Minister Radebe. So, I would like to thank the Minister today
for two things: for having put his shoulder to the wheel and for having
brought boundless energy to this – and we have just heard about the other
part-time responsibility that he has had.

I think we all know what a difficult and complicated department Transport
can be. In fact, nationally, it has been called the heartbeat of South
Africa’s economy. The Western Cape government has defined it also as the
path breaker for economic growth. The municipalities in the city have
defined transport as the central question. Therefore, through the budget
and the support that we are giving as a province, this policy directive is
moving from strategy and conceptualisation to rapid implementation and
action. Therefore I am delighted to report, on behalf of the Western Cape,
that we are singing from the same sheet as the national department.

In his Budget Vote speech, Minister Radebe said:


 Through our interventions in the transport sector we have facilitated the
 economic and social transformation of our country, with targeted
 programmes aimed at providing access to work opportunities in our cities,
 integrating our human settlements and business districts and providing
 rural access roads to our poor and marginalised communities.


This confirms what I have alluded to at the beginning of my address, that
our national department has the muscle and the resources to play a critical
role in helping to transform South Africa’s informal settlements by turning
them into places that people can begin to start calling home, and providing
them with proper roads and a proper transport system. Therefore, it’s not
transport for the sake of transport, it’s transport in the context of
change.

I am convinced that we can build another type of road – a road that will
offer a way to what many have referred to as our second economy and to
bring the second economy in line with the first economy. Therefore the
issues that the Western Cape has identified relate to the roadworks on the
Klipfontein Corridor and the N2. And, as you go from the airport into Cape
Town, you can actually see progress regarding an extra dedicated lane for
public transportation which will cost approximately R400 million.

We have ambitious road-building and repair programmes that will make
travelling easier, especially for communities who rely on public transport.
In the context of our own budget which I will be discussing in the
legislature on Tuesday, approximately R1 billion has been set aside for
EPWP roads projects, the upgrading of new roads and road maintenance, with
a particular focus on the Gansbaai-Elim road where we have been able to use
the road to create economic opportunities for very poor rural communities.

The issue of smart cards for an integrated public transport system will be
a reality sooner rather than later. So, it’s not only about building those
roads; in the national transport action plan we are also saying we need to
focus on the operational processes related to public transport and
transport in general.
In the context of the subsidy, we have decided, in line with the national
agenda, to bring alignment between small bus operators, bus operators and
taxi operators. But, Minister, I can say that the provincial plan that we
have brought out for bringing in essentially new entrants into the process
and the possibility of reflection on a mobility upgrade in that type of
budget allocation need to be taken into account. And this is a business
plan that we will provide to the national department in order that there
can be reflection on it.

But critical to transport, in terms of this national action plan, we have
also agreed at provincial level, as the Minister indicated, that the
institutionalisation between the spheres of government is important. I am
proud to indicate that we have created in the metropolitan area, an
intersphere structure between the provincial and national and city levels.
In the context of the national level, the SA Rail Commuter Corporation is
sitting on that one, specifically.

Concerning the rail corridors and reflecting on what the Minister said
around rail safety, for the first time in many years we are busy with
essential extensions of new rail infrastructure into the poorest of the
poor areas. We are busy completing a Khayelitsha rail extension of
approximately 4,5 km. Underpinning this, we have also provided R29 million
for the construction of phase one of Sandkraal Road to improve the road in
support of the public transport system. These improvements include a
pedestrian and cyclist-friendly environment for thousands of people who use
the road each morning.

Speaking of nonmotorised transport, the Western Cape department is at one
with the national agenda regarding the use of bicycles. Therefore, in this
financial year, we will be distributing approximately 3 000 bicycles mainly
to schoolchildren who would normally have to walk long distances to and
from school, and especially in the poorest of the poor rural areas.

However, in order for us to address this agenda of transport in this
province, with a budget of no less than R1,5 billion, we have identified a
critical challenge in terms of price hiking when it comes to tenders and
also the challenges around skills. We have put aside no less than R15
million to support 230 architects, engineers and quantity surveyors who are
studying – and 90% of them are black engineers, quantity surveyors etc.

So, I would like to conclude this address by once again thanking the
Minister for the work he has put in over the past year. I would like to
thank him for that inspiration because not so long ago we were also visited
by the national director-general in a strategic meeting, and she indicated
that she was in fact going to another province. That very strategic meeting
was not focusing on generalities but on details, in terms of the provincial
action plan. Therefore we as the Western Cape would also want to support
this particular policy directive given by Minister Radebe. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr A SINGH (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister of Transport,
provincial MECs of transport present here, hon members of the NCOP, mayors,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I am honoured here this
afternoon to be able to participate in this debate on Vote No 33. I bring
apologies from the KwaZulu-Natal MEC for transport, community safety and
liaison, hon Bheki Cele, but I will try and do my best.

Chairperson, we in KwaZulu-Natal would like to join the march on the paved
road to a better life for all. I wish to convey our support for the Budget
Vote of the Department of Transport. It’s clear that, given the necessary
resources, the department will continue to advance the objectives of
economic growth and strategic delivery in the fight against poverty and
inequality.

I concur with the hon Minister that, indeed, development in transport
infrastructure and service delivery are fundamental in meeting the
country’s objectives of sustained economic growth, increased investment,
job creation and poverty alleviation. It is on this basis that we in
KwaZulu-Natal agree on the initiation of targeted interventions focused on
the advancement and empowerment of women through the Vukuzakhe programme,
which is a great success. There is truth in the old adage: Empower a woman,
empower a nation. We in KwaZulu-Natal are reaping the benefits of women
empowerment through the Zibambeleni and Vukuzakhe programmes.

Since 1994, we have seen development in the rural areas and the
construction and maintenance of roads and bridges so that learners and
educators can go to school without taking their clothes off after rains
because of swollen rivers. KwaZulu-Natal is a rural area and thus has the
largest number of marginalised rural communities. These communities are now
integrated into the road sector through the Zibambeleni and Vukuzakhe
maintenance programmes. The Zibambeleni and Vukuzakhe programmes are having
a remarkable impact on addressing poverty and gender stereotypes in the
road maintenance and construction industry.

The Minister’s point on effective and sustainable growth, seen in
conjunction with investment and transport infrastructure, cannot be denied.
It is from this premise that I proceed to contend that investment and
transport infrastructure are fundamental and central to sustainable growth.
In KwaZulu-Natal we have observed and experienced this change and we fully
support this line of thinking.

Regarding unemployment, it must be acknowledged that our communities in
rural areas and those areas that were previously disadvantaged are now
enjoying the dignity of being employed through the programmes that the
transport department is progressing with. This, however, needs to be
expanded with greater vigour so that more of our people can be employed and
taste the fruits of labour and feel the security that accompanies the state
of being employed. For a meaningful interpretation of investment and
sustained growth in this context, the most feasible interpretation is that
the transport sector has a pivotal role to play in the economic growth and
democracy of this country.

The concepts we are involved with in transportation include freight,
logistic aviation, ports and rail, the safety and security of transport
services, an infrastructure that requires sophisticated multi-nodal
planning, most efficient and inter-nodal transport facilities and
streamlined intergovernmental arrangements for interpretation in
Parliament.

In light of this, I believe I should mention that the transportation of
goods by rail needs to be re-examined. I trust that such an examination can
reveal that the transportation of goods by rail is not being maximised and
exploited to its fullest potential. I also trust that objective studies may
reveal that transportation of goods by rail can be more economically viable
and that saving the resources in the industry will benefit the consumer.

Such a study, I believe, will also show that road maintenance will be more
cost-effective and, as previous speakers have mentioned, this will reduce
damage to our road surface by heavy trucks and trailers. The traffic on
freeway routes would be reduced considerably and the road accidents and
fatalities on our roads would be significantly reduced. Remember: One death
on our roads is one death too many.

I believe that we should investigate traffic on roads and the viability of
rail as a matter of urgency, more so in the light of the developments in
KwaZulu-Natal concerning the Dube Trade Port and the King Shaka Airport. Of
course, these will help during the 2010 Fifa World Cup. All developments on
our roads will help the 2010 World Cup and will enhance the experience of
visitors travelling to and from their destinations.

A study must also be carried out to examine the incentive of road transport
so that rail-road transportation of goods can be encouraged from ports to
other provinces and cities. Focus must be put on delivering the goods
speedily and effectively to their final destinations. Such a study would
lead to the enhancement of commuter railway transport.

We are also assessing available roads for 2010 readiness so as to direct
our efforts to more effective transport planning for our 2010 Soccer World
Cup. eThekwini has already started implementing the 2010 Transport Action
Plan. As a host city, in our province of KwaZulu-Natal we look forward to
an environment where there will be reduced dependency on private cars and
where there will be promotion of public transport usage during and after
the Fifa World Cup.
We believe that the 2010 Soccer World Cup is not going to be the be-all and
end-all; we have life after 2010. Whatever roads we develop now will help
our communities after the World Cup. The progress made through the
integrated multi-nodal facilities for long-distance public transport
services is of great importance regarding the reality of the 2010 Fifa
World Cup.

Chairperson, all the nonsense about South Africa losing the hosting of the
2010 World Cup is now a thing of the past. We are going to host the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup - and with great success. We are committed to making
this World Cup one of its kind. I believe that we will give the Minister
the fullest support in seeing that transport is enhanced during this
period. This will make a success of the World Cup. We need to ensure the
safety of our visitors and that their transport is safe, whether they
travel by air, road or rail.

KwaZulu-Natal welcomes all plans to supplement the public transport action
plan for host cities. I believe that the amount of R9 billion over the next
MTEF period will be spent on host cities to prepare for this massive event.
Undoubtedly, I hope that KwaZulu-Natal will receive a lion’s share of that
R9 billion. Transport during the 2010 Fifa World Cup will greatly
contribute to the success of this great event.

We definitely support Budget Vote No 33 and all the initiatives of the
Minister of Transport. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr T MHLAHLO (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP and hon
Minister Radebe, I wish to participate in supporting this Budget Vote by
highlighting a few successes from the department of roads and transport in
the Eastern Cape. We are committed to using all available resources to
improve transport infrastructure and advance public transport solutions in
the province through involving as many role-players as possible.

Our growth and development plan highlights the importance of transport
infrastructure investment in realising our economic growth and targets
towards 2010. The new approach that has been adopted by the provincial
government, which involves integration of roads and transport planning, has
given us an advantage in broad infrastructure development strategy.

This approach has enabled us to complete a number of critical roads in our
province, such as phase 2 of the road from Cala to Lady Frere, which cost
R220 million; Mthatha to Qokolweni road; N2 to Kei Mouth, which we visited
with hon Minister Radebe; phase 1 of the Ugie to Langeni road; and the
Maclear to Mount Fletcher road.

Further, we have reconstructed roads between Adelaide and Fort Beaufort,
and we are currently working on a road from Middeldrift to Alice. We all
know very well that the University of Fort Hare is one of the important
institutions in our society.

As we speak, work is in progress concerning the construction of roads in a
number of areas, such as the construction of phase 3 of the Maclear to Mt
Fletcher road, and we are spending R150 million on this project; the
Middeldrift to Alice road where we are spending R207 million; phase 2 of
Ugie to Langeni where we are spending R420 million; Ugie to Langeni phase
3, which is going to cost us R348 million; phase 1 of the Mount Frere to
R56, also called T15, where we are going to spend R347 million; Sulenkama
hospital road where we are spending R240 million; and Xuka River bridge
where we will spend R9 million.

The department has also embarked on special mega projects that embody the
principles of the Expanded Public Works Programme, regarding our road
construction. Through this method, we have introduced a sustainable job
creation approach which does not contravene the conventional method of road
construction.

We also believe very strongly that we can employ as many communities as
possible in road construction. We have teamed up with 170 community members
to upgrade a road that is 27 km in length and this is going to provide job
opportunities for the next two-and-a-half years. This is sustainable
because these communities will be working permanently and they will be
getting salaries monthly through this kind of intervention.

The community has been introduced to skills acquisition, including some
engineering skills, and we collaborated with the Department of Labour in
this. The chairperson of the standing committee of my province, who is also
here today, visited that project. It looks like there is war in that town,
because everybody wakes up in the morning, goes to one project and puts in
their efforts as members of society.

The residents have introduced a protective clothing project. The overalls
and protective clothing used in this project are actually made by the very
members of society. We believe that this culture could make decisive
interventions in spending and in infrastructure development, especially
roads. Other locals have been trained in various fields such as fencing,
brick making, bricklaying, building of culverts and bridge construction.
Today we are happy to announce that the department is currently at an
advanced stage with the planning and implementation of similar projects.

We took a position in the department that, in building or maintenance of
any road from 100 km downwards we will use this kind of concept because we
believe that it is sustainable, it is defensible and it provides
sustainable job opportunities, especially for members of rural communities
in our area. We have again introduced this concept in dealing with the 17
km stretch of road between the N10 and Alicedale.

Communities are already embarking on massive training and they are going to
kick-start the implementation of this project. The department is ready to
integrate this as a matter of policy within our own operations. We are
still committed to initiating projects in areas like Ncanarha, Isilimela
hospital, the Motherwell to Addo area, East London to Kidds Beach area, and
Peddie to Birha River area. These are all multi-year projects, which are in
support of the 2010 Fifa World Cup, and the provincial growth and
development plan targets. We are also looking forward to some kind of
interventions in terms of funding, because provinces have no capacity
outside the broader allocations from national government.

The total provincial road network is 43 465 km, of which only 5 102 km are
surfaced and 38 363 km are gravel. In response to this challenge, the
department will start in the next financial year with a 10-year plan to
change the ratio of surfaced to gravel roads. Eighty per cent of the 43 465
km road network will be changed into surfaced roads and 20% will remain
gravel.

Due to the scarcity of quarry material, alternative surfacing technologies
will get a stronger focus in this year in our province. We have embarked on
alternative material, because we strongly believe that spending through
gravelling is not sustainable.
The department of roads and transport is undertaking an investigation on
the possibility of tolling strategic routes like the R72, between East
London and Port Elizabeth, and the route running through Ncanarha
interchange and N2 to Nahoon interchange, East London. This is a vital
intervention. We have already approached the private sector, because the
two areas link the Coega and East London industrial development zones.

Regarding the Expanded Public Works Programme, as part of our contribution
to government we have introduced a new programme called the Sakha Isizwe
community–based transportation programme. The hon chairperson of the
committee visited almost all these projects. Through this programme we have
been able to build and maintain our roads, especially in rural areas, while
simultaneously creating work and fighting poverty through labour-intensive
methods.

Presently, we have 1 995 household contractors in this programme throughout
the province, on which we have spent about R12 million. These people work
for not less than two years in these jobs; these are not three month and
six month jobs, but they are sustainable jobs. If we could get more
support, in terms of funding, we could spread this, because in our six
districts we intend to employ 5 000 workers in each district so that,
finally, we can have 50 000 people who will be working permanently in the
Eastern Cape.

We have spent about R10 000 in facilitating this kind of approach for each
district so that we can kick-start this programme. It has resulted in the
construction of approximately 300 km of new low-volume roads and the
maintenance of approximately 5 500 km of the existing roads.

The targeted roads will assist in improving accessibility to economic
tourism opportunities, schools, clinics and government services. These
remain the key targets and challenges, as we know that the Eastern Cape is
more rural.

We are making decisive interventions on the aviation front. I want to
invite hon Watson to visit Mthatha Airport, because I think his perception
is a little bit inconsistent with the reality of life. Umthata Airport is
currently undergoing a very important and vigorous revamp. We have put in
new infrastructure there and we are already working on Bisho Airport. As
you know that the hon Minister of Transport has identified Bisho Airport as
an entry point in the Eastern Cape. The reason is that the airport has
capacity for the landing of Boeing 747s. We do not have such capacity in
all other airports in the Eastern Cape, but it has not been utilised for
many years.

We have introduced the Blue Skyway Aviation Strategy, which we launched on
2 October 2006 in an effort to maximise the potential of the Bhisho and
Umthatha Airports ...
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon MEC, your speaking time has expired.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr J BOKABA (Gauteng): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Members of
Parliament, representatives of various communities, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of Gauteng province, we would like to
express our gratitude for the opportunity we have been given today in order
for us to speak on the challenges facing our province and our country. But,
before I can continue, I would like to say to the Minister and to the House
...

... ngwana’ phoša dira ga a bolawe. [O tsenwa-ganong.] [... minor mistakes
do not warrant exaggerated punishment.] [Interjections.]]

In line with the 2007 Budget Vote by Minister Jeff Radebe, as presented
earlier on, the Gauteng portfolio committee on public transport, roads and
works is working together with the provincial legislature as well as the
Gauteng department of public transport, roads and works with a view to
addressing the challenges and the milestones highlighted therein.

Our work entails ensuring accountability for the utilisation of public
resources to the extent that it takes into account the needs and the views
of all stakeholders and the various local communities. Ours is the role
that also includes advocacy for people-friendly and environmentally
sustainable policies and programmes that seek to help our country to
redress historic socioeconomic development imperatives in our society.

We also provide oversight on the application of the democratic principles
and practice in the institution of the state, ensuring that there is fair,
accessible and equitable service delivery for all the citizens of our
country and residents of our province. We are doing work to ensure that
programmes currently being implemented and rolled out in the province are
in line with our country’s aim of contributing to the government’s
strategic objective of ensuring the attainment of the millennium goals of
halving poverty and unemployment by the year 2014.

On the other hand, the mandate of the department entails the provision of
an integrated, effective and efficient transport infrastructure and
transport system, based on the principles of safety, reliability,
affordability, accessibility and environmental sustenance; infrastructure
renewal, upgrading and expansion of socioeconomic infrastructure,
management, maintenance and utilisation of Gauteng’s provincial property
and assets in a manner that is administratively just to all the residents
of Gauteng, and the implementation of the Expanded Public Works Programme
across the province in pursuance of contributing to the Millennium
Development Goals of halving poverty and underdevelopment through
accelerated job creation and sheer economic growth.

In this regard, we have taken note that the Gauteng department of public
transport, roads and works’ programme of action for the year 2007-08 seeks
to help achieve the following strategic objectives of the Gauteng
provincial government: to stimulate faster economic growth and drastically
reduce unemployment; to fight poverty and build secure and sustainable
communities; to develop healthy, appropriately skilled and productive
people; to deepen democracy and nation-building, and realise the
constitutional rights of all; and to build an effective and caring
government.

The department’s key programme areas include the following: the Gautrain
Rapid Rail Link; transport infrastructure development for 2010;
implementation of capital expenditure and Expanded Public Works Programme
projects, including the 20 identified townships; development of all roads
in the aforementioned 20 identified townships; provision of an integrated
intermodal public transport system, including provisions for 2010; and
development of the freeway improvement plan for Gauteng province and the
implementation of the better road plan, both of which are aimed at the
provision of an integrated road network transport that is also public-
friendly and biased towards mass mobilisation.

Road construction activities will prioritise accessibility and mobility for
previously disadvantaged areas. The revitalisation of existing roads to
accommodate priority lines for public transport will also be attended to.
Other measures will be taken to ensure a public transport system that is
user-friendly and to address outstanding links in the road network,
especially in respect of freight congestion and hazardous traffic
congestion.

Gauteng has over the past two-and-a-half years seen an increase in public
participation on issues of public transport, resulting in further
actualisation of the deepening of democracy and the various platforms for
public discourse brought about by the democratic dispensation.

Campaigns such as Transport Month have enabled our province to promote
public transport as a sustainable means of travel for the people of our
country. Of significance, in this regard, is the collective commitment made
by the public transport operators towards the improvement of a quality
service.

We are also encouraged because we have learnt that the Gauteng portfolio
committee on public transport, roads and works has managed to work with the
taxi industry resulting in commendable co-operation by more than 35 000
operators in a campaign to get operators to apply for the conversion of the
50 000 or more old radius-based taxi operators’ permits to the new route-
based operating licences.

In the same vein, the formation of the Gauteng Commuter Organisation in
August 2006 is an indicative of the unity and growth of the broad
partnership between commuters, government and public transport operators
concerning the matter of public transport in the province. This will help
government’s efforts aimed at ensuring that the voice of commuters becomes
an integral part of public transport planning in particular and transport
in general.

We have learned that there is currently an advanced work permit being done
towards the establishment of a single transport authority for Gauteng,
further laying the basis for united service in the province whose various
municipalities have become city regions. In this regard, institutions of
government and all stakeholders have also seen to the signing of the
intergovernmental transport charter, a document that spells out common
programmes for transport integration between local and provincial spheres
of government.

We also need to take cognisance of the rapid growth in the demography of
the province, as demonstrated through rapid urbanisation and population
increases, indicating a growth in demand for essential government services
...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Mr J BOKABA: Hon Chair, I would like to say that Gauteng supports the
budget.

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs, members and officials, the
early moon landings were much more than a triumph of science and
technology, much more than a race between two super powers, much more than
the situation between the Northern Cape and Western Cape or a triumph over
gravity and space; what they did was to give us the first opportunity to
view our world from the outside.

Aleksei Leonov, the first man to walk in space, described it thus:


   The earth was small, light blue, and so touchingly alone, our home that
   must be defended like a holy relic. The earth was absolutely rounded. I
   believe I never knew what the word “round” meant until I saw earth from
   space.

Another cosmonaut, Sigmund Jähn, described his experience in these words:


   Before I flew, I was already aware of how small and vulnerable our planet
   is, but only when I saw it from space, in all its ineffable beauty and
   fragility, did I realise that humankind's most urgent task is to cherish
   and preserve it for future generations.

The mysteries of the first space travellers and the spiritual understanding
they awakened in the world of human beings, presaged a deepened sense of
our planet and the life it gives to our people. The impetus that propelled
the astronauts and cosmonauts into space was man-made. The message they
brought back was universal: Our world is beautiful and fragile; we neglect
and abuse it at our own risk.

This seems to suggest that the focus on the global and the preservation of
the local are not two separate things but should be seen as a seamless way
of integrating the lives of human beings and the wellbeing of the human
environment within the context of the planet we all share.

Taken as a whole, the previous government created a transport system around
national goals that were designed to accomplish employment creation for a
privileged class of citizens, and engineered to support spatial
dispensation of separate dispersion with no rational long-term economic or
social basis. This was a system that perpetuated itself into the
postapartheid era, hon Lamoela, and a system that the national Department
of Transport has begun to address.

There has been a serious lack of integrated transport planning for urban
transport in South Africa in the past. The former government’s masterplan
was to segregate South Africa’s various population groups into well-defined
geographical areas and townships. Railway infrastructure was provided to
serve these townships which were located far from city centres. Fewer
services were provided by bus operators.

In spite of the fact that all South African citizens can now live anywhere,
the former segregated townships will remain as a demographic feature of
South Africa for many years. Rail services to these townships must be
improved and integrated with convenient road feeder services in such a
manner that commuters will support these intermodal services. And here I
would especially plead, Minister and MEC, that you look at our Metrorail
system to make it safe for our people to use. I think hon Lamoela doesn’t
know what the Metrorail system is, so we will take her on a train ride.

In line with international trends, traditional population concentrations
near city centres have spread to the suburbs. Many businesses and
industrial establishments have moved to new decentralised development
areas, spread far and wide. This has forced homeowners and company
employees to rely ever more on motor vehicle transport, leading to
increased traffic congestion.

The challenge is now to provide attractive public transport services
whether road, rail or nonmotorised transport. This important budget debate
today will, I hope, take the implementation of how we do this to a new
dimension, in our country. It will help us move forward together towards
development solutions that focus on the local, while collectively
considering the future of our country in a broader global context. It will
also underline, I believe, our imperative of creating a better life for all
in South Africa, because it is only in a better South Africa for all that
we can develop and sustain a transport system that will bring us all to
shared prosperity.

This means that we need to see sustainable development as the very bedrock
of all our efforts and endeavours in South Africa. It means that we must
see it as a holistic enterprise, a loop that links our communities,
government and business sector in a continuous process of renewal and
sustained growth.

We must understand - to borrow the phrase of the labour movement – that,
“An injury to one is an injury to all,” hon Watson; and in the words of the
poet, John Donne, that “No man is an island, sufficient unto himself”, like
the DA has painted itself in Cape Town. For better or worse, our future
depends on our ability to work collectively for the benefit of all.

In practical terms, this means that we need to base our socioeconomic
systems on sustainable transport services. In South Africa, this means that
we need to look carefully at our strategies for creating livelihoods in our
transport system. It means that we need to face the challenges of poverty
and unemployment, that we must find and develop sustainable strategies to
deal with transport services and that we must confront and abolish the
inequalities and divisions that are the historical legacy of our country.

All this implies that if we are to survive and thrive as a country, as a
nation, as a region and as a world, we need to co-operate and collaborate
on every level. We need to agree on the folly of short-term and greedy
solutions to problems that ultimately affect us all, and find ways to
extend our strategies for survival and for the sustainable public good of
our people and the environment in which they exist.

Again, we need to consider what contribution our own skills and traditions
can make to our economic development, as we work towards linking the first
and second economies. While we do so, we need to look at the lessons we
have learnt about the conservation of our energy resources, about how to
avoid the fatal effects of using up our renewable resources and making use
of technologies that are less energy-intensive.

We also need to take on board the concept of what we mean by growth. We
need to revisit the concept of trickle-down growth, and consider, instead,
the notion that sustainable development must underpin everything we do and
inform all our decisions as we seek to develop our economy in ways that
promote shared endeavours and shared growth.

I assume my time is fast running out and this clock is very fast, Chair. I
think there is something wrong with it. [Laughter.] In other words, South
Africa must become a home for all. It must belong to all who live in it,
and it must benefit its present and future generations. Because it is
fragile, it must be nurtured and cherished. Because it is vulnerable, it
must be defended and strengthened. I hope the DA listens to this: Because,
like the planet that the cosmonaut, Aleksei Leonov, saw from space, it is a
home, I quote, “That must be defended like a holy relic.”

I want to conclude with the poetic elegance of Heather Robertson. And I
quote ... The DA doesn’t know Heather Robertson. [Interjections.] I quote:


   Scratch beneath the skin of every struggle and feel at the heart of it
   all, love of life for humanity, the roots of the tree of progress.

That’s the tree of progress which the ANC government has made in all the
years and in these 13 years. I believe much progress has been made by the
hon Minister, MECs in their respective provinces and the directors-general
in their departments. We want to thank you for that progress. Minister,
continue on the road of making South Africa a better place in which to
create a better life for all. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Thank you, Chairperson, and all the members who
participated in the debate. I’m going to be brief in my response, starting
with the chair of the committee, the hon Tau.

On the issue of the Expanded Public Works Programme, you would be aware
that the R3 billion that has been set aside for the EPWP has been as a
result of the collaboration between the Department of Transport, the
Department of Public Works and the National Treasury. I want to assure you
that I am a converted person. [Laughter.]

I started the public works programme way back in 1994, so I should know
that we need to ensure that it happens; not only in the road sector but
also with all infrastructure we need to use labour-based construction
methods so that we are able to enhance employment creation every time we
provide infrastructure. This money is over and above the portion of the
equitable share to the three spheres of government. So, I just wanted to
clarify that.

On the issue of access to funding for taxi operators, the department has
been engaging with the banks to address this specific problem. The
indications that we are getting from all these financial institutions is
that they are willing to look at the value of the business, especially the
operating licences that can be used as collateral.

Simultaneous to that, you would recall that Santaco has been engaging with
the major financial institutions that support the taxi industry. This is so
that that can also cover the entirety of the taxi industry in South Africa.

On the issue of road to rail: We need to ensure that this concept is aimed
at ensuring that we use the appropriate mode for appropriate cargo that has
to be moved, or the people that have to be moved, in areas of our country.
In other words, this has to be done in a rational manner so that we are
able to be in line with the rate of investment to revitalise rail. You
would be aware that Spoornet is currently spending billions of rands in
order to ensure that they increase freight rail in South Africa.

On the issue of rural transport access: we need to ensure, as we indicated,
that integrated rural mobility access is based on our understanding of
addressing the transport needs of our country. The department, together
with all provinces, is developing and dealing with the rural access road
network. Also, as I have indicated, there is a special allocation of
R3 billion, and the provinces themselves have their own budgets that they
can utilise in building these rural access roads in South Africa.

On the issue of nonmotorised transport: we are far advanced in developing
that strategy. It has been to Cabinet. We have to consult with other
government departments. But we are also implementing it at the same time in
as much as the Shova Lula initiative is well advanced. We believe that we
are going to be on course in providing a million bicycles by 2014.

Regarding Mthatha Airport, I think hon Mhlahlo has already explained about
Mthatha. I can just indicate, over and above the comments that he has made,
that as a department, we are busy developing what we call a national
airport development plan to cover all airports over and above those that
are owned by the Airports Company of South Africa, Acsa. Mthatha will be
part of that plan. So, when that plan is ready – towards the end of this
year – we will be able to indicate what can be done.

On the issue of gender and transport, colleagues would recall that last
year we had an international conference on gender and transport when we
commemorated Women’s Day. This took place in Port Elizabeth in the Eastern
Cape. Part of the outcome of that conference was the issue of the
recognition of the challenges faced by women, especially rural women, so
that we could engender the transport agenda by including specific
interventions in our design and implementation of transport programmes. We
also need to recognise, especially as men, that women are not donkeys, nor
providers of freight solutions in our country. So, when we need people to
fetch wood, it should not be women’s heads that do that.

Over and above that, there is the issue of the integrated rural mobility
action plan. There are pilot projects that we are running in O R Tambo, in
Umkhanyakude and in Sekhukhune which will help us access the feasibility of
this programme so that we can roll it out in all the provinces in South
Africa.
Back to the Eastern Cape, the issue of the Kei Rail is on track, as Mhlahlo
would have said if he had been given an opportunity. Already, there is an
agreement between the Eastern Cape and ourselves and Spoornet. A lease has
been signed to transfer the operations to the Eastern Cape, and Metrorail
has been brought on board to participate in the programme so that we are
able to extend this service, not only between East London and Mthatha, but
King William’s Town as well. So we are going to be supporting this
programme very enthusiastically, because we know the potential it has even
to support the timber industry in the Eastern Cape.

While on the Eastern Cape, I can also indicate that we also have extension
programmes to Motherwell and even to the Port of Coega as well. The MEC
from the Free State has also highlighted the Mangaung ... What is that town
now? [Interjections.] Botshabelo, yes. That is on track, and we are going
to be supporting them as well. I think the MEC for the Western Cape has
also highlighted in concrete terms the programmes that are unfolding here
in the Western Cape.

Hon Mzizi, the budget for the Taxi Recapitalisation Programme has actually
not decreased. It will increase as we gain momentum in terms of the
scrapping of old vehicles. I want to assure you that what appears to be a
decrease is, in fact, not. It will be adjusted to take into account the
volumes of vehicles that are coming.

On the cross-border road tariffs, this is an issue that we are addressing,
but I don’t think we should panic. Our strategic thrust is to ensure that
we lower the cost of doing business in South Africa. So, if other people do
the wrong things, we should not follow suit in a tit-for-tat way. Our role
is to ensure that we do not push up the cost of doing business in South
Africa. Nevertheless, we are talking with our neighbours and very soon we
are going to be coming with a Bill to amend the cross-border issue in order
to ensure that we take into account the issues of tariffs and other issues
too so that we are able to succeed.

Regarding overload control, hon Watson, together with the provinces we have
identified flashpoints with regard to this problem. Our priority projects
have been identified, especially in Mpumalanga - where weighbridges are
being constructed in Ogies. All these overload projects are being done.
Incidentally, we are launching one on Friday in Gauteng.

In KwaZulu-Natal there are many projects that are being developed,
including Enkwalini, to ensure that we build capacity amongst our people.
In the urban areas of Durban the bridge-city development is on track –
Umlazi – that will take into account the provision of a train station below
the mall at Umlazi. The SA Rail Commuter Corporation will be concluding an
agreement very shortly, in order to ensure that this project stays on
track.

Lastly, my thanks go to my colleagues, MECs, and also to the hon members
for having taken part in this debate. Now that my time is over, I would
like to thank the chairperson and all hon members and the officials of the
department for the support they always give to me as the executive
authority. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 18:48.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


      (a)   Correctional Services Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
            Minister of Correctional Services. Referred to the Portfolio
            Committee on Correctional Services and the Select Committee on
            Security and Constitutional Affairs.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

        a) Report of the Electoral Commission on the 2006 Municipal
           Elections [RP 40-2007].



