---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-09-20
---

THURSDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:09.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I have to announce that the vacancy caused
by the vacation of seat in the National Assembly by Mr Y S Bhamjee has been
filled by the nomination, with effect from 12 September 2007, of Ms N N
Sibhidla.

The vacancies caused by the vacation of seats in the National Assembly by
Dr E Nkem-Abonta, Mr M T Goniwe and Dr F N Ginwala have been filled by the
nomination, with effect from 19 September 2007, of Mr M K Khaoue, Mr M H
Fazzie and Mr L J Sehlare.
                         OATH OR SOLEMN AFFIRMATION

Ms Sibhidla, Mr Khaoue, Mr Fazzie and Mr Sehlare, accompanied by Mr K M
Khumalo and Mr M D Gumede, made and subscribed the oath or solemn
affirmation, and took their seats.

                         CHANGE IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before we proceed with the rest of today’s
business, I want to announce the following change in party membership that
occurred in terms of Schedule 6A to the Constitution:

 Mr S Simmons had, on 14 September 2007, left the United Party of South
 Africa and joined the National Alliance, a new party in the National
 Assembly.

[Interjections.] Order! Hon members, we might inform those of you who were
not here that the hon Simmons has already made his maiden speech as a
member of the National Alliance in the Joint Sitting.

                    STATE OF PARTIES AFTER FLOOR-CROSSING

                               (Announcement)
The SPEAKER: Members are also reminded that the notice reflecting the
membership and number of seats allocated to each party represented in the
House after floor-crossing will be published in the Gazette tomorrow, as
required in terms of Schedule 6A to the Constitution.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Ms S C VOS: Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention and that of
the House to a probable breach of parliamentary privilege committed in the
Portfolio Committee on Communications by a candidate for appointment to the
SABC Board, and accordingly I give notice of the following motion for
urgent consideration by the House:

   That the House -

   (1)      noting that -

         (a)      Ms Gloria Serobe was one of the 12 candidates recommended
               by the House on Thursday, 13 September 2007, for appointment
               by the President to the SABC Board;


         (b)      when interviewed by the Portfolio Committee on
               Communications and asked whether she knew the person who had
               nominated her for appointment, a Mr Louis du Plooy who gave
               his address as P O Box 2012, Groenkloof 0027, she replied
               that she did not know him but it was "nice" of him to have
               done so;


         (c)      according to a report in the Sunday Times of 16 September
               2007 Mr Du Plooy "... revealed yesterday that he had
               discussed Serobe's nomination with her (emphasis added) 'as I
               had to get a CV from her to submit with the nomination
               form'"; and


         (d)      Mr Du Plooy is the Chief Director for Ministerial Services
               in the Ministry in the Presidency but did not reveal this
               important information in nominating Ms Serobe; and

   (2)      resolves -

         (a)      to appoint  a committee to conduct a preliminary
               investigation into whether Ms Serobe, in informing the
               Portfolio Committee that she did not know Mr Du Plooy,
               wilfully furnished the Portfolio Committee with false or
               misleading information  and thereby committed the offence  of
               breach of parliamentary privilege in terms of section
               17(2)(e)  of the Powers, Privileges and Immunities of
               Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Act, Act 4 of 2004
               (possibly in an attempt to conceal from the Portfolio
               Committee Mr Du Plooy's direct link with the Minister in the
               Presidency, Dr Essop Pahad), the investigation to be
               conducted with a view to establishing whether the matter
               warrants formal referral to the National Director of Public
               Prosecutions for prosecution under the Act;


         (b)      that the committee may exercise those powers in Rule 138
               that may assist it in carrying out its task;


         (c)      that the committee reports to the House within 15 working
               days; and


         (d)      that the President be informed immediately of the decision
               of the House to investigate whether Ms Serobe may have
               committed a breach of parliamentary privilege.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

               (The late former Chief Justice Michael Corbett)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House-
        1) notes-


            a) with profound sadness the death of former Chief Justice
               Michael Corbett at the age of 84 on Sunday, 16 September
               2007; and


            b) that he achieved distinction not only as a judicial officer
               but as a legal scholar, a writer and an advocate, leading to
               him being awarded honorary doctorates in law by five
               universities, being elected an honorary bencher of Lincoln’s
               Inn and an honorary fellow of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and
               receiving the Order of the Baobab on his retirement;


      2) recognises the vital role he played in the administration of
         justice, especially during the first two years of our transition to
         democracy;


      3) recalls that the widespread confidence and respect he enjoyed, led
         him to stay on as Chief Justice three years after his retirement
         fell due; and


      4) conveys its condolences to his wife, Peggy, his four children and
         their families.

                         INTERNATIONAL DAY OF PEACE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


      1) notes that -


            a) humanity worldwide observes 21 September as the International
               Day of Peace; and


            b) this day is devoted to concentrated efforts of the United
               Nations and its member states in promoting the ideals of
               peace;


      2) recalls that we observe this day as a day of global ceasefire and
         non-violence, an invitation to all nations and people to honour a
         cessation of hostilities for the duration not only of a day but
         forever;


      3) recognises that -

            a) peace and friendship amongst all people and nations must be
               secured by upholding equal rights, opportunities and status
               for all; and


            b) the new global situation has not resolved the contradictions
               within and among nations between poverty and opulence, to the
               extent that ethnic, religious and other tensions continue to
               ravage parts of the globe;


      4) believes that the United Nations Organisation is an instrument in
         the service of peace for all humanity, a reminder that our
         permanent commitment, above all interests or differences, is to
         peace; and


      5) calls on all countries of the world to reaffirm their commitment
         and belief in the ideals of peace and the eradication of tension
         and causes of conflict.

Agreed to.

                           NORTHERN ARTS FESTIVAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House-


     1) notes that –


         (a)      the Northern Arts Festival will be held in Bethelsdorp,
               Port Elizabeth, in the Eastern Cape from 21 September to 24
               September 2007;


         (b)      this festival will include both established and emerging,
               performing and visual artists and crafters, thereby creating
               an opportunity for young up and coming local artists to
               demonstrate their many talents; and


         (c)      acknowledges that Bethelsdorp has a unique history that
               has been lost over the years and that this festival will help
               make the local community more aware of their heritage and
               proud of their vibrant past;

   (2)      recognises that –


         (a)      by using the medium of music and the arts, this festival
               will have a positive socioeconomic impact on this community;
               and

         (b)      this festival will both highlight and celebrate the
               diversity of this community, thereby helping to build and
               unite a truly vibrant society; and


   (3)      wishes the organiser, Billy Paulson, as well as the community of
         Bethelsdorp well in launching this festival, with the hope of
         sustaining an annual Northern Arts Festival in future.

Agreed to.

             GOOD WISHES TO MUSLIMS OVER RAMADAN AND EID MUBARAK

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That this House-


  (1) notes that this is a great month for Muslims globally as they observe
         the holy month of Ramadan in fasting and prayer;


  (2) further notes that a Malaysian astronaut will be the first Muslim
         ever to observe fasting in space in this holy month of Ramadan as
         he leaves earth on 10 October 2007; and


  (3) believes that microgravity shall be a challenge for fasting in the
         observation of prayer in space.


Since we will not be sitting at the time of Eid, I take this opportunity to
give the astronaut good wishes for Ramadan Kareem and Eid Mubarak, to him
and all the Muslims nationally and internationally.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Rajbally, was that a motion ...

Ms S RAJBALLY: ... a motion without notice.

The SPEAKER: ... or was that a statement? It sounds to me like it’s a
statement. Anyway, it’s on the records now.

                   CELEBRATION OF SOUTH AFRICAN PARKS WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that-

           a) Monday, 17 September 2007, marked the start of the annual
              South African Parks Week; and


           b) the launch of the South African Parks Week highlights the
              celebration of South African Heritage and Tourism Month
              countrywide;


   (2)      recalls that the highlight event of the week is free access for
         South Africans on specified days to most national parks;


   (3)      believes that this initiative by the Department of Environmental
         Affairs and Tourism and SANParks will raise awareness about the
         importance of sustainable development and the preservation of the
         environment; and


   (4)      extends its best wishes to the Department of Environmental
         Affairs and Tourism, the SANParks Board and all the social partners
         on their effort to raise awareness about the importance of
         celebrating our heritage and preserving the environment.


Agreed to.

 SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) FOR PURPOSES OF CONDUCTING SECOND READING DEBATE
                      ON EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move the motion printed in my name
on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Education
   Laws Amendment Bill [B 33B – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)) today.

Agreed to.

 REFERRAL OF MINERAL AND PETROLEUM RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT AMENDMENT BILL BACK
             TO PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE FOR CONSIDERATION AND REPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the motion
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development  Amendment  Bill  [B
   10B – 2007] (National  Assembly  –  sec  75)  be  referred  back  to  the
   Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy for further consideration  and
   report.
Agreed to.

                   CONSTITUTION THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT BILL

       (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Justice and
                     Constitutional Development thereon)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                   CONSTITUTION THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, hon
Ministers and members, ladies and gentlemen, the reason I am standing
before this House today is because the Constitutional Court has given
Parliament the opportunity to rectify the procedural defect that led to
that court’s order of invalidity of certain provisions of the Constitution
Twelfth Amendment Act of 2005.

The Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act of 2005 amended the Constitution to
redetermine the geographical areas of the nine provinces of the Republic of
South Africa to, amongst other things, avoid municipal boundaries
stretching over provincial boundaries, and to resolve the challenges that
were experienced relating to the provincial boundary between the provinces
of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.

In terms of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act and the related Cross-
Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act of 2005, the
provincial boundary between, amongst other things, the provinces of the
Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal was altered with effect from 1 March 2006 so
that the area that previously formed the local municipality of Matatiele,
was transferred from the province of KwaZulu-Natal to the province of the
Eastern Cape, and new municipal boundaries were created as a consequence.

What is important in respect of the passing of the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Act, an Act of 2005, is that because it redetermined provincial
boundaries, it fell within the ambit of section 74 of the Constitution and
consequently required the approval of both the National Assembly and the
National Council of Provinces.
The National Council of Provinces could, in terms of section 74(8) of the
Constitution, only pass the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill if it was
approved by the legislatures of the provinces concerned. All the
legislatures of the affected provinces approved the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Bill as required and, consequently, that Bill was also passed by
the National Council of Provinces.

Before the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act and the Cross-Boundary
Municipalities Repeal Act came into operation, the Matatiele Municipality
and various other applicants challenged the constitutional validity of
those two Acts in the Constitutional Court. In the case of Matatiele
Municipality and others v the President of the Republic of South Africa and
others, 2006, the applicants argued that those two Acts changed the
boundary of the Matatiele Municipality and its composition and transferred
it to the province of the Eastern Cape without complying with the
procedures set out in the Constitution.

They further argued that in doing so, Parliament took over the functions
which the Constitution had reserved for the Municipal Demarcation Board.
The court, on 27 February 2006, rejected the applicants’ main argument that
Parliament, in passing the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill,
unconstitutionally usurped the powers of the Municipal Demarcation Board to
redetermine municipal boundaries.
The court, however, did not decide on the question of whether the
Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act was enacted in accordance with the
procedures set out in the Constitution, but, of its own volition, called
for further argument on certain related issues.

After the Constitutional Court heard further argument on the issues raised
by it, the Court, on 18 August 2006, in the case of Matatiele Municipality
and others v the President of the Republic of South Africa and others,
2007, declared that part of the Constitutional Twelfth Amendment Act that
transferred the Matatiele Municipality from the province of KwaZulu-Natal
to the province of the Eastern Cape to be inconsistent with the
Constitution and therefore invalid.

From the judgment in the Matatiele case, it is clear that a new piece of
legislation, namely a Constitution Amendment Bill, must be processed afresh
in a manner that complies with all constitutional and procedural
requirements. That has led to the introduction of the Constitution
Thirteenth Amendment Bill before the House today.

The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution so as to substitute and re-enact
those provisions of the Constitution that have been declared to be
inconsistent with the Constitution. Although the Constitutional Court’s
order of invalidity was formulated with reference to the Matatiele
Municipality only, the memorandum on the objects of the Bill explains why
it is necessary to substitute and re-enact all the provisions of the
Constitution that refer directly to the provinces of the Eastern Cape and
KwaZulu-Natal and not only those that refer to the Matatiele Municipality.

As far as the constitutional obligation of a legislative organ of the state
to facilitate public involvement in the law-making process is concerned, it
is, in my view, necessary for this House to note the following general
findings by the Constitutional Court in the case of Doctors for Life
International v the Speaker of the National Assembly and others, in 2006,
and the Matatiele case, in which it considered the nature and scope of that
obligation.

Here I cite the relevant points. The Constitution calls for open and
transparent government, and requires legislative organs to facilitate
public participation in the making of laws by all legislative organs of the
state. The other issue is that the provisions of sections 72(1)(a) and
118(1)(a) of the Constitution impose a duty on the NCOP and the provincial
legislatures to facilitate public involvement in their respective
legislative processes.

Further, to facilitate public involvement in the legislative process means
taking steps to ensure that the public participates in the legislative
process. Also, Parliament and provincial legislatures have a broad
discretion to determine how best to fulfil their constitutional obligation
to facilitate public involvement in a case, so long as they act reasonably.
Whether Parliament or a provincial legislature has acted reasonably in
discharging its duty to facilitate public involvement will depend on a
number of factors, for example the nature and importance of the legislation
under consideration, whether the legislation needs to be enacted urgently,
and the intensity of its impact on the public.

The obligation to facilitate public involvement may be fulfilled in
different ways and is open to innovation on the part of the legislatures.
The conventional method of public participation in the law-making process
is through the submission of written or oral representations on the Bill
under consideration by Parliament, or through a combination of both written
and oral submissions.

I have noted that the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development conferred with the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
Government in its deliberations on the Bill. I would like to thank the
chairpersons and members of those two committees for the time and effort
that they have put into finalising the Bill. I have also noted the content
of the report that the Justice portfolio committee has adopted in respect
of the Bill.

Without going into the detail of that report, it is clear to me that the
Justice portfolio committee has taken various steps relating to the
National Assembly’s constitutional obligation to facilitate public
involvement in the legislative process relating to the passing of the Bill.
Because the Bill is intended to redetermine the provincial boundary between
the provinces of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, the National Council
of Provinces may not, in terms of section 74(8) of the Constitution, pass
the Bill, unless it has been approved by the legislatures of the provinces
concerned.

I would therefore like to echo the Justice portfolio committee’s call on
all the provincial legislatures and, more particularly, those of the
Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal to take all the steps that, in their view,
are necessary and reasonable to comply fully with the spirit and direction
of the Constitutional Court’s judgment when considering whether to approve
or support the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill, as the case may be.
I recommend the passing of this Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill to
the House. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Constitution Thirteenth
Amendment Bill, as the Minister has said, is essentially a re-enactment of
certain provisions in the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act, which were
found to be procedurally defective by the Constitutional Court.

It deals with all the provincial boundaries pertaining to the province of
KwaZulu-Natal, as a natural consequence of the Constitutional Court’s
finding that the provincial legislature of that province failed to
facilitate public involvement in its processes pertaining to the
consideration and approval of certain portions of the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Bill that concerned it.

This failure being considered to be fatal in respect of the Matatiele
Municipality, it is presumably equally fatal to the alteration of the other
less contested areas of the boundary between the provinces of the Eastern
Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, as it is trite that the KwaZulu-Natal legislature
did not equally hold hearings in these areas either.

It is important, as the Minister has done, to briefly sketch the background
to this Bill. This House, in November 2005, passed the twelfth amendment to
the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa in order to bring about a
redetermination of the geographic areas of the nine provinces of the
Republic. This was done in essence to effect the necessary realignment of
the provincial boundaries to remove enclaves and the concept of cross-
boundary municipalities.

The difficulties pertaining to the existence of enclaves and cross-boundary
municipalities were that they could not be efficiently governed. It was the
intention of this House that the new provincial boundaries, together with
the subsequently redetermined municipalities, would form the basis of the
local government elections that were held in March 2006.
The NCOP passed the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill in December 2005,
and shortly thereafter, as the Minister has already indicated, the
Matatiele Municipality and others challenged the law on an urgent basis
before the Constitutional Court. In essence, they argued that this House
had usurped the role and function of the Municipal Demarcation Board in
requiring that provincial boundaries be redetermined on the basis of
municipal boundaries. In the course of the proceedings, the applicants had
conceded the legality of the procedure in terms of which the Constitution
Twelfth Amendment Bill was passed.

The court, in delivering its judgment on 27 February 2006, literally on the
eve of the elections, unanimously held that Parliament had not usurped the
authority of the Municipal Demarcation Board. The court found that the
power of the Municipal Demarcation Board was limited by the authority of
Parliament to redetermine provincial boundaries. Parliament, it found, had
the authority to interfere with municipal boundaries if that became
necessary in performing its duty to redraw provincial boundaries.

However, the majority of the court went further, and notwithstanding the
concession of the applicants in regard to the procedural issue, called for
the legislature of KwaZulu-Natal to argue before it the matter of the
applicability and meaning of section 118(1)(a) of the Constitution. Such
argument was to be held on 30 March 2006. The court did not declare the
elections that were meant to happen on 1 March 2006 invalid, nor was it in
a position to declare the twelfth amendment invalid pending the hearing of
further argument.

It is significant in this regard for the House to note the dissenting
judgments of Justices Yacoob and Skweyiya, who both argued that the court
was putting form above substance in pursuing the argument relating to
adherence to section 118(1)(a), and noted that the road travelled by this
House and the Minister for Provincial and Local Government in particular,
when pursuing the redesign of provincial boundaries, was on all fours with
the principles of good governance.

On 1 March 2006, the provincial boundary between, amongst other things, the
provinces of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal was altered so that the
area that previously formed the local municipality of Matatiele was now
located in the province of the Eastern Cape, and new municipal boundaries
were created as a consequence. The old Matatiele, consisting of
approximately 16 000 citizens, ceased to exist, only to be replaced by a
newly designated municipality that now boasts approximately 170 000
citizens – a much better basis, I think you will agree, on which to build a
viable municipality in the future.

Five months later, on 18 August, the Constitutional Court declared that
part of the twelfth amendment which effectively relocated the old Matatiele
into the province of the Eastern Cape to be inconsistent with the
Constitution, and therefore invalid. The order of invalidity was based, as
I said, on a procedural defect, but was suspended for a period of 18
months, during which period Parliament has been given the opportunity to
correct that defect.

Again, the dissenting judgments of, this time, three judges – Yacoob,
Skweyiya and Van der Westhuizen - pertaining to their finding that
reasonable public involvement is not a prerequisite for the passing of ...

The SPEAKER: Hon members, can we just lower our voices a bit, please?

Ms F I CHOHAN: ... a constitutional amendment in terms of section 74(3)
read with section 74(8), is pertinent to this House when we consider what
we are meant to do with these decisions pertaining to our procedures
governing how we pass laws in this Parliament.

The committee, during its deliberations, considered a number of written
submissions. In a few submissions, concerns were raised relating to the
possible future lack of service delivery by the province of the Eastern
Cape, in particular in respect of health and education services. During the
consideration of and deliberations on these submissions, we called for a
report from the Department of Provincial and Local Government, which
indicated no material breakdown in respect of service delivery levels in
that area.
The committee noted that the province of the Eastern Cape compared
favourably in relation to its spending trends on education, in relation to
teacher-learner ratios, and on spending on health as it pertains to the
province of KwaZulu-Natal or, indeed, other provinces.

Government has committed itself to ensuring service delivery to all of the
people, regardless of which province they find themselves in. These efforts
by government accord with the basic tenets of equality for all South
Africans, no matter where people are located.

There are, of course, inequalities arising from our past that need to be
addressed, particularly in the arena of capacity and skills. Government is
intent on laying sound development platforms at local level. It is obvious
that the old Matatiele Municipality of approximately 16 000 citizens could
not hope to be a financially viable entity going forward. The briefing that
the committee received indicated that there has been a significant
committal by the newly constituted Matatiele Municipality to the
development of infrastructure right up to 2009. This bodes well for the
economic development of the area as a whole.

Some submissions, I am sad to say, detailed cultural and ethnic links with
the province of KwaZulu-Natal, and highlighted the different cultural
practices in the Eastern Cape. I think we must take time today to remember
that, particularly given that we are on the eve of Heritage Day, unlike 13
years ago, today we celebrate a collective heritage as one people, whether
on the shores of Durban beachfront or on the serene coastal spaces of the
Eastern Cape; that there are no longer superior cultures, superior
religions, superior races; that there will no longer, in this country, be
spaces reserved for the exclusive use of one race or one ethnic group; that
every culture, every religion and every language will cross-pollinate the
length and breadth of this country as freely as the winds that caress our
multitoned faces.

In Matatiele or in Sandton, in Khutsong or in Krugersdorp, let us embrace
the diversity of our neighbours in the spirit of ubuntu; let us see with
our hearts, secure in the knowledge that wherever each of us finds
ourselves, no matter who we are, what we look like, what language we speak,
we not only have the constitutional right to practise our traditions or
speak our languages, but we are South Africans all intent on celebrating
them too. I thank you for your attention. [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Speaker, hon members, in layman’s terms this Bill can
be called a comeback.

Die Konstitusionele Hof het ons proses met die twaalfde wysiging geweeg en
te lig bevind. [The Constitutional Court weighed our procedure relating to
the twelth amendment, and found it wanting.]

When we debated the twelth amendment to the Constitution in 2005 the Deputy
Minister said it defied all understanding that we did not support it. I
wonder whether he also does not understand why the Constitutional Court
found parts of the 12th amendment to be unconstitutional. He didn’t listen
to us then, when we warned him not to fast-track constitutional amendments
and to take the wishes of the inhabitants into consideration.

The Deputy Minister also said in 2005 that they would be judged by history
whether they did the wrong thing or not. It is perhaps too soon to expect a
judgment from history, but the Constitutional Court has judged and ruled
that consultation had not been adequate, as we warned back then.
[Interjections.] The Constitutional Court has proved us right and him
wrong.

In die annale van ons regspraak is dit aangeteken, vir altyd!
[In the annals of our judicature this stands recorded for all time!]

In his reply in 2005 the Deputy Minister also expressed the view that after
the adoption of the 1996 Constitution, the constitutional principles ceased
to exist. We never have the opportunity to reply to these responses which
come at the end of a debate, but I would like to take this opportunity to
tell the Deputy Minister that he’s also wrong on that point. The
constitutional principles are the ground norm of our Constitution and
cannot be amended or ignored, and most definitely did not cease to exist.
I challenge the Minister to put this view as a legal question to the
Constitutional Court. [Interjections.] He will no doubt again respond to
this, knowing that I don’t have the opportunity to reply, but I can predict
now that, should he take up my challenge, he will again be proved wrong.

It has been said that a successful government leaves a country happier. I
wonder how happy the people of Matatiele feel. Are they happier to be
included in the Eastern Cape? I doubt it. When will we learn that people
cannot be treated as objects? Successful government involves confronting
the problems of the future, not those of the past. [Interjections.] We did
not support the twelth amendment and we will also not support this Bill for
the same reasons. People should not be moved from one province to another
by the stroke of a pen. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Madam Speaker, the original twin Bills were opposed by the
IFP when last presented to this House in 2005, and we do not believe that
circumstances are such that we should reverse our position now.

The fact that the Constitutional Court struck the Bills down on procedural
grounds constituted an ideal opportunity for the government to rethink its
stance on the matter. However, it was clear from the start that nothing
would change and that the same provision would be re-enacted with
sufficient public engagement this time around to pass constitutional
muster.

Indeed, just after the Constitutional Court decision, and in response to an
IFP statement, the Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development effectively told this House that in respect of the political
content of the reintroduced Bills, nothing would change. Clearly then,
government had no intention of reconsidering its original position;
likewise the ANC.

The fact of the matter is that the government and the ANC agree that
whatever consultation was to take place, this was to be a procedural
formality rather than a real engagement.

The objections to the inclusion of Matatiele in the Eastern Cape were
varied, but could be set out in the following broad terms: poor service
delivery from the Eastern Cape; distance from Eastern Cape economic and
political centres; strong economic, educational and other ties with KwaZulu-
Natal; and a general sense of identity with KwaZulu-Natal.

It was clear from the start that the ANC would latch onto the service
delivery issue to the exclusion of the others and, in acknowledging certain
historic delivery difficulties, argue that in tackling these more
effectively the desirability of maintaining the status quo was
satisfactorily addressed.
The IFP believes that, notwithstanding service delivery difficulties, this
was never the central issue in the debate and it is therefore fallacious to
argue that if you address complaints over service delivery you have
addressed the issue of Matatiele’s location. That is not correct. We oppose
the Bill.

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Speaker, the ID believes that the whole issue of
cross-border municipalities has been handled extremely badly by the
government. The government has, in fact, ridden roughshod over the wishes
of the people who live in the affected areas. What is also clear is that
the government has not held proper consultations and public participation
over this issue, a view which was subsequently upheld by the Constitutional
Court, forcing the drafting of the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill.

The ID believes that proper consultation and public participation has still
not taken place in the areas concerned on this extremely controversial
issue, and it is for that reason and the fact that the ID believes in
proper people-led development that we cannot possibly support this Bill. I
thank you.
Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, in the Doctors for Life matter, the
Constitutional Court stated that:


  Public involvement provisions gave effect to an important feature of
  democracy, its participative nature. The participation of citizens in
  government formed the basis and support of democracy which could not
  exist without it.


The Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislatures are required in
terms of this Constitutional Court order to take all the steps necessary
and reasonable to facilitate public hearings in the affected areas.

Whilst the ACDP is fully aware that no fault was found in the process
adopted by this National Assembly, it would in our view, at this stage, be
premature to support this Bill until the public hearings have been held in
the affected areas in terms of the Constitutional Court order. Only then
would we be able to gauge whether there had been sufficient public
involvement as required by the Constitutional Court.

Indeed, the KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Cape legislatures may, after hearing
public input, decide to veto the Bill. The ACDP will accordingly, at this
stage, not support the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, the greatest achievement of our democracy is
the Constitution that it has been built upon. We have a Constitution that
has been drafted by the people for the people, and it is absolutely
imperative that every South African venture is endorsed through, upon and
in alignment with our national Constitution.

The MF finds it unfortunate that our demarcation process has landed us in a
bit of hot water with municipal boundaries, but we respect that clarity in
the situation is crucial to ensures that the needs of our people are met in
these areas.

In view of this and the true democracy that we strive to make progress on,
the MF finds the provisions inculcated in the thirteenth amendment in line
with the values and principles that our people envisioned years before the
birth of democracy. It is imperative that all South African governance and
decision-making is in consultation with the people.

At the end of the day, our democracy, our system of governance and the
rights of our people are enshrined in this great text, which years of
struggle has liberated and in which years of freedom has to be celebrated.
The MF will support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Madam Speaker and hon members, this debate takes place
during two significant events, firstly, Heritage Month - we have just had a
Joint Sitting this morning – and, secondly, the Constitutional Court is
today hearing the Khutsong matter.

In my speech I will focus on written submissions received from the public
on the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill. These submissions concern
the following: firstly, some people give cultural and ethnic reasons for
suggesting that Matatiele be incorporated into the KwaZulu-Natal province;
secondly, others give personal preferences for retaining Matatiele in the
Eastern Cape province or its inclusion in the Kwazulu-Natal province;
thirdly, there are those who raise concerns about possible future lack of
service delivery by the Eastern Cape province, especially regarding health
and education.

South Africa is a fairly unitary state and some people will argue and say
with some federal features. When the new Constitution of South Africa was
signed, it was a landmark in the history of our country that enshrined in
law the need to build a society based on democratic values, social justice
and human rights, in which every citizen is protected by law.

The current Constitution provides, and I paraphrase, that the Republic of
South Africa is one, sovereign, democratic state founded on the values of
human dignity, nonracialism, nonsexism, etc. I am mentioning but a few
characteristics of our South African state.

Under apartheid rule, people were segregated along racial and ethnic lines.
The advent of democracy spelt the end of such discrimination. Some people
still see today’s provinces as remnants of the homelands. They believe that
in order to practise their ethnic or cultural activities, they need to be
in one province and not in another. Even today we still have people with
preconceived ideas. They wish to belong to a particular province in the
belief that their cultural activities will be more secure in one province
than in another.

People should not regard a province as a homeland for a specific ethnic
group. For instance, people should not regard the Eastern Cape as a
homeland for Xhosa-speaking people or KwaZulu-Natal as a province for
amaZulu [Zulu people]. On this basis, residents of Matatiele should not
say, “We are not Xhosas, thus we cannot be part of the Eastern Cape
province, but we are Zulus and we prefer to be part of KwaZulu-Natal to
enable us to practise our cultural activities freely.”

In my constituency of Kungwini, for example, which was a cross-boundary
municipality between Mpumalanga and Gauteng, some traditional leaders
indicated that they preferred that Kungwini be part of Mpumalanga, because
they feared that they would not be recognised in Gauteng and that their
subjects would not be permitted to practise their culture. Kungwini is
today part of Gauteng. These traditional leaders are still recognised as
traditional leaders and, during the last season, we saw more initiation
schools being conducted in Kungwini.

The Constitution further provides, among other things, that persons
belonging to cultural, religious and linguistic communities may not be
denied their rights. They will not be denied their rights by the change of
boundaries. They will be free to enjoy their cultural practices, religion
and language.

I would like to point out to the people giving personal preferences as to
how the places should be demarcated, that the days of influx control are
gone. In order to exercise their rights, people need not belong to a
particular province. People can move freely from one province to another as
they wish. They can live in the Eastern Cape province and work or buy in
the province of KwaZulu-Natal. The South African Constitution recognises
the right of freedom of movement. The alteration of provincial boundaries
does not affect this constitutional right.

With the proposed Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill, persons are not
moved from their residential areas to another area against their will, as
the hon Swart has indicated. That would be unconstitutional.

There is a process on the way, conducted by the Ministry of Provincial and
Local Government. Here I am referring to the policy review of the system of
local and provincial government; the public participation process plan;
questions, for example, on provincial government, two of them being
question 37 and question 38.
Question 37 says: “Should there be a provincial system of government, how
should this be determined and what are the alternative options?” Question
38 says: “If provinces are to be retained, what should be the criteria for
determining the following, for example, purpose, structure and functions,
number and sources of funding?”

People all over South Africa are free and are required as well as
encouraged to participate in this review process so as to air their views.

To those who raised concerns about future lack of service by the Eastern
Cape province, I would like to refer them to the status report on service
delivery by the Matatiele Local Municipality, updated as at 11 September
2007. Page 37 says that the year-on-year growth for 2006-07 was 18,2% for
Eastern Cape and 10,2% for KwaZulu-Natal.

Concerning classrooms it says that a number of schools and classrooms were
built between 2003-04 and 2006-07, and 141 new schools were completed for
the Eastern Cape while none were completed in KwaZulu-Natal.

There is a significant increase in the number of physical science standard
grade passes from 73 667 in 2005 to 81 151 in 2006, so says the report on
page 6.
In terms of the child nutrition programme, recent surveys indicate that
KwaZulu-Natal spends 90 cents, which is the lowest per day per learner, as
compared to R1,17 in the Eastern Cape per day per learner.

According to these statistics there is no disadvantage in service delivery.
The ANC supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, constitutions are made to serve
people; people are not made to serve constitutions. A constitution must be
amended where it is in conflict with the interests of the citizens of our
country.

We cannot speak of this Parliament as the people’s Parliament but continue
to repeat, with regard to the Matatiele issue, that the Constitutional
Court order of invalidity was suspended for a period of 18 months, during
which period Parliament had the opportunity to correct the constitutional
defect that led to the order of invalidity. When people express deep
reservations about legislation that affects them, they must be listened to.


Moving people in this country has a painful history. No people should be
transferred to another province without compelling reasons.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.
Dr S E M PHEKO: The people of Matatiele and Khutsong ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Dr S E M PHEKO: ... must be moved only after the consultation on their
hearing. The PAC is opposed to this Bill.

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, the Bill is an indication that our
constitutional democracy works in favour of our people, and the public’s
right to participation in the legislative process is a non-negotiable
right. The Constitution binds the National Assembly and the National
Council of Provinces to allow public participation.

Contesting the constitutionality of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment
Bill, the public, through responsible governance of the Municipal
Demarcation Board, prohibited Parliament from exercising powers outside of
its framework.

The Bill is primarily a technical correction on previous procedures, while
the affected municipalities will still be faced with the challenges of the
demarcation process. But, as far as the parliamentary process is concerned,
the legislation has been aligned to conform with the Constitutional Court
requirements.

The FD supports the Bill on its technical application. However, we trust
that a people’s democracy also effectively means providing the best
services and resources available to them and that, in principle, these will
be the objectives driving the demarcation process. I thank you.

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, developments around this Bill
illustrate an interesting characteristic of democracy, namely it offers the
best system of government, but it is not, by any measure, a perfect one as
it is at the same time wide open to abuse. The Constitutional Court’s
decision declaring the twelfth amendment inconsistent with the Constitution
was treated as a procedural nuisance.

The National Alliance believes that section 118 of the Constitution is not
serving its purpose of allowing the law-making process to be sensitive to
the will of the people. Democracy is not just a numbers game but a system
of fairness to all people. Clearly, it is not so in this case.

Notwithstanding the weakness in the democratic process, the NA will support
the Bill as all technicalities have been satisfied. I thank you.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I call the next speaker, I would like to appeal
to the Whips on both sides of the House to assist us in maintaining order.

Ms N M MAHLAWE: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon members, the matter before us
today is a very sensitive and emotional issue. It is a matter that can
further divide the communities of Matatiele instead of uniting them, as our
Constitution bids us to be united in our diversity. It is our duty
therefore as public representatives to bring about unity where there are
divisions, cohesion where there are several dissenting opinions, stability
where the pangs of apartheid seem to be dominating and causing instability.

Best practice, in every respect, should be the aim of each one of us,
including the opposition parties involved in community affairs. The
Minister and chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development have clearly outlined the objectives of the Bill
as well as the content of the ruling of the Constitutional Court, and I am
not going to speak on that.

The hon Sibanyoni has given the content and context of around
10 000 submissions made to the committee by the people of Matatiele, an
indication that public participation and public involvement have taken
place. I know that there are plans for public hearings by both the Eastern
Cape and Kwazulu-Natal, as required by the ruling of the Constitutional
Court.

The most disturbing factor is that opposition parties appear not to have
the interests of the people of this country at heart. [Interjections.] Of
course, I understand why, because most of these parties are not represented
in the committee and therefore they do not have information and
understanding of all the processes and briefings that have been received by
the committee. They are not even aware of the consequential matters that
have arisen from the redetermination of the boundaries in this area.
Redetermining them again, when we are only 18 months from the end of the
term, would obviously cause unhappiness for the people and also
instability.

Perhaps I could briefly outline some of the reconfigured Matatiele
benefits. The population that stood at 16 000 now stands at 194 629, and
this is very good for the economy of the area. The number of councillors
has grown from 21 to 48 in the municipality. The 2005-06 budget was R46,6
million and since the reconfiguration it is R84,4 million. The municipal
infrastructure grant for 2005-06 was R4,1 million and now, after the
reconfiguration, it is R18,5 million.

The status of section 27 employees has grown, with senior posts being
filled. Access to basic services has greatly improved. If, for instance, we
compare electricity supply, it is 55,22% compared to 69,7% of the Republic
of South Africa, and when it comes to bucket latrines the percentage is
0,65% compared to 4,08% of the Republic of South Africa. More than eight
access roads are being constructed with the assistance of the nearby Alfred
Nzo District Council.

The list is endless. We therefore understand that there is still a lot to
be done, especially in the rural areas of Maluti which have been
disadvantaged by the separation of Matatiele and Maluti.

The ANC supports the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon
Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Ministers and hon members, once again, thank
you to everyone who has participated. Obviously, we will take into
consideration the views you have expressed, although from this side of the
House there was very little to consider.

I think that the first thing to address is that a lot of absolute nonsense
has been spoken from the podium. Let’s make it very clear what happened in
this matter as far as the courts were concerned.

When the people in Matatiele exercised their constitutional right to
challenge this legislation, it was properly argued before the
Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court gave a judgment in which
every substantive issue that was raised was rejected and the government’s
position was upheld. And every procedural issue, as far as the National
Assembly and the NCOP were concerned, was upheld as being constitutional.

It is on the basis of the first judgment that the election was allowed to
go ahead, and it is on that basis that Matatiele, from 1 March 2006
already, has been part of – and has moved – on the judgment of the
Constitutional Court, because the part that was unprocedural was suspended
until February next year.

So, everything that was decided on in terms of this legislation - the
substance of it - was upheld and therefore the municipality has been
transferred and has been operating under the Eastern Cape.

The only issue that was found to be unprocedural, on the evidence put
before the court, was that one of the nine provinces that, in terms of the
Constitution, has a veto right over the passing of this Bill in the NCOP,
the province of KwaZulu-Natal, did not go far enough in their consultation.

So the myth that some people are trying to create here, that somehow the
courts have been overruled, is not correct. Every substantive issue was
decided in favour of government in terms of moving Matatiele. It was the
one procedural issue which we are now dealing with, and the people will go
back in KwaZulu-Natal, consult with those communities and then make a
decision.

The other thing that I find really extraordinary – and you’ll find this
particularly with people that were close to the colonialists that occupied
this country - is that the boundaries of this country are a colonial
fiction and myth that were created. Subsequent to that, those were all
imposed upon us.

During the negotiation process, the ANC made it very clear that we were not
necessarily in favour of the boundaries that the colonialists had carved
here, and we only agreed to them as a compromise.

Boundaries are not fixed in any reality, except in some people’s heads, for
some strange reason. The boundaries of this country, whether they be
municipal or provincial, will not only change now, but will be changed in
the future as well to make sure that we create the best boundaries that
will allow us to govern properly in this country. It’s all about
functionality and not about your little racist dreams and concepts that
certain people should live in certain provinces. [Applause.]

I thank the ANC, once again, for supporting the Bill.
Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES — 269: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
   E; Asmal,A K; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Beukman, F;
   Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi,
   M S; Burgess, C V; Carrim, Y I; Cele, MA; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
   Chohan, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N;
   Daniels, P; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza,A T; Dikgacwi,
   M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Doidge, G
   Q M; Du Toit, D C ; Erwin, A; Fazzie,M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G
   J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum,A H; Gcwabaza, N E;
   George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L;
   Gomomo, P J; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede,
   M M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A ; Hangana, N E; Hendricks, L B;
   Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N; Hogan, B A; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R;
   Kekana, C D; Khaoue, M K; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K;
   Khumalo, K M; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z;
   Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe,
   C I; Luthuli, A N; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L;
   Madella, A F; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E;
   Magwanishe, G B; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S;
   Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maluleka,
   H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N;
   Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M;
   Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
   Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S
   M; Maziya, A M; Mbete, B; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana,
   M M S; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, I S; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z
   S; Mkongi, B M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B
   J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I
   D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga,M R; Mokoena,A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T;
   Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M;
   Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss,
   M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B ; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B;
   Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndlazi, Z A;
   Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S;
   Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngcobo, N W;
   Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G;
   Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C;
   Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli,M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-
   Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J; Olifant, D A
   A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M;
   Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E; Radebe, B A;
   Rajbally, S; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M;
   Reid, L R R; Rwexana, S P; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A;
   Seadimo, M D; Sefularo, M; Sehlare, L J; Sekgobela, P S; Selau, J G;
   September, C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Siboza, S ;
   Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Smith, V G; Solo,
   B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
   Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tobias,
   T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J;
   Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der
   Merwe, S C; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y;
   Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.

   NOES — 56: Bhengu, M J; Bici, J; Biyela, B P ; Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G
   G; Botha, A; Botha, C-S; Coetzee, R; Cupido, H B ; Davidson, I O; De
   Lille, P; Delport, J T; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
   Gibson, D H M; Greyling, L W; Joubert, L K; Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V;
   Kganyago, N M; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lowe, C M; Lucas, E
   J; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J ; Mncwango, M A; Morgan, G R;
   Mpontshane, A M; Nefolovhodwe, P J; Nel, A H; Nkabinde, N C; Opperman, S
   E; Rabinowitz, R; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J
   A; Seremane,W J; Sibuyana,M W; Sigcau, S N; Singh, N; Skosana, M B;
   Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Trent, E W; Van Der Walt,
   D; Van Dyk, S M; Vos, S C; Waters, M; Weber, H.

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

   CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES LAWS REPEAL AND RELATED MATTERS AMENDMENT
                                    BILL

   (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
                                 Government)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

   CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES LAWS REPEAL AND RELATED MATTERS AMENDMENT
                                    BILL
                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Deputy Minister needs water, please. Where are the
service officers? [Laughter.] Ngikuzwile phela. [I heard you.]


The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Deputy Speaker,
hon Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, in 2004 the ANC, in its
election manifesto, committed itself to a people’s contract to work
together to build a better South Africa and to improve the quality of life
of all citizens. We specifically resolved to broaden access to basic
services and agreed to focus ...


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy Minister, please take a minute. Let us allow
those members who want to leave, to do so quietly.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: ... amongst other
things, on the need to speed up programmes to provide water and sanitation,
electricity and telephone services to those who are not yet connected; and
to realise the Batho Pele principles and improve services from our various
arms of government.

In the 2006 local government elections, we further renewed our vision for
2014 and said that we needed to accelerate our pace in improving the lives
of our people. In this regard, we specifically said that we were determined
to make local government work better in order to build a better South
Africa. Deputy Speaker, could I have some water here, please? We need to
remind ourselves that it was these electoral mandates that directly
informed our decision to review the dispensation of cross-boundary
municipalities.

Let us look at the rationale for the eradication of former cross-boundary
municipalities. In 2003 and 2004 this government undertook a rigorous
assessment of the performance of the new local government system since its
inauguration in December 2000. We reached a key conclusion that many people
were not feeling the impact of the new system of developmental local
government.

It was also this same assessment of all 284 municipalities that directly
informed the initiation of Project Consolidate in October 2004. This local
government review and our work on Project Consolidate highlighted key
challenges and problems facing the 16 former cross-boundary municipalities,
which affected five provinces.

It became very clear that these municipalities had very complicated
administrative and governance arrangements that led to a number of problems
pertaining to the implementation of differing provincial legislation
pertaining to health and traffic; the co-ordination of housing and
infrastructure projects; the finalisation of integrated development plans,
the IDPs, and their alignment with different provincial growth and
development strategies; and, lastly, the differing provincial financial
management systems impacting on the affected municipalities.

In our view, the combined result of this system of cross-boundary
municipalities negatively impacted on our communities and deprived them of
the optimal set of services due to them by our provincial governments and
former cross-boundary municipalities. It was against this background that
this House, the NCOP and all the relevant provinces adopted legislation to
do away with all the cross-boundary municipalities. This was facilitated
through the enactment of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act of 2005,
and the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act,
Act 23 of 2005.


When we passed this legislation in 2005, this government committed itself
to ensuring that all former cross-boundary municipalities would be better
off than they were as cross-boundary municipalities; that service delivery
would also improve and therefore the affected communities would benefit;
and that national and provincial government would be mobilised, as well as
resources, to ensure a smooth transition and accelerated service delivery
at the local level.

In 2006 the community of the Matatiele Local Municipality challenged the
constitutional validity of our legislation. On 18 August 2006 the
Constitutional Court found that the KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislature
failed to facilitate public participation in the legislative process, as
required by section 118(1)(a) of the Constitution. It is for this primary
reason that we are reconvening here today to correct this unfortunate
oversight and to renew our pledge of ensuring that our people in the
realigned municipalities reap the maximum amount of fruit of this people’s
government at all levels.

In 2005 this Parliament and the affected seven provinces engaged in a
process of consultation with local communities regarding our system of
cross-boundary municipalities and sought to get their comments and views on
a range of matters. It is, once again, unfortunate in retrospect that only
a single issue has dominated the public discourse, especially via the
media, regarding the subject of our consultations with our people.

That issue has been whether communities should reside in a particular
province or not. Our understanding of the Constitution, the laws of this
country and the programmes of this government is that it is incumbent on
every level and component of government to exercise its full developmental
mandate to the maximum benefit of our people, regardless of where our
people are located.

We therefore recognise that our provinces are differentially endowed with
resources and capacity, primarily due to the legacy of apartheid’s uneven
spatial human settlements and economic development policies. It is for this
reason that subsequent to the enactment of the Constitution Twelfth
Amendment Act in 2005, national government and the affected provinces
undertook various measures to positively advantage the former cross-
boundary municipalities and our communities in these areas.

Since 2006, government’s institutional response to support these realigned
municipalities has comprised a number of elements, including: signing a
memorandum of understanding, provincial implementation protocols and
service level agreements between and with affected provinces and
municipalities to ensure uninterrupted service delivery. The institution
...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, Deputy Minister, your time has expired.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Oh, so quickly?
[Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Cross-Boundary Municipalities
Laws Repeal and Related Matters Bill flows from the Constitution Thirteenth
Amendment Bill, whose aim is to correct a defect, as reflected earlier, of
the province of KwaZulu-Natal not having held public hearings during the
processing of the principal Act and the Constitution. We had to retrace our
steps, so to speak, and reintroduce the laws again. And, as is the practice
in the committee and as we did before, we requested both departmental
interaction and briefings and public submissions to help us decide whether
or not to support the Bill as presented.

The circumstances the Bill deals with are complex and not simple. Since we
were not conducting a referendum per se, we scrutinised the submissions for
persuasive arguments to sway us against the proposed Bill, as presented to
us.

I thought that it would be appropriate to share with members someone who
reflected on leadership challenges, which are relevant to our discussions
here today, because this is about leadership and it signifies our
differences with the opposition profoundly.

In a book called Leadership on the Line, the writers argue as follows:

  To lead is to live dangerously, because when leadership counts, when you
  lead people through difficult change, you challenge what people hold
  dear, their daily habits, loyalties and ways of thinking, with nothing
  more to offer perhaps than a possibility.

  Moreover, leadership often means exceeding the authority you are given to
  tackle the challenge at hand. People push back when you disturb the
  personal and institutional equilibrium they know. And people resist in
  all kinds of creative and unexpected ways that can get you taken out of
  the game.

This speaks to the leadership experience of the ANC. It has never neglected
or abdicated its responsibility to provide leadership to the people it
comes from. We have never been merely comfortable being born of the people,
but have always accepted the responsibility to provide leadership. This
means that we accepted that even if people wanted to have the comfort, for
example, from their inception as tribal groupings to fight, that did not
succeed and this is why the ANC was formed.

We did not become comfortable with the reality that the organisation was
made up of professionals, traditional leaders and so on. We insisted on the
involvement of women over time. We insisted on the involvement of workers
over time and, of course, we also did not only insist that the organisation
embrace the role of women inside the organisation, but also that gender
equality must be the objective of the organisation; in short, it could have
been very easy for us to say this is what the people would prefer to do,
but we said we are bigger and greater than parochially our interests may
be.

In that sense, what we did in this instance was not only to listen to what
people were saying, but to look at what the leadership responsibilities are
that we have. We conducted our review of the Bill and submissions from the
public, fully aware that the provinces, as stated earlier, were going to be
given an opportunity to express their views further. We were also mindful
of the bigger picture, as I said: the objectives of the legislation to
remove impediments to effective service delivery in the areas affected.

The changes in the population and in the political leadership and in the
staffing of these organisations were profound following the elections. So,
it would be very difficult for us, this judgment having come five months
after March, to simply accept a reversal of those with ease.

The current service delivery problems cannot be treated in those areas as
permanent features, not that anybody ever suggested it. In fact, the
reality is that increasing resources, as argued earlier here, are going
into those areas to make a difference in those conditions. We trust that
the Ministers present here today and those not here will continue to
pressure their departments to speed up contributions in those areas in
order to address people’s concerns, so that these, being at the heart of
some of the concerns people are raising, are addressed.

The Cabinet’s decision, following the Local Government: Municipal
Demarcation Act, that all departments must align their service delivery
boundaries with municipal boundaries, remains an outstanding job. This
unfinished business is directly responsible, in part for the concerns that
are being raised. Technology and people deployment must be harnessed
effectively to achieve those objectives. The roll-out of the Thusong
centres more vigorously will go a long way towards meeting people’s
concerns where they live.

Our stance in support of the Bill is intended to facilitate the meeting of
people’s underlying concerns about service delivery, to spare provinces,
the municipalities and other national departments further institutional and
administrative and political changes that are themselves not cheap, so that
we help to focus the energies of the state institutions and those of the
people themselves on the great task of dealing with poverty, and dealing
with it effectively. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr M SWART: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, oorgrensmunisipaliteite is destyds
ingestel om gemeenskappe by die naaste munisipaliteit te laat inskakel, ten
spyte daarvan dat hulle in ’n ander provinsie woonagtig was. Daar is
gereken dat die naaste munisipaliteit belangriker is as om in dieselfde
provinsie te bly en by ’n munisipaliteit ingedeel te word wat verder geleë
is.

Dit het baie gemoedere gekalmeer om darem by die munisipaliteit te bly, al
is daar provinsiale grense getrek wat gemeenskappe verdeel het. Daar is ook
gemeen dat munisipale dienste beter gelewer sal kan word al is so ’n
gemeenskap in `n ander provinsie.

Oorgrensmunisipaliteite is ’n eksperiment wat in die praktyk misluk het.
Oorgrensmunisipaliteite het dit moeilik gevind om met twee stelle wette van
twee provinsies rekening te hou. Die wetgewers van twee provinsies het
byvoorbeeld uiteenlopende wette gemaak ten opsigte van gesondheid,
behuising en beplanning. Munisipale amptenare moes dus daarmee rekening hou
dat verskillende reëls vir die oorgrensgebiede gegeld het.

Oor die skakeling met provinsies moes daar natuurlik by twee verskillende
kantore in twee verskillende hoofstede geskakel word. Omdat die
verskillende kantore in die verskillende provinsies nie ewe flink was nie,
het munisipaliteite dikwels verleë gestaan dat hulle nie dieselfde
standaard diens kan lewer aan al hulle gebiede nie. Ongelukkig laat
munisipale dienslewering feitlik orals in die land veel te wense oor en het
die oorgrenssituasie by daardie munisipaliteite dienslewering verder
versleg en van hierdie munisipaliteite het ook geskuil agter die
oorgrenssituasie, as ’n verskoning vir hulle vrot diens.

Die DA is daarom ten gunste van hierdie wetgewing wat wegdoen met
oorgrensmunisipaliteite. Alhoewel die DA nog altyd die herroeping van
hierdie wet voorgestaan het, het ons ons besware oor hoe die grenswysigings
hanteer is. Daardie besware vir ons is dat in plaas daarvan dat die
Minister en politici deurentyd betrokke was om met die publiek te skakel,
is dit aan amptenare en die munisipale afbakeningsraad oorgelaat om
gemeenskappe se voorstelle en besware aan te hoor.

Minister Mufamadi was nou nog nie by brandpunte soos Khutsong en Matatiele
nie. Die gemeenskappe is nooit behoorlik ingelig om die groter prentjie te
sien nie. Hulle is nie ingelig oor waarom oorgrensmunisipaliteite ’n onding
is nie. Hulle is nie ingelig dat geld geskuif sal word na die ontvangende
provinsie toe nie, sodat dienste nie sal versleg nie. Die ontvangende
provinsies het nie genoegsaam uitgereik na die gemeenskappe om hulle te
verseker dat daar na hulle behoeftes omgesien sal word nie.

Daar is ook nie genoegsaam oorleg gepleeg met en geluister na gemeenskappe
nie. Die ANC het gedink dat hy sy eie aanhangers links en regs kan skuif en
hulle sal dit maar net aanvaar. Nou sit ons met onluste en ontwrigting
waaruit ons moeilik gaan kom. Die DA het gewaarsku oor die swak
oorlegpleging en die blote feit dat die wetsontwerp weer vandag voor die
Huis is, is ’n bewys dat ons reg was. Die ANC het ook duidelik indelings
gemaak teen die wense van die gemeenskappe.

As byvoorbeeld Khutsong en Matatiele met ’n referendum getoets sou word,
sal dit duidelik word dat die gemeenskappe onderskeidelik in Gauteng en
KwaZulu-Natal wil wees. Dit is vir ons duidelik dat die ANC seker wil maak
dat mense so geskuif word, dat dit die ANC se posisie in die Noord-Kaap,
Gauteng en KwaZulu-Natal sal versterk. Die DA steun hierdie wetsontwerp.
Dit is egter duidelik dat met die Ministers en die ANC se swak hantering
van die saak, hulle ’n lat vir hulself in die pekel gelê het, wat nog lank
by ons gaan wees. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr M SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, cross-boundary municipalities were
originally established to integrate communities into the nearest
municipality, despite the fact that they were living in another province.
It was considered more important to be in the nearest municipality than
remaining in the same province and being placed in a municipality which was
situated further away.

It calmed many flaring tempers to remain with the municipality, even though
provincial boundaries had been drawn that divided communities. It was also
thought that municipal services could be delivered better, even if such a
community was in another province.

Cross-boundary municipalities are an experiment that failed in practice.
Cross-boundary municipalities found it difficult to cope with two sets of
laws from two provinces. The legislatures of two provinces made divergent
laws, for example, with regard to health, housing and planning. Municipal
officials had to take into account that different rules applied to the
cross-boundary areas.

With regard to liaising with provinces, two different offices in two
different provinces had to be contacted. Because the different offices in
the different provinces were not equally quick to respond, the
municipalities were frequently embarrassed that they could not supply the
same standard of service to all their areas. Unfortunately municipal
service delivery leaves much to be desired virtually everywhere in the
country and the cross-boundary situation in those municipalities further
worsened that service delivery and some of these municipalities also hid
behind the cross-boundary situation, as an excuse for their bad service.

The DA is therefore in favour of this legislation that abolishes cross-
boundary municipalities. Although the DA has always been in favour of
repealing this act, we have objections as regards the way in which the
boundary changes are being dealt with. These objections are that instead of
the Minister and politicians continually being involved to interact with
the public, it was left to officials and the Municipal Demarcation Board to
hear communities’ suggestions and objections.

Minister Mufamadi has still not been to hotspots like Khutsong and
Matatiele. The communities were never properly informed of the bigger
picture. They were not informed as to why cross-boundary municipalities
were bad. They were not informed that money would be trasferred to the
recipient province, so that services would not deteriorate. The recipient
province did not reach out sufficiently to the communities to assure them
that their needs would be catered for.
There was also not sufficient consultation with communities and they were
not listened to adequately. The ANC thought that it could shift its own
supporters this way and that and that they would simply accept it. Now we
have protests and disruptions from which we will struggle to extricate
ourselves. The DA warned about the poor consultation and the simple fact
that this Bill is before this House again today, is proof that we were
right. The ANC has also clearly redrawn boundaries against the wishes of
the communities.

If Khutsong and Matatiele, for example, were tested with a referendum, it
would become clear that the communities want to be in Gauteng and KwaZulu-
Natal respectively. It is clear to us that the ANC wants to ensure that
people are shifted in such a way that it will strengthen the ANC’s position
in the Northern Cape, Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal.

The DA supports this Bill. It is clear, however, that with the bad handling
by the Ministers and the ANC they have been hoist with their own petard and
we will suffer the consequences for a long time. I thank you.]

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Hon Deputy Speaker, the real issue underlying Matatiele’s
discontent is centred on issues of identity, not service delivery. In other
words, people are saying that, in terms of identity, they associate
themselves with KwaZulu-Natal, rather than the Eastern Cape.
This is an argument centred on emotion. It is an argument where people are
saying they have a preference for where they want to live, because they
have positive associations with one province over another. They feel more
connected with a specific province and, all things being equal, would
prefer to live in the province of their choice.

This is a complete anathema to this government. The government refuses to
acknowledge that such feelings have any merit. In fact, the ANC denies the
validity and even the legitimacy of such arguments, stating, as if this has
any relevance at all, that we are all South Africans. Yes, of course we are
all South Africans, but what has that got to do with the fact that within
one country, one can have additional loyalties?

The ANC feels very uncomfortable with this. It is so centrist in its
mindset, so unitarist in its approach to governance, that it fails to
comprehend that regional and local identities can legitimately exist within
the country alongside a common national identity. This is false thinking,
and it is this type of false thinking that has the ANC dismissing all
arguments centred on identity, acknowledging only arguments based on
delivery and then promptly saying that this can be addressed by improving
delivery from the Eastern Cape.

I have just come back from a study tour to Germany, which, like South
Africa, is engaged in a review of the federal system. It is striking how
differently they deal with these things. There, they really consult the
people ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr M A MNCWANGO: ... and do not rely on “Mickey Mouse” consultation.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! I personally was interested in your
story on Germany, but there’s no time left.

Mr M A MNCWANGO: The IFP rejects this.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Hon Deputy Speaker, as a result of the inter-relationship
between the Constitution Twelfth Amendment and the Cross-Boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act of 2005, the
Constitutional Court declared that part of the repeal Act, which relates to
the Matatiele Municipality, to be unconstitutional. That is the reason for
this amending Bill, which is dependent on the passing of the Constitution
Thirteenth Amendment Bill.

The crux of the matter relates to the nature and scope of the
constitutional obligations to facilitate public involvement in the
legislative processes, as stated in the Matatiele case, and I quote:
“Clearly, the duty to facilitate public participation had required that the
people of Matatiele be given the reasonable opportunity to engage with the
KwaZulu-Natal legislature.” The KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislature did
not hold public hearings or invite written submissions on the issue.

Similar arguments pertain to this Bill as to the Constitution Thirteenth
Amendment Bill. It would, in our view, be premature to support this Bill
until the public hearings have been held in the affected areas. The ACDP
will not support this Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Speaker and hon members, we are engaged in an
effort to pass this Bill because someone in the government of KwaZulu-Natal
failed to do their work properly in 2005, when they failed to hold public
hearings in that province. Failure to adhere to constitutional dictates is
a grave matter.

In a country that respects the views of the people and the Constitution,
that particular individual and even that government should have been shown
the exit door. A lapse in detail has cost the taxpayer dearly.

The UCDP has never supported cross-boundary municipalities. We also
maintain that provincial boundaries should not be treated as if they were
cast in stone like those of the colonial era.

We take note that the irregularity has had to be regularised and therefore
support the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
Amendment Bill, as we did with the principal Act in 2005. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, as advocated in the Constitution
Thirteenth Amendment Bill debate, the utmost respect and adherence to the
national Constitution should in no way be compromised. It’s the
preservation of the people’s rights and the delivery of services to the
people that need to be monitored to ensure true democracy. However, we also
stress that it is transparency and consultation with the people that
secures our people’s trust and satisfaction in our government.

The MF believes that the separation of powers, which our Constitution
clearly instructs, saves us from autonomy and ensures a system of checks
and balances. The provisions that serve as correction to the Eastern Cape
and KwaZulu-Natal municipality dilemma appear to provide much clarity and
hopefully better service delivery. We sincerely hope that the people of
Matatiele will be patient in reaping the benefits of this decision. The MF
will support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, when the legislation was passed to have
Matatiele incorporated into the Eastern Cape, it went against the wishes of
residents of the area. The residents challenged the constitutionality of
the legislation and the Constitutional Court ruled in favour of the
community on a technicality. Parliament was given 18 months to correct the
constitutional defect. This Bill aims to correct the omission to legally
transfer Matatiele from KwaZulu-Natal to the Eastern Cape.

The question remains whether the problem surrounding the incorporation of
Matatiele into the Eastern Cape will be resolved, despite the new law. The
initial process was flawed, yet 18 months down the line, while the
residents have managed to restore constitutionality to the legislative
process, their circumstances remain the same.

The protests against the demarcation were not only socioeconomic in nature.
The residents did not want to be incorporated into an area they felt would
leave them worse off than they already were. Government has transferred
staff and assets to the Eastern Cape, but the struggle remains an uphill
battle for the people of Matatiele.

Whether improvements in municipal delivery will change the perception of
the affected residents to their new boundary locations remains to be seen.
For now, the situation remains volatile, and this Bill does not help in any
way to further a process in ongoing consultation.

This Bill is a response to a flawed process of the past, which, in order to
be constitutionally valid, required a technical change. The constitutional
ruling could not, however, cause Parliament to rescind its decision on the
original demarcation process and return Matatiele to KwaZulu-Natal. The FD
therefore cannot support this Bill in light of the earlier processes. I
thank you.

Mrs M M GUMEDE: Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy Ministers and
Ministers in the House here, hon members and guests, today I greet you only
in the name of the ANC-led government.

The people of Matatiele have spoken and the ANC has responded accordingly.
The historical mission of the ANC has always been, and will continue being,
to unite all people of South Africa wherever they are, not choosing the
rich places, but wherever those masses are. The mission has at its centre
the creation of a united, nonracial, nonsexist and democratic society.

This then means that our central task is the liberation of our people from
all forms of bondage. It means uplifting the quality of life of all South
Africans, especially the poor and the marginalised, from whom, even today,
some people still want to benefit in an indirect manner. If you want to
benefit from somebody, go directly and ask for a benefit; don’t go about it
indirectly.


Today marks one of the stages in the ongoing work around the Matatiele
boundary changes. Today we adopt the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws
Repeal and Related Matters Amendment Bill, which seeks to amend the Cross-
Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act of 2005. In
2005 the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act and the Cross-Boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act were passed by both
Houses of Parliament to do away with cross-boundary municipalities and kick-
start the process of redetermination of provincial boundaries.

Ulalele kahle, lungu elihloniphekile.[Please listen carefully, hon member.]

You must listen very carefully. It has kick-started the process to correct
whatever might have been going wrong somewhere. Today we have corrected
that.

The Constitutional Court identified procedural defects in processing the
Bills by the KZN legislature in terms of absence of public involvement. The
KZN legislature, in considering and passing the Bill, did not conduct
sufficient public hearings and such an act was deemed inconsistent with the
Constitution and therefore the Acts were deemed invalid. This only applied
to the aspects that relate to Matatiele between the two provinces of the
Eastern Cape and KZN.

The court ruling therefore suspended it – the court didn’t say it shouldn’t
happen – for correction due to the failure of the KZN legislature to
conduct public hearings. The ANC didn’t move away because there was an
error. The ANC-led government came very close to those people who were
upset about what was happening, and today they have responded.

While the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act
was not necessarily one of the major key pieces of legislation for local
government, it has been the single most controversial piece of legislation
that continues to attract attention due to the community of Matatiele
challenging the constitutional validity of the earlier legislation in
respect of which the Constitutional Court found that KwaZulu-Natal had
failed to facilitate public participation in the legislative processes
required by the Constitution, which states that a provincial legislature
must facilitate public involvement in the legislative and other processes
of the legislature and its committees.

I’m not going to go into anything that has been said by somebody, but as I
was seated here, somebody said it was Mickey Mouse consultation, but I’ll
get back to that later on.

The Constitutional Court felt that the previous Act that altered the
boundary of KZN was invalid and it had not been adopted in a manner that
was consistent with the Constitution. Accordingly, the court declared that
part of the Act that transferred the area of Matatiele Municipality to the
Eastern Cape province as invalid. It was by then invalid.

However, the court order did not reject the contents of the Act, but
principally suspended the order of invalidity for 18 months – it was
invalid for 18 months – so that Parliament could, if it so wished, adopt a
new amendment in a manner that was consistent with the requirements of the
Constitution, and today we are doing exactly that in response to the court
order.

We can’t run away. The ANC-led government will never run away from
anything. It will just abide by the rules and regulations of the structure
that has been mandated to correct whatever needs to be corrected. The court
order also created room for extension if Parliament failed to meet the
deadline. I am pleased today that Parliament is now adopting this Bill way
before the cutoff date and would not necessarily need any extension.

By concluding with the Bill, we are then hoping that the area of Matatiele
will normalise and that the municipality will continue to play a leadership
role and drive development, involving and empowering citizens in the
development process and creating a sense of common purpose by all the
people affected.

Let me get back to that statement about “Mickey Mouse” consultation...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, there’s no time for the “Mickey Mouse”
story. [Laughter.]

Mrs M M GUMEDE: You know, Madam Speaker, really ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, there is no time, hon member! Will you please
leave. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Deputy
Speaker, hon members, in concluding this debate I’d like to bring to the
attention of the House that when the DA started advancing these counter-
arguments, cross-boundary municipalities were not a new creation of this
government. You know that very well and you sat very comfortably when these
boundaries were created under apartheid. You named them Bantustans. You
were sitting very comfortably and doing nothing, so you are the last people
to come and tell us what to do. [Interjections.]

We are aware of a number of challenges that continue to face these
realigned municipalities in the area of service delivery backlogs and the
strengthening of their municipal institutional capabilities. These
challenges will continue to receive focused and dedicated attention.

Following the deliberations here today, this legislation will proceed to
the NCOP and the provincial legislatures of the KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern
Cape governments. The latter is especially viewed as crucial, since these
legislatures are in relatively close proximity to the affected communities.
It is important that the process unfolds in a manner that allows for
greater accessibility and participation by our people.
Today is another important milestone in our efforts to build a better South
Africa for all. You sat and did nothing under apartheid! [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Federation of Democrats, Inkatha Freedom Party and
African Christian Democratic Party dissenting).

                  Criminal law (sentencing) amendment bill

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker,
colleagues, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I stand before this House to
call on all members in this House to support this Bill. I will now give you
the rationale.

The Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1997, which came into operation on 1 May
1998, dealt with the abolition of the death penalty and created a legal
regime of discretionary minimum sentences in respect of certain serious
offences. During the Second Reading debate on the Criminal Law Amendment
Bill, on 6 November 1997, our beloved late Minister of Justice, Dullah
Omar, described the introduction of discretionary minimum sentences for
certain serious crimes as an important matter for our country and in the
fight against crime in particular.

Discretionary minimum sentences are only provided for in respect of a small
number of serious and defined offences. In each case the presiding judicial
officer has the discretion to impose a lesser sentence than the prescribed
minimum sentence, if he or she is satisfied that substantial and compelling
circumstances exist which justify the imposition of such a lesser sentence.


The offences to which discretionary minimum sentences are applicable are
listed in schedule 2 of the Act. These offences are categorised in terms of
their degree of seriousness. For instance, Part 1, which carries potential
life imprisonment, comprises murder with aggravated circumstances, as well
as many instances of rape such as gang rape and rape of a minor. The Act
also provides that these provisions will lapse unless they are renewed, for
periods of two years at a time, by the President with the concurrence of
Parliament.

The discretionary minimum sentences provisions were extended on 1 May 2007
for a further period of two years in order to allow Parliament time to
consider and pass the Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill. The Bill
proposes the repeal of the provision in terms of which the minimum
sentences provisions shall lapse after two years, and it will therefore not
be necessary in future to follow this procedure.

When the minimum sentences provisions were first debated and even once they
were enacted, stakeholders in the legal fraternity were divided on their
constitutionality. Some argued that their prescriptive nature constituted
an unwarranted interference in the judicial function of sentencing. The
late Minister Omar, in summarising the main arguments in favour of the
introduction of minimum sentences during the Second Reading debate of 1997
referred to earlier, stated the following in this regard:

  In terms of the proposed legislation, the courts are granted discretion
  to deviate from the prescribed minimum sentences. The introduction of
  minimum sentences could therefore not be regarded in this Bill as being
  interference with the independence of the judiciary.

In deciding challenges brought against the minimum sentences legislation in
the years following this enactment, the Constitutional Court, on two
occasions, as well as the Supreme Court of Appeal held that the provisions
were indeed consistent with the Constitution and in line with the
executive’s and the legislature’s interest and mandate as far as sentencing
was concerned.

In State v Dzukuda of 2000, the Constitutional Court dismissed allegations
that section 52 of the Act infringed on an accused’s right to a fair trial
in terms of section 35 of the Constitution.

A year later, in State v Dodo of 2001, the Constitutional Court had to deal
with an application from the High Court for confirmation of a declaration
of constitutional invalidity of section 51(1) of the Act. The High Court
declared the section in question to be constitutionally invalid, because it
was inconsistent with section 35(3)(c) of the Constitution and was also
inconsistent with the separation of powers required by the Constitution.

The Constitutional Court, in interpreting the words “substantial and
compelling circumstances” in section 51(3) of the Ac, endorsed the step-by-
step sentencing procedure set out in State v Malgas by the Supreme Court of
Appeal. The Court held in this regard that this interpretation of the SCA
steers an appropriate path, which the legislature doubtless intended,
respecting the legislature’s decision to ensure that consistently heavier
sentences are imposed in relation to the serious crimes covered by section
51 and, at the same time, promoting the spirit, purport and objects of the
Bill of Rights.

It is therefore necessary to briefly highlight some of the main points made
in the Malgas case. Section 51 has not eliminated the courts' discretion in
imposing a sentence in respect of offences referred to in Part 1 of
Schedule 2. Courts are required to approach the imposition of sentence
conscious of the fact that the legislature has ordained life imprisonment
as the sentence that should ordinarily and in the absence of weightier
justification be imposed for the listed crimes in the specified
circumstances. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: The Minister of Justice is going to lend me her speech so
that I can finish it for her.

Hon members, the Bill before us is an amendment to the Criminal Law Act on
minimum sentences which was passed in 1997. That Act put in place a regime
of minimum sentences for certain serious offences which the Constitutional
Court has correctly described as discretionary. This is so because a
judicial officer, upon finding substantial and compelling circumstances,
may deviate from the minimum sentences set down in the legislation.

Up to now, this House has not guided the courts in any way as to the
precise meaning of the phrase “substantial and compelling”. As members, we
will know that the 1997 Act, which the Minister has already alluded to, was
not necessarily well received by some members of the judiciary and the
legal fraternity. In not one but two Constitutional Court cases that court
found the legislation entirely constitutional. In one of those cases, State
v Dodo, Justice Ackermann quoted, with approval, the first certification
judgment, where the court said:


  The separation of powers anticipates the necessary or unavoidable
  intrusion of one branch on the terrain of the other. No constitutional
  scheme can reflect a complete separation of powers. The scheme is always
  one of partial separation.

However, notwithstanding these and other definitive judgments, including
the superb judgment alluded to by the Minister in State v Malgas, where the
court detailed the finer aspects relating to the application of
“substantial and compelling”, disdain for this legislation in some quarters
has persisted. This is particularly true in rape cases.

Members are familiar with the case of State v Abrahams where the courts
held that the accused, who had raped his 14-year-old daughter, was not a
threat to society as a whole, and this was, in itself, a mitigating factor.
Although the Appeal Court in that case found that the judge had misdirected
himself, tendencies along this line of reasoning persist in our courts.

In State v Mahomotsa, the accused, who was 23 years old, raped a girl under
the age of 16 after brandishing a firearm. He was arrested and, while
awaiting trial, he raped another girl under 16, threatening to stab her
with a knife. In both cases, he raped these girls more than once. I now
want to quote from the judgment delivered so that members can see for
themselves the kinds of attitudes that prevail in regard to rape cases. The
judge says and I quote:

  Although there was intercourse ...

note “intercourse” –

  ... with each complainant more than once, this was the result of the
  virility of a young man still at school who had intercourse with other
  school pupils against their wishes ...

and notes -

  ... school pupils who had previously been sexually active. Where one is
  dealing with school pupils and where, in addition, it appears that the
  two girls concerned had already had intercourse before, one really
  shouldn’t lose perspective, especially not in relation to the first
  count, which dealt with a complainant who had, in any event, been naughty
  a few days earlier, and had intercourse with somebody else.


  The injustice which she suffered in this case does not demand an
  unusually severe punishment.

There are many examples of clearly inappropriate and often sexist
pronouncements emanating from some quarters in our judiciary.

Lest we are too quick to conclude that these attitudes vest only in male
judges, I would refer members to the appeal of Nkomo v the State where it
was left to Acting Justice of Appeal Theron, in a dissenting judgment, to
restore to the victim a measure of dignity.

In this case, the victim was held hostage all night by the perpetrator. She
was forced to remain naked for the entire period. She was physically
assaulted to overcome her resistance to performing oral sex on the
perpetrator. She was raped on four occasions. In her desperation to escape,
she jumped from the second floor of a building despite the potential danger
to her life and notwithstanding the unanimous finding by the court, “It is
difficult to imagine a rape under much worse conditions”, Justice Lewis of
that court found that because there was no serious injury, and the victim’s
wounds were superficial, the perpetrator was young – he happened to be 29
years old – and there was a prospect of rehabilitation, the maximum
sentence was not then pronounced.

Arising from these and other very sadly indicting tendencies in some of our
courts, we have veered into the terrain of the absolute discretion of the
courts in deciding what does and what does not constitute “substantial and
compelling circumstances”. We now propose the following factors will not in
future be able to be considered “substantial and compelling circumstances”
so as to attract a lesser sentence for the accused.

These factors are, firstly, the victim’s sexual history; secondly, the
apparent lack of physical injury to the victim; thirdly, the accused’s
cultural or religious values regarding rape; and, fourthly, any previous
relationship between the accused and the victim.

Previously – coming now to the issue of jurisdiction – after convicting
accused persons for crimes listed in Part 1, which are the most serious
crimes, our regional courts stopped proceedings and referred such cases to
the High Court for sentencing, owing mainly to a lack of statutory
jurisdiction to pass the sentence of life imprisonment. Apart from the
administrative delay caused in transferring a case from one court to the
other, some High Courts refused to simply sentence the accused based on the
record of the proceedings in the lower court, and insisted on rehearing
evidence. This often led to secondary trauma for victims, particularly in
rape cases when a woman or a child victim had to give evidence not once,
but twice before our courts.

This two-tier process is now being removed, with the necessary jurisdiction
being conferred on the regional court to pass life-imprisonment sentences.
Where a person is sentenced to life imprisonment in a regional court, an
automatic right to appeal will attach. At the same time, we now require the
National Prosecuting Authority to clearly stipulate a policy on prosecuting
the most serious crimes in the High Court as the court of first instance.
We intend by this measure that, as far as possible, most serious crimes
will be prosecuted in the High Courts and not in the regional courts, as
has been the practice up to now. This is to reassert the role of dominus
litus in respect of the National Prosecuting Authority.

Lastly and finally, the committee has added the ritual murder of people or
the so-called “witch killings” to Part 1 of the Schedule to the Act. In
this regard, while all premeditated murders are already in this category,
it was thought to abide by the request of the Premier of Limpopo to deal
harshly with crimes of this nature so as to send a strong message that muti
murders or witch killings, the victims of which are largely women and
children, are cowardly crimes which will be dealt with extremely harshly by
the state in all its manifestations. I thank you for your attention, hon
members. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Voorsitter, my inligting is dat dit waarskynlik die laaste
keer is wat die agb voorsitter van die portefeuljekomitee hier in daardie
hoedanigheid optree. Ek wil vir haar sê dit was ’n voorreg om saam met haar
te werk.

Ons sal haar skerp intellek en deeglike voorbereiding mis. Sy is bekend as
iemand wat nogal hardkoppig kan wees, maar ek moet bysê sy is altyd
diplomaties hardkoppig. Dit is jammer dat ons so min tyd het om werklik
belangrike wetgewing te debatteer in hierdie Huis. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr J T DELPORT: Chairperson, my information is that this is probably the
last time that the hon chairperson of the portfolio committee will act in
this capacity here. Therefore, I want to tell her that it has been a
privilege working with her.

We will miss her sharp intellect and thorough preparation. She is known as
someone that can be somewhat stubborn at times, but I should add that she
is always diplomatically stubborn. It is a pity that we have so little time
to really debate important legislation in this House.]

I cannot do justice to what I have to say in four minutes, let alone enter
into a debate with the hon Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development on specific issues.

Laat ek sê ons ondersteun hierdie wetgewing en ons ondersteun absoluut
sterk en streng vonnisse. Trouens, ons wil graag hê alle kriminele moet
voor die gereg kom staan en deur ’n behoorlike proses gaan. Sover dit
verkragting betref, laat ek dit dadelik sê, ek persoonlik sou vir
verkragting met verswarende omstandighede - en ek praat nie namens my party
nie, maar persoonlik - die doodstraf sou wou sien. Só sterk voel ek
daaroor. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Let me say that we support this legislation and we absolutely support
harsh and strict sentences. In fact, we would like to see all criminals
brought before a court of law and go through a proper process. With regard
to rape, let me say immediately, that for rape with aggravating
circumstances - and I am not talking on behalf of my party, but in my
personal capacity – I would like to see the death penalty. This is how
strongly I feel about this.]

Against this background I must express some reservations on the
constitutionality of the clause that limits the discretion of the court to
deviate from the prescribed minimum sentence. In terms of the Bill, a court
may not rely on certain factors in order to find a reason to impose a
lesser sentence, and the chairperson did list these instances.

I am of the opinion that Parliament, here at the very least, borders on
interfering with the discretion of the court. We know that the
Constitutional Court has ruled that minimum sentences per se are not
unconstitutional.

Hierdie bepaling gaan nou veel verder. Dit is nog altyd die imperatief dat
’n hof die totale posisie van ’n beskuldigde sal oorweeg by die oplegging
van ’n gepaste vonnis. Wat ons hier vind is dat daardie diskresie, nee ek
wil verder gaan, daardie verpligting op die hof om na die totale prentjie
te kyk nou aan bande gelê word.

Ek dink ons wil ’n probleem wat bestaan op die verkeerde plek regmaak, want
nie alleen kan daar dalk geargumenteer word – ek sê nie dit is so nie – dat
ons hier inmeng met die bevoegdheidsonafhanklikheid van die regbank, maar
daar is ’n ander fasset wat net so belangrik is. Sal ’n beskuldigde nie kan
aanvoer dat hy nie ’n regverdige verhoor gekry het nie omdat sy totale
prentjie nie deur die hof oorweeg mag geword het nie? (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This provision now goes much further. It has always been the imperative
that the court will evaluate the total position of an accused when imposing
an appropriate sentence. What we find here is that this discretion, no I
want to go further, this obligation of the court to look at the whole
picture is now being restricted.

I think we want to rectify an existing problem in the wrong place, because
not only could it be argued - I am not saying this is the case - that we
are interfering with the competency independence of the judiciary, but
there is another facet that is just as important. Could an accused not say
that he did not get a fair trial because his total circumstances could not
be considered by the court?]

The imposition, however, of minimum sentences is but a small part of the
solution to the overall problem we have. The criminal justice system as a
whole needs to be upgraded if the crime wave is to be stopped in its
tracks.

As far as this legislation and this particular clause are concerned, I will
await further developments, possibly in our courts, with bated breath. We
support this Bill, because we think extreme situations like those we are
experiencing today need extreme measures. I thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, the IFP welcomes this Bill as we have long been
concerned about the delays and other negative aspects caused by having a
person convicted in a regional court transferred to a High Court for
sentencing in terms of the 1997 Act.

This matter has repeatedly been brought to our attention by senior members
of the judiciary and we therefore welcome the action taken by the
department to repeal the relevant provisions. This should, we believe, end
the delays caused by having to transfer cases to the high courts and
should, in our opinion, lead to a quicker finalisation of serious cases.

As a consequence, we also welcome the provision made in this Bill for
regional courts to hand down life sentences and the introduction of an
automatic right of appeal in such cases. We would, however, have liked to
see that the automatic right of appeal also be extended to cases where the
regional courts impose direct prison terms and not just life sentences.

The question of “substantial and compelling circumstances” to be considered
by the judiciary in altering the prescribed minimum sentences remains a
vexed problem. The IFP has never been in favour of such prescriptions as
they potentially impinge on the discretion of judicial officers – something
that the previous member, hon Delport, said. However, we accept that the
Constitutional Court found these prescriptions to be constitutionally valid
and the hon Minister referred to this earlier.

We also welcome the provision that a court may take into account the period
an accused spent as an awaiting-trial prisoner when deciding on a sentence.
We would, however, like this provision to be made compulsory.

The Bill also inserts two further grounds for murder. In this instance, we
would have liked to see a third ground, namely murders committed against
the farming community, also being included, because there have been a
number of these murders taking place in our country at this moment in time.

The IFP will support the Bill. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, most South Africans are overwhelmed and even
preoccupied with crime, its effects and how to combat it. Most categories
of crime are at unacceptably high levels. The callousness of the crimes,
particularly the rapes and murders, has resulted in society calling for
harsher measures, including the reintroduction of the death penalty.

In view of the absence of the death penalty, clearly, the only deterrent
left is long prison sentences, including life imprisonment. Regrettably,
some members of the judiciary have not applied minimum sentences
consistently, resulting in the need for this amending legislation.

As the chair of the portfolio committee has said, the ACDP believes that it
is necessary to provide that certain circumstances shall not constitute
substantial and compelling circumstances justifying a lesser sentence than
that prescribed for rape.

The ACDP will support this amending legislation, as it will further
regulate the imposition of minimum sentences for serious offences including
murder and rape. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, rape, murder, robbery and violence have South
Africans living in fear. And this paranoia exists no matter what statistics
say. When our beloved comrades envisioned our free South Africa, in no way
did they envision the people to once again live lives of oppression, but
this time at the hand of crime.

Poverty has been utilised as a scapegoat for crime in South Africa. While
the MF believes that poverty does have repercussions on the fabric of South
Africa, we believe that criminals in our free South Africa have opted by
free will to commit crime. We don’t believe that poverty tells one to rape,
murder or become violent.

While our national Constitution and legislation govern us with principles
and values that pertain to a good people, domestic morals and values have
been replaced by material desires and evil. In this respect we need to
inculcate the teaching of respect for life and consciousness of our
actions, as our fathers taught us generations before.

We need to redress this important aspect of being South African. The MF
calls for intense and effective rehabilitation of criminals. The MF will
support this Bill. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, turning the tide in dealing with the backlog of
criminal cases in our courts remains one of the primary challenges, yet it
is also one of the critical objectives if you want to win the fight against
crime. Our magistrates’ courts currently have to deal with more than
a million cases, of which it is reported that only about 375 000 have been
finalised thus far and of which 86% have resulted in a conviction.

Our regional courts are apparently the worst hit, given that, since June,
there has been a total of about 47 000 cases outstanding, of which 17 000
are back-dated more than nine months. The current Bill provides for the
streamlining of sentencing, especially relating to serious crime, giving
certain powers to regional courts to impose sentences such as life
imprisonment.

The nature of crime in South Africa is characterised by high levels of
murder, rape and aggravated robbery, and we trust that this Bill will
successfully achieve its intended objectives. Being able to effect high
levels of sentencing does not necessarily mean that crime is under control.
First of all, the Bill elucidates certain provisions to guide the
imposition of minimum sentencing.

The Bill limits mitigating factors of certain circumstances that may have a
bearing on the nature of sentencing imposed by the court. The Bill
correctly comes down hard on offenders convicted of rape and it is moving
in the right direction to assess ways to control the occurrence of rape.
The effective implementation of this Bill may lead to a reduction in the
numbers of offenders on the street, but whether we will experience a
reduction in crime is a matter equally important to consider if we wish to
equate conviction rates with crime reduction.
The FD supports this Bill, but wishes that further strategies relating to
deterrents of crime, such as increased, visible policing and improvement in
crime-detection mechanisms, be enhanced to complement the provisions
contained in this Bill. I thank you.

Ms M V MERUTI: Chairperson, hon members, Parliament has previously passed
legislation providing for minimum sentences. What this means is that our
presiding officers are given discretion to impose a sentence. However, the
legislation compels them to order sentences between certain parameters and
based on certain criteria. In other words, the court may not impose a
sentence that is less than a certain prescribed minimum, unless the court
has found substantial and compelling circumstances in the case. The court
can only deviate from this minimum sentence and, in other words, impose a
lesser sentence, if the court finds that there are substantial and
compelling circumstances in the case.

The legislation was not passed to make sentences mandatory. Presiding
officers still have discretion when it comes to sentencing, except that the
legislation sets out the minimum sentence that the court may impose.
Despite the passing of the legislation, cases show that there are still
presiding officers in our courts who are imposing sentences which are
inappropriate. An example is the case of the State v G, in which the
accused was convicted of raping a 10-year-old girl. The accused was in a
position of trust over the child, as he was the mother’s boyfriend. The
court found that the accused showed absolutely no remorse whatsoever and
that the victims suffered continuous trauma because of the rape. Despite
this, the court still imposed a lesser sentence because the court found
that the violence used during the rape was not excessive and he therefore
did not inflict serious physical injuries on the complainant.

The court seems to forget that rape, in and of itself, is a serious injury
both physically and psychologically. Pronouncements such as these are
unacceptable in a society that has to protect its women and children.
Sentencing is all about attitudes, and this House has a duty to send a
message that crimes such as the rape of children are unacceptable and
demand a heavy sentence.

The Bill before us will make it very clear that our courts may not use
factors such as the complainant’s sexual history, an accused person’s
cultural or religious beliefs about rape, any personal relationship between
the accused and the complainant or a perceived lack of physical or
psychological harm on the victim as mitigating factors to justify lesser or
lighter sentences.

This House needs to speak for victims of rape who cannot speak for
themselves. For example, in the case of the State v Swart the accused had
been convicted of housebreaking with the intent to rape, two counts of rape
and two counts of indecent assault. The evidence showed that the accused
was heavily under the influence of alcohol at the time.

The court found it was more important to cure the accused of his alcohol
abuse, and therefore sentenced the accused to only seven years’
imprisonment, suspended on condition that he seek treatment for his
drinking problem. On appeal, the Supreme Court of Appeal overturned the
sentence and imposed a sentence of 12 years, of which only eight years had
to be served.

Die Grondwet verbind ons tot die daarstel van ’n samelewing wat vry is van
rassisme en seksisme. Ons kan slegs ’n vrye, nie-rassige en geslagsgelyke
samelewing gebou op beginsels van menswaardigheid, gelykheid en vryheid ten
volle verwesenlik, indien ons as `n samelewing ons denke so kan verander
ten einde dit te bereik.

As gevolg van sommige toonaangewende hofuitsprake, veral deur ons
Konstitusionele Hof, is daar reeds groot vordering gemaak op die gebied van
geslagsgelykheid. Tog wil dit voorkom asof daar in verkragtingsake veral
sommige howe is wat steeds onsensitief is teenoor die slagoffers van
verkragting en vonnisse oplê wat nie die misdaad pas nie. Dit is hoekom ons
hierdie wetgewing, wat nou voor die Huis dien, nodig het. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The Constitution enjoins us to establish a society that is free of racism
and sexism. We can only fully realise a free, non-racial society with
gender equity, built on the principles of human dignity, equality and
liberty, if we as a society can change our mindset so as to achieve this
end.

As a result of several authoritative judgments, especially by the
Constitutional Court, there has been significant progress in the field of
gender equity. But it would appear that, in rape cases in particular, some
courts continue to be insensitive to the plight of rape victims, and still
impose sentences which do not fit the crime. That is why we need this
legislation that is now before this House.]

In conclusion, I wish to quote from a comment by the Association of
Regional Magistrates, who will primarily be tasked with the implementation
of this legislation:

   We support the objectives of this Bill fully and are committed to ensure
   that this Bill is put into operation and shall be properly and
   responsibly applied. We are also committed to providing training and
   guidance to our members, pertaining to the appropriate use of the new
   sentencing powers extended to us in this Bill.


We commend our regional courts for this positive approach. With such
enthusiasm we can certainly look forward to the successful implementation
of this important piece of legislation. The ANC supports this Bill.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: It is a
great pleasure to come and speak, seeing that all the parties have agreed
with this Bill. I really do thank members ... well, I like smiling
[Interjections.] ... particularly Mike here. Thank you very much for
supporting this Bill and we have not put politics before it.

Clearly, the House is unanimously of the view that this legislation is
still vitally important to give guidance on issues of sentencing in our
society. Members have quite correctly, and particularly Dr Delport and
others, highlighted the one issue in the Bill that should be discussed
properly and that is that in the case of rape we have created and placed
certain limitations on the discretion that may be used in that regard.
Obviously, this will go to the Constitutional Court, but it is for us to
argue strongly why we have to do this.

I think we are starting to analyse the statistics around rape and there is
a very scary trend that is starting to develop. We now find that more than
50% of rapes in this country are actually perpetrated on girls younger than
16. The perpetrators are in 80% to 85% of cases people older than 18. We
are getting grown-ups targeting children and we see it in the newspapers.
Young kids are being raped. The problem is that the extent of it is
enormous.

If we as legislators do not do something about this, wouldn’t it be right
for our people to ask questions about it? I am prepared to put my head on a
block on this issue, although there may be some difficulties with what we
doing, to argue to the court why we are doing it. We have tons of court
cases. The women’s organisations have brought it to us and said: Here is a
problem. Look at what the judiciary is doing in terms of their perceptions
of rape in this society.

If one judicial officer said it, I’d say: Okay. But what worries me, for
example, is that if you rape your daughter, your niece, your stepchild that
there is quite broad acceptance amongst judicial officers that that is
somehow a lesser crime. We had a judge here in the Cape who specifically
said in one case, where the stepfather had raped the daughter, that this
was not really a problem because it was all done within the family and
therefore it’s not from outside. It is very scary, with the deeper inner
socialisation of people coming out when they write judgments, particularly
on sentencing.

We argued when we introduced minimum sentences that the one thing that
minimum sentences are going to do is not necessarily that more people are
going to get higher sentences. What it does is that it forces judicial
officers to put their reasons on paper why they don’t want to give the
sentence. What we are seeing, I submit, is rather scary.

One of the cases mentioned is the Nkomo case. I want to read to you exactly
what the judges have said. These are two senior judges in the SCA that have
said this. This is a case in which a woman was forced upstairs, raped; the
chap then went downstairs to drink in the bar. She then jumped out the
window from the second floor. He grabbed her when she landed in front of
the bar, took her upstairs, raped her four more times that evening,
assaulted her, forced her to have oral sex with him, she escaped the next
day and the High Court gave him a life sentence. The judges said this - why
they did not want to give a life sentence:

   In this case the appellant did not use any weapon, although he did
   assault the complainant. He did not seriously injure her though he
   callously and cruelly disregarded her injury caused when she tried to
   escape from the hotel room. I emphasise in particular the brutality with
   which the appellant treated the complainant – raping her four times after
   she had been injured ...

That’s after already raping her once –

   ... trying to escape from him; that he forced her to perform oral sex on
   him, assaulting her when initially she refused; that he showed absolutely
   no remorse; that he was in a comparatively better position than her with
   education and a permanent job. He should have known. He behaved like a
   sexual thug. That said, I do not believe that this crime should attract
   the heaviest sentence permitted by our law: life imprisonment. I
   recognise that it may be difficult to imagine a rape under much worse
   conditions, but it is possible. And I consider that the prospect of
   rehabilitation of a 29-year-old and the fact that the appellant is a
   first offender must be regarded as substantial and compelling
   circumstances.

The two judges then gave 16 years to this man, instead of life
imprisonment. The other judge, who gave a minority judgment, says this ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Deputy Minister, you are fast
running out of time. I can give you half a minute.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: One minute
please. He says:

   In my view, the rape of the complainant is one of the worst imaginable.
   If life imprisonment is not appropriate in a rape as brutal as this, when
   will it be appropriate?

That is the problem that we are facing. I would have preferred not to
actually prescribe the discretion in rape cases more than we have done. But
against the background of what is happening out there with young girls in
particular and what we are seeing in the judgments that they do not want to
impose these sentences, our Parliament has no other recourse than to
actually say: We are restricting the discretion. I am prepared for us to go
to court to argue that point very strongly on behalf of those women that
are being raped and not being treated with the necessary respect in our
courts. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                        EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I hope hon members have been
encouraged by the previous debate to pay far closer attention to the
sentencing practices of the judiciary.

The Bill before the House today has been endorsed by many stakeholders. It
seeks to strengthen the statutory measures that support quality in
education, sets out the roles and functions of school principals as key
managers in schools, and provides measures directed at curbing the scourge
of drugs in our schools.

The key features of the Bill are the following. The first key feature
concerns the bodies that the Minister is required to consult in the
formulation of policy. The National Education Policy Act currently has two
sections - section 5 and section 11 – that seem to contradict each other.
They are not elegant in formulation and tend to cause confusion in
interpretation. To remove that confusion, we have offered a simpler
formulation that makes it clear that the Minister of Education may
establish a National Education and Training Council and other bodies to
advise on any policy matter.

Concern has been expressed in some of the submissions as it is believed
that the Minister will want to determine policy alone. I wish to assure hon
members that the Minister does not make policy without consulting the
public and relevant stakeholders. Currently, trade unions and other bodies
engage with the Minister in a wide range of bodies and institutions, for
example, the Education Labour Relations Council, as mandated by the
Employment of Educators Act and the Forum for National Governing Body
Associations, as key examples. I am also pleased to inform members that I
have already taken steps to establish the National Education and Training
Council.

The second key feature of the Bill is the setting of norms and standards
for capacity and infrastructure in schools across the country. Section 5 of
the Bill is designed to guide implementation in the provision of
infrastructure for learning. It is our intention to alter the character and
quality of school facilities in South Africa.

The three Parliaments of our young democracy have played a vital role in
ensuring that resources are made available for the provision of education.
Much has been done to redress past imbalances. We have come a long way, as
the recently published National Education Infrastructure Management System
report has revealed.

In terms of success, the report states the following: The number of
overcrowded schools has fallen from 51% in 1999 to 24% in 2006; the number
of schools with electricity has increased from 11 174 in 1996 to 20 713 in
2006; the number of schools without water has fallen from 8 823 in 1996 to
3 152 in 2006; and the number of schools without on-site toilets has fallen
from 3 265 in 1996 to 1 532 in 2006.

Clearly, despite these achievements, a great deal still has to be done. The
challenges we have to attend to are the following. It is clear from the
Neims - National Education Information Management System - report that even
as we built new schools, we continued in some cases to perpetuate the
apartheid design of education facilities. Clause 5 of the Bill on norms and
standards for schools clearly sets out our demand that all schools must
have libraries, laboratories and other learning facilities.

Neims also revealed that we have hundreds of very small schools in South
Africa and that this is often an inefficient use of the human resources in
education. Furthermore, we have some severely crowded schools that make
learning and discipline difficult if not impossible. The Bill, once signed
into law, will allow us to set minimum norms for class sizes in a
particular phase or quintile. We plan to ensure that we relieve teachers of
overcrowded classes and create conditions for effective teaching.

There is no point in setting norms and standards if there is no mechanism
in place to enforce them. Clause 58 of the Bill, therefore, requires an MEC
and a head of department to comply with the norms and standards relating to
schools as prescribed in the legislation. It also provides that MECs shall
report to the Minister annually on the progress made in complying with the
legal norms and standards.

The third key feature of the Bill is a section that authorises school
principals or persons they delegate to search pupils for dangerous weapons
and illegal drugs and to seize them. I am certain that given wide community
concern about drug trafficking and drug abuse in our country, all members
will support this Bill and these particular measures.

In the Bill we also do address that the searching of pupils must be on the
basis of reasonable suspicion of finding an offensive weapon or drugs. Such
laws exist in other jurisdictions in the world, and we are merely acting as
has been provided in other systems and responding to a real concern in
education in our country.

The fourth key feature is that of setting out the responsibilities of
school principals and the functions that they should execute within the
school setting. Many persons, when we referred to an intention to craft
such legislation in 2005, suspected that we intended in some way to deny
school governing bodies proper powers in terms of school principals and
their governance roles in schools. I had nothing of the sort in mind. I
intend to assist school principals to execute the role of school manager
and education leader within the education system.

The Bill gives attention to school leadership and to the key role of the
principal in the promotion of quality learning and teaching. We have made
it clear that the principal is in charge of a school on behalf of the state
and not on behalf of the school governing body.

The fifth and final key feature of the Bill is the clause in which we
address the steps that should be taken in order to turn around an
underperforming school. I am sure hon members are aware that we have often
had schools that have underperformed for five years or more with no direct
action being taken by administrators of education. We have now ensured that
there should be formal steps that must be taken to support a school towards
a path of recovery. These steps will include putting principals that cannot
perform in accordance with the appropriate legislation and, of course,
providing them with assistance and support to come up to the mark in terms
of ensuring that the school removes itself from the underperformance list.

The clause provides the basis for evaluating schools that are failing. It
is a process that we have lacked for a number of years, and I am very
pleased that we have now been able to put this in legislation in order to
ensure that we support schools to improve and do not allow them to continue
in a state of perpetual mediocrity.

We are about to establish a national evaluation unit that will support
provinces in identifying underperforming schools and setting them on the
path to recovery. I am pleased to note that some provinces have already
begun to provide the building blocks for such a process of external
evaluation. Secondary schools have begun development plans and are working
at targets to improve the performance of learners and support for the
development of teachers in their education function.

This Bill we believe provides an essential framework for achieving quality
education in our schools and I trust that hon members will support the
Bill. [Applause.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Mandibulele Sihlalo naMalungu ePalamente, lo Mthetho
uYilwayo, siwuphetheyo namhlanje, uzama ukulingisa imithetho emithandathu,
emibini kuyo inezinto ezininzi ekufuneka sizijongile. Le yokugqibela mine
imiba ibalulekile, kodwa ke phaya ekomitini sivene ngayo sonke.

Mandiqale ngayo kuqala. Le mithetho inento yokwenza nelinge likazwelonke
lokuzama ukuncedisana nabafundi ngemali yokufunda okanye i-national student
financial aid, iSouth African Council for Educators okanye i-Sace
ngamafutshane, kunye ne-Adult Basic Education okanye iAbet.

Zonke iinguqu esizakuzenza apho zilungiselela abantwana bethu ukuba bakwazi
ukufunda kumaziko azikholeji zemfundo ethe vetshe okanye ii-further
education and training colleges okanye iiFETs. Niyakukhumbula ukuba
sikwiphulo lokuba abantwana bethu bakwazi ukusebenzisa iizandla zabo,
ingabi ngabo bonke abafuna ukubheka ezidyunivesiti. Ithi ke loo nto
umntwana esakuliphumelela ibanga lesixhenxe okanye igredi yethoba makazi
ukuba unelungelo lokubheka kwi-FET college.

Ingxaki yeyokuba aba bantwana ababinayo imali yokuya apho, kuba zisembalwa
zona. Urhulumente kule minyaka mithathu ubeke ecaleni imali engangezi-R600
million. Ukuze ke abantwana bakwazi ukuyifumana le mali sifuna i-National
Student Financial Aid Scheme okanye i-Nefsas ikwazi ukuncedisana nabantwana
ize iqinisekise ukuba bayayifumana. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Prof S M MAYATULA: Thank you, Chairperson and members of Parliament. The
Bill we are discussing is going to amend three laws of which two have a
number of things we need to look at. The last four issues are important and
the committee agreed on them.

Let me start with them. These Bills go hand in hand with the National
Education Policy, which is trying to assist students with funds to pay
their fees through the National Student Financial Aid Scheme Fund, South
African Council for Educators, Sace in short, and Adult Basic Education,
Abet.

All the changes which were done here would help our children to go and
register in further education and training colleges, FETs. You will
remember that our aim is to empower our children with skills so that not
all of them have to go to university. That means a student who passes
Standard 7 or Grade 9 can register in a FET college.

The problem is that these learners do not have enough money to register and
the number of FET colleges is still limited. Government has put aside an
amount of R600 million for three years. The National Student Financial Aid
Scheme, Nasfas, must make sure that learners enjoy this benefit.]

Let me go now to the National Education Policy Act of 1996, sometimes
referred to as Nepa. With Nepa we are making a few amendments here, one of
which, among other things, declares that the Minister shall establish a
National Education and Training Council, and what we are going to be doing
today in this Bill is to try to amend that Bill in, mainly, three ways.

The first way is that we are changing “shall establish” into “may
establish”. This is in line with other bodies and the experience we had,
for example, with the National Board for Further Education and Training.
Because it had outlived its importance, we were able to do away with it.

The second way relates to another Nepa amendment and has to do with
consultation. When the Minister makes policies, he or she is supposed to
consult with the National Education and Training Council. But there has
been confusion in some of the submissions we received, because they took
this to mean that when making laws you need to consult with the National
Education and Training Council, when in fact it is solely for the Minister
when he or she is making policy.

We found this in the same Bill, part of which we did not change. Section
6(a) of the Nepa Act reads: Legislation on a matter referred to in section
3, which has to do with the determination of policy, shall be introduced in
Parliament only after consultation between the Minister and the council.
Some submissions were saying that since there was no consultation in terms
of this Bill with the NETC, it is null and void and unconstitutional. But,
as we see it, they interpreted this reference to “council” incorrectly as
if it related to the National Education and Training Council when, in fact,
it related to the Council of Education Ministers.

The third amendment as far as Nepa is concerned relates to the structures
that need to be consulted. The original Bill listed these structures: the
council, the organisations representing college rectors, the organised
teaching profession, and many others. In terms of experience, for example,
with Gauteng, which already has such a structure, the officials there said:
The problem with this unwieldy body, which is supposed to give advice to
the Minister, is, one, that this structure is very big; two, these
structures go there and they need mandates in order to be able to give
advice, which becomes impossible.

They say that the NETC tends to forget that it is an advisory body with the
intention to provide impartial advice on request and focuses on insisting
to take on the role of an organisation with executive or regulatory powers.
Because of that, we have had to expand that list so that the Minister can
bring around people who are going to be advising her on expert issues that
relate to education.

The other part that is part of this has to do with the violence that is
happening in our schools. We want to arm our schools so as to be able to do
something, and what is important is that this does not do away with the
principal calling the police when necessary. Let me read what this says:
Clause 7(8)(1):

  Unless authorised by the principal for legitimate educational purposes,
  no person may bring a dangerous object or illegal drug onto school
  premises or have such objects or drug in his or her possession on school
  premises or during any school activity.

This gives the school something in law to prevent anybody bringing these
things into the school. Over and above that, we are arming the school to be
able to search for and seize these things. The hon Van den Heever will deal
with this.

We also find that our principals’ functions have not been defined, and they
become confused, especially when it comes to how they relate to school
governing bodies. There is a difference between a governing body of a
private school and a governing body of a public school. In a private
school, the buck stops with the principal and the governing body, but in a
public school the buck stops with the MEC, or Minister, or head of
department. This means that at any point when the principal is in the
school governing body, he or she is there in his or her capacity as
representing the MEC.

If it was possible, the MEC and head of department would be in that school
governing body. That is why, therefore, this Bill says that if the
principal is representing the MEC in the school governing body, how is it
possible for him or her to stand against the MEC or head of department. We
are trying to prevent that. This Bill goes a step further in that the
principal must now, through this Act, be able to report on a yearly basis
on the performance of the school.

It also goes a step further to say that in case the performance is bad,
what it is that needs to be done pertaining to the principal and educators
generally. This Bill is also telling us about the norms and standards of a
school. Currently, we do not have one picture when we talk about schools.

Izikolo zethu zingamatyotyombe, uyakufika isikolo singamagumbi amabini,
ingekho indlu yangasese, singabiyelwanga, kwaye kungenzwanga nto. Lo
Mthetho uYilwayo uthi makubekho into esiza kuthi ukuba uthetha ngesikolo
nokuba kuphi na kukho izinto ekunyanzelekileyo ukuba zibe khona. Ukanti ke
nalapha ngaphathi esikolweni iSGB mayibe nendlela yokwazi ukuba zikhona na
iincwadi apha esikolweni. Kuphindwe kujongwe ukuba igumbi lokufundela lona
liza kuba ngakanani.

Ootishala abaninzi kunye neenqununu ukuqala konyaka bamkela wonke umntu
esikolweni besenzela ukuba babe namanani amakhulu ukuze babhatalwe, kodwa
ufumanise ukuba ngoku abakwazi ukufundisa ngoba abantwana baninzi kakhulu.
Lo Mthetho ke uza kukwazi ukunqanda loo nto ukuze sazi ukuba egumbini
ngalinye sinabantwana abalinani elithile, nabangenakugqitha kulo.
Siyakucela ukuba lo Mthetho uYilwayo wamkeleke. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Some of our schools operate from shacks, others have only two classrooms,
no toilets, no fencing and are without any amenities. This Bill emphasises
that each and every school must be developed. The SGB must monitor the
delivery of school books as well as the size of the classrooms.

Teachers and principals have a tendency to admit large numbers of learners
to their schools at the beginning of the year, because they want the
Department of Education to allocate them big budgets and one cannot help
but notice during the course of the year that they cannot cope with the
large number of learners. This Bill will prevent that situation and through
it we will know the number of learners in each classroom. We therefore ask
members to support this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Agb Voorsitter, kollegas ... [Hon Chairperson,
colleagues ...]

... the intention behind several aspects of the Bill we are voting on
today, including the provision for random drug testing in schools and plans
to make nonperforming schools more accountable, is most welcome and
supported. While the DA is not convinced that the specific proposals made
will be practical, they do at least take some steps towards tackling the
drugs crisis that traps so many learners and the thousands of completely
dysfunctional schools that fail many more.

Daar is meriete daarin om minimum standaarde vir skole toe te pas, maar ons
wil nie hê dat hierdie standaarde die maatstaf moet word vir wat as ’n
kwaliteitskool gesien moet word nie. Daar is altyd ’n risiko dat minimum
standaarde mettertyd as maksimum standaarde beskou sal word. As ’n mens in
gedagte hou wat prakties bereikbaar is in terme van ’n minimum standaard
vir alle skole, sal dit die maatstaf baie laag plaas. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[There is merit in imposing minimum standards on schools, but we do not
want these standards to become the criterion for what is to be regarded as
a high-quality school. There is always a risk that minimum standards may,
over time, be seen as maximum standards. If one bears in mind what can be
achieved in practice in terms of a minimum standard for all schools, the
yardstick used will be very low.]

It is unfortunate, however, that there are two aspects of this Bill that
the DA cannot support and that therefore make any discussion of the
remainder of the Bill irrelevant. During the public hearings on the Bill,
the Portfolio Committee on Education heard organisation after organisation
objecting to two aspects in particular.

These two aspects were, firstly, the removal of the obligation on the
Minister of Education to consult when making policy with those who are at
the coal face of education; and, secondly, the insertion of a clause
prohibiting a school principal from testifying against the state. These
organisations raised cogent arguments against the first of these
provisions, saying that it constituted a power grab on the part of the
Minister, placing her on a pedestal out of reach of any accountability to
the interest groups involved in education.

They objected to the fact that the Minister would no longer be obliged to
constitute the National Education and Training Council, even though other
legislation does require her to do this. It is a requirement that has now
been ignored for 11 years. They also objected to the fact that she will no
longer be required to consult with this body, even if it is ever
constituted.

In respect of the other aspect of this Bill relating to the right of
principals to testify against the state, it has been pointed out that this
not only violates the principal’s right to equality before the law and
freedom of speech, but also the rights of others to have disputes resolved
fairly. Any step taken to advance one particular employee over another
would never be accepted in terms of labour law and is very likely
unconstitutional.

Die wetlike en filosofiese teenkanting teen hierdie wetsontwerp is
grotendeels geïgnoreer of ontken. Terwyl die komitee ’n hele reeks tegniese
aanpassings gedebateer het, het hierdie wysigings die substansiële
aangeleenthede heeltemal geïgnoreer. Met ander woorde, die proses van
openbare deelname was ’n klug. Die Minister het geweet wat sy wil hê en die
komitee was gehoorsaam. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The legal and philosophical opposition to this Bill was largely ignored or
denied. Whereas the committee debated a whole series of technical
alterations, these amendments totally ignored the substantial matters. In
other words, the public participation process was a farce. The Minister
knew what she wanted, and the committee obliged.]

Whatever may happen in Parliament today, however, it has become clear over
the past weeks that various aspects of this legislation are in
contravention of already entrenched education laws and, in all likelihood,
the Constitution. It is unfortunate that more effort was not made to
resolve these problems before bringing this Bill to Parliament, because it
will only make the process of resolving the problems more complicated and
acrimonious. The DA will not support this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues, the IFP
supports clauses 1 and 3 of the Bill, which allow the Minister to establish
the council. We are aware that some structures may provide for contestation
of powers and it is for this reason that we wish to give the Minister space
to provide for better and quality education.

We support the setting of minimum norms and standards. We also support
random searches, seizures and testing. Our real bone of contention with the
Bill is part 4 of clause 8, which deals with the functions and
responsibilities of principals of public schools. Our problem lies with the
prohibition on the principal giving evidence against the Minister and MEC
or head of department, where they are cited as parties to a case.

We have sought legal opinion on this provision and, after studying this
legal opinion, the IFP, unfortunately is compelled to throw the baby out
with the bath water. Therefore, we cannot support the Bill. [Applause.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, the Bill before us
seeks to amend various education laws on the Statute Book. Several
technical amendments are made, but I would like to focus briefly on some of
the more important substantive amendments. Most important among these are
the new measures to deal with dangerous objects and illegal drugs.
We are all painfully aware of the violence and killing which are
increasingly entering our schools and claiming young victims. As a society,
we are outraged by these weapons and drugs and the devastation that they
sow among our children and, rightly, we all demand remedies. As legislators
we are placed in a very difficult position of having to legislate remedies
that are invasive and trample on the democratic rights of children.

On the one hand, it must be our highest priority to protect our children,
but, on the other hand, we cannot expect them to value human rights and
democracy if we violate their human rights in the process. Provisionally we
will support these remedies, but it is possible that upon implementation it
will be found that they are inadequate or improper in a democratic society.


Finally, the Bill also provides the Minister with the power to prescribe
national minimum norms and standards regarding school infrastructure. I
thank you, Chairperson. The UDM supports the Bill. [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, hon Minister, Ministers, measures to address the
problem of drugs in schools are welcomed by the ACDP and the objectives of
the Bill in general are commendable. However, the ACDP has serious
reservations with regard to this Education Laws Amendment Bill, starting
with the fact that the amendments effectively remove any mandatory
requirement for the Minister to establish an advisory body.

In our view, the fact that several Ministers have failed over a period of
11 years to establish what is at present a compulsory advisory body,
highlights the reality that a noncompulsory advisory body has no chance
whatsoever of existing if left to the discretion of a Minister.

Efforts to define and clarify the management role of the school principal,
while necessary, are cause for concern as conflict between the principal’s
management and governance responsibilities are not adequately dealt with.
Parents and communities expect school principals to be people of integrity
and to protect and promote the school’s best interests without reservation.
It is the opinion of the ACDP that these amendments require a principal to
protect the department, even if it means compromising the school’s best
interests.

We are seeing a very disturbing trend being highlighted in our health
sector at present, where those responsible for institutions are expected to
cover for the department or lose their jobs. This is shocking and cannot be
accepted as the norm. The ACDP is not convinced by the arguments put
forward at present and will vote against the amending Bill. Thank you.

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Voorsitter, ouers is vennote en mede-eienaars van hulle
kinders se onderwys en die staat het nie ’n reg om daarmee in te meng nie.
Hierdie wet is net ’n verdere uitbreiding van ’n proses wat jare terug
begin het en wat steeds voortduur met die voortdurende afskaling van ouers
se inspraak in onderwys. Kinders is aan hulle ouers en gemeenskappe
toevertrou en nie aan die staat nie en dit is baie jammer dat die staat dit
nog nie besef het nie.

Die VF Plus is baie bekommerd dat hierdie wysigingswet ook nie geldig gaan
wees nie, om ’n baie eenvoudige rede en dit is dat die bestaande wetgewing
vereis dat wysigings eers gedoen kan word na oorlegpleging met die onderwys-
 en opleidingsraad. Daardie raad is nog nie deur die Minister ingestel nie
en om daardie eenvoudige rede kan die Minister nie wysigings deurvoer
voordat sy nie oorleg gepleeg het met die raad wat sy eers moes instel nie.

Dit is dus baie jammer dat hierdie wysiging eers deurgevoer word, sonder ’n
behoorlike proses van oorlegpleging en sonder dat daar voldoen is aan die
vereistes wat in die wetgewing voorgestaan word. Om daardie rede sal die VF
Plus die wet nie steun nie. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, parents are partners and co-owners of their
children’s education and the state does not have the right to interfere
with this. This Bill is just a further extension of a process that started
years ago and that is still continuing with the ongoing downscaling of the
say of parents in education. Children are entrusted to their parents and
communities and not to the state and it is a great pity that the state has
not realised this yet.

The FF Plus is very concerned that this amending Bill will also not be
valid, for the very simple reason that the current legislation requires
that amendments can only be made after consultation with the Education and
Training Council. This council has not yet been established by the Minister
and for that simple reason the Minister cannot pilot through any amendments
until she has consulted the council that she must first establish.

It is, therefore, a great pity that this amendment is being piloted through
first, without a proper process of consultation and without the
requirements advocated in the legislation being complied with. For that
reason the FF Plus will not support this Bill. Thank you.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, an education system is
dynamic and never static and it is for that reason that laws related to it
should and will be amended to answer to the demands of the day. It will be
up to the Minister, who has the barometer of the department, to know when
the pressure is high or low and thereupon establish a national education
and training council to advise him or her.

During the public hearings much was said about the principal of a school
being left as an independent individual. This argument is absurd in the
extreme. A principal by virtue of his position is ipso facto in the same
ring as the department.

As an education officer in my past life, I used to say that a principal is
the department on the spot. There is no way that an appointed person will
align himself with the school governing body at the expense of the
department. In fact, principals are being empowered through this to run
their schools, otherwise the schools will run them down if they do not look
up to him.

As matters now stand, the UCDP will find it hard to accept the clause on
the prescription of minimum uniform norms and standards in respect of
infrastructure and all that, because there are still areas where pupils are
taught under trees or in the open, let alone those being taught in mud
rondavel hovels, like the chairperson indicated. The clause is, however, an
ideal to strive for.

The disruptive conduct of learners in schools calls for random searches and
drug testing. There is nothing sinister about all this as long as it is
done in a humane and responsible manner by teachers who know that they are
to stand in loco parentis to come up as reasonable parents. The UCDP will
therefore support the Bill.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, on 6 September 2007 we were addressed by the
hon Minister of Finance, who painted a grim picture of education spending
in South Africa in comparison to countries like India, Turkey and Chile.

It is 13 years into democracy and people are losing patience with the
expectations of what we should have delivered to date. The truth is: In
education we have the right Minister, with the right department, but policy
may not be able to deliver.

Education has experienced major challenges, and poverty has been a cruel
hijacker to our success in the sector. Our nutrition programmes and even
the no-fee schools have been progressive in opening doors to educate for
the less fortunate. We, however, make the plea that these programmes be
extended to higher education schooling that qualifies for these services to
secure a lower dropout rate of senior attendance and to service our school
shortage in the long term.

In terms of the amending Bill, the MF finds value in the alteration, but a
number of gaps remain that need to be clarified if the department is to
progress in delivery and to inculcate these provisions adequately at school
level.

With regard to the dangerous objects and illegal drugs amendments, we note
that crime and violence are on the rise in our schools and that we need to
ensure that provisions are devised to securely address the matter under all
circumstances. The MF will support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, violence in our schools and underperforming
public schools are issues of national concern. The Bill is an attempt to
intervene and bring about changes in these critical areas. The role of
principals is also brought under the spotlight, especially as it relates to
school governing bodies and other matters relating to school
administration.

With respect to violence in schools, the carrying of what has been
determined to be dangerous weapons is prohibited from being allowed onto
the school grounds. Teachers will be given the right to randomly search
learners based on fair and reasonable grounds of suspicion validating such
action.

We would, however, wish to emphasise distress to teachers who may not be
regularly used to procedures relating to searching of persons. Further, it
will be far better to leave such practices to trained personnel, such as
police officers or others, who are not so closely associated with learners.

The education environment should be nonthreatening and learner-friendly. In
a recent newspaper article, security companies are alleged to have refused
to conduct patrols in townships and other high-risk areas as they fear for
their own safety. For the Bill to be effective in combating crime at
schools, all stakeholders should be committed to resolving the issue,
otherwise the role of teachers will not only be ineffective but they may
also put their lives in danger.

In order to implement the aspect of safety as proposed by the Bill, we must
ensure that the police and other safety and security departments have the
capacity to assist with the protection of our schools.

The reservation the FD has with the Bill is with reference to clause 16
A(4) which states that a principal in his line of duty as an educator,
given any particular issue that may impact negatively on education, should
be disallowed to give evidence on behalf of a governing body against the
Minister and other officials when it may be in the interest of justice to
do so.

Although the FD welcomes the overall merits of the Bill that seek to
improve the conditions at schools, we cannot support this Bill because of
clause 16 A(4), which will undermine the course of justice. I thank you.

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Chairperson, a few months ago, in reply to a
series of questions about violence in our schools, the Minister of
Education said that many of the incidents of violence in schools stemmed
from drug-taking by learners on school premises. She then indicated that
random testing of learners for drugs and seizure of drugs and dangerous
weapons had become unavoidable options in order to stop this scourge of
violence in our schools.

Even though there were regulations in place for safety measures at schools,
these did not adequately address the mischief they were designed to remedy,
that is to stop the proliferation of dangerous objects and illegal drugs at
schools. It had therefore become necessary to strengthen these regulations
by way of allowing random searches and seizures and drug testing at
schools.

The new regulations provide clear guidelines about circumstances under
which searches and drug-taking should be conducted. It is important to
emphasise that a random search of any learner may only be instituted if a
fair and reasonable suspicion exists that such a learner may be in
possession of a drug or a dangerous weapon.

The Education Laws Amendment Bill also explicitly deals with areas of
omission from previous pieces of legislation. The South African Schools
Act, for example, expressly lists the functions and obligations of the
school governing body, but fails to do so in the case of the principal. To
remedy this shortcoming, the Education Laws Amendment Bill clearly spells
out the functions and responsibilities of the principal of a public school.
This is intended to create legal certainty regarding the functions and
responsibilities of the principal vis-à-vis those of the governing body.

The Bill also makes it clear that the principal is officially representing
the head of department when he or she is acting as a member of the
governing body. There is nothing sinister in this amendment. In fact, it
clears up a grey area in which the principal was often caught in the
crossfire between school governing bodies and the department, with his or
her loyalty being held to ransom.

The principal is the chief executive officer at the school and the demand
of the Bill that a principal may not operate in conflict with the
instructions of the head of department is entirely in line with the good
order and discipline required of school governance. The principal can give
evidence on behalf of a school governing body if he or she is not required
by the employer to give evidence on his or her behalf. Thus, the aim is
merely to give the employer a first preference and not to ban the principal
from giving evidence. The principal is also allowed to give evidence on his
behalf or on behalf of any other person. There is therefore no question of
unconstitutionality if that is suggested.

Voorsitter, die opposisie van die DA teen ’n aantal klousules sowel as teen
die Wysigingswetsontwerp op Onderwyswette self kom as geen verrassing nie.
Die DA het vanuit die staanspoor van hul bestaan hier in die Parlement te
kenne gegee dat hulle nie daarin belangstel dat apartheidsonderwys omvorm
na ’n demokratiese en nie-rassige onderwyssisteem nie.

Agb Van der Walt argumenteer dat meer pogings aangewend moes word om
ooreenstemming te kry binne-in die portefeuljekomitee, maar met die
hantering van hierdie wetsontwerp binne die onderwys portefeuljekomitee het
agb Van der Walt haarself nie eers die moeite geverg om die teenvoorstelle
van die DA op die tafel te plaas nie.

Dit was duidelik aan haar houding dat wat immers die debatvoering en die
uiteindelike uitkoms van die portefeuljekomiteeproses betref, die DA reeds
toe-oë besluit dat hulle teen die wetsontwerp sou stem. Sy het haar dus nie
eers verwerdig om in interaksie te gaan met die prosesse waardeur enige
parlementêre portefeuljekomitee verplig is om te gaan nie. Daardeur het sy
’n bespotting gemaak van die demokratiese prosesse van besluitneming van
hierdie parlement en kom haar party, die DA, maar weereens vandag vorendag
met sy tradisionele vooroodeel teen die demokratiese omvorming van ons
onderwyssisteem.

Die DA probeer eintlik hierdie Parlement oor die jare reeds gyselaar hou
met betrekking tot wetgewing in die onderwys. Indien ouerbeheerliggame nie
maksimaal in beheer is van skole nie, gaan die DA nie vir so ’n wetsontwerp
stem nie. Hulle stel hoegenaamd nie belang in die oorhoofse bestuur en
goeie orde reëlings van die onderwysdepartement nie. Dis al manier waarop
hulle glo hulle die transformatiewe aspekte van die onderwyswetgewing kan
omseil. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the DA’s opposition to a number of clauses as well as the
Education Law Amendment Bill comes as no surprise. Since the DA came into
existence here in Parliament they have intimated that they are not
interested in apartheid education being transformed into a democratic and
nonracial system of education.

Hon Van der Walt argues that more attempts should have been made to reach
agreement within the portfolio committee, but when this Bill was dealt with
in the portfolio committee the hon Van der Walt did not even bother to make
the effort to table the counterproposals of the DA.

It was clear from her attitude, with regard to the debates and the eventual
outcome of the portfolio committee process, that the DA had blindly decided
that they would vote against the Bill. She did not even condescend to
engage with the processes through which any parliamentary portfolio
committee is obliged to go. She therefore made a mockery of the democratic
processes of decision-making of this Parliament and her party, the DA, has
today, once again come up with its traditional prejudice against the
democratic transformation of our system of education.

Over the years the DA has actually tried to hold this Parliament hostage
with regard to legislation pertaining to education. If parent governing
bodies are not in maximum control of schools, the DA will not vote for such
a Bill. They are not at all interested in the overall management and
arrangements for good order of the education department. This is the only
way they believe they can circumvent the transformative aspects of the
education legislation.]

As far as the National Education and Training Council – the NETC - is
concerned, it is clear that the Minister is attempting to break the
paralysis that has characterised this body since its inception. The NETC,
as it has been constructed, has not met since its inception. At least the
Minister is attempting to break that log jam. As far as the allegations
regarding excluding trade union bodies are concerned, there is nothing in
this legislation which says they will not be consulted.

The Education Laws Amendment Bill is a very important vehicle to effect the
changes required in the existing legislation to effectively address the
latest demands in education. The ANC urges this House to support this Bill
and to continue the trend of transformation required for the effective
overhaul of our education system. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to thank
the members who participated in the debate. I particularly wish to thank
the chairperson of the committee for steering the Bill to the point of our
being able to debate and vote on it in the House today.

I must say, as usual, that I am very surprised because I certainly thought
this legislation would take us to a new phase in the provision of quality
education for the children of our country and that, given that, it would be
supported by all the members of this House. I can’t imagine myself voting
against a piece of legislation that says a school has certain basic
attributes it must have: classrooms, a library, laboratories, resource
centres for media and ITC. Denying that is absolutely ridiculous and
unbelievable.

Furthermore, the legislation clearly states that a principal cannot be a
witness against the Minister with a governing body unless a court expressly
provides for this or the Minister indicates that the person will not be a
witness on behalf of the department or the Minister. So, there isn’t a
muzzling; you are being quite ridiculous in your approach. Of course, we
know you have never supported quality education for the majority of people
in this country and we are not surprised that you will not vote for this
particular piece of legislation. [Interjections.]

We are very happy that some of the parties have indicated strong support,
especially for the norms and standards, for the identification of and
support for underperforming schools, for ensuring that no school principal
gets away with being the head of a school that doesn’t have a learning
plan, that doesn’t support teacher development, that does nothing to ensure
that underperformance is actually targeted and addressed by the principal
as the leader of the school.

For the first time we have provisions where we can hold our employees
accountable for the learning of our children. But we don’t only hold the
employees in the schools accountable; we are also saying the MECs as well
as the heads of department have a duty to ensure that the norms and
standards are met. It’s very important.

We hope that this House as well as the other House will ensure that these
norms and standards, which have been specified for the first time clearly
in legislation - in concrete terms - will hold those who hold the money
responsible, hon Bhoola, for using it to provide the resources for learning
that they must. The Minister of Finance in making comments on education was
absolutely right, but if he could give us some financial control, perhaps
we would do more than is done by those who currently have exclusive
financial control of resources for education.

We really welcome those members who’ve said that there should be
consultation. Obviously, there must be consultation and there will be. We
have advertised and called for nominations for the body that I intend to
establish.
We have received nominations from a range of persons and individuals. All
legislation is published and gazetted for public comment; days are set
aside for this. Any person is able to comment. So to seek to hold us
hostage to a group of some nebulous persons is absolutely ridiculous and
this cannot be allowed to stop us from proceeding with the changes that we
believe are necessary.

We must ensure, as we implement the search and seizure provisions of the
legislation once it is signed into law, that the rights of learners and any
person who is searched on the school grounds are of course protected. It’s
for this reason that very careful steps related to the search processes and
to recording of the process, etc, have been set out in the legislation.

The issue of reasonableness has also been articulated in the Bill in order
to give that test which is required in terms of the limitation clause in
our Constitution so absolutely, with regard to the rights of learners.

I think paramount is the need to protect our children from the scourge of
drugs and weapons in our schools. There is too much violence; there are too
many drugs in our society; there is too much out there that is a threat to
young people. So, I would think we should veer towards the protection of
children rather than protecting individuals who are peddling drugs on our
school grounds. I think that when we support antidrug measures, we must do
so in a balanced way across every sector in society. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance, Inkatha Freedom Party,
African Christian Democratic Party and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

                        RENTAL HOUSING AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, unfortunately this Bill is not going
to be as exciting as the previous one. I think too much excitement for a
day might not be too good for us. It’s a fairly straightforward Bill. It’s
an amending Bill.

Against the background of unprecedented urbanisation and population growth,
both of which have resulted in an enormous demand for housing, the
Department of Housing has come to recognise the critical importance of the
rental option. Accordingly, the department places stress on the efficient
functioning of the rental housing market. It is in our interest that we
ensure that this sector is given all the support we can give while, at the
same time, ensuring that sufficient protection exists for the tenant.
Having been sensitised about some of the problems of existing legislation,
we have taken the necessary steps to amend it. Following Cabinet approval
of the Rental Housing Amendment Bill in December last year, a consultative
process was undertaken on the objectives of the Bill. A publication of the
Bill was made in the Government Gazette in the same month for comments.
Subsequently, it was revised, based on the comments that we have received.
It has now been brought here to this House for further deliberation and
approval.

Principally, the Bill seeks to make necessary amendments to the Rental
Housing Act of 1999, where in particular it seeks to widen the definition
of what constitutes unfair practice in the rental housing market. Thus, the
insertion of a very important provision which states, and I quote:

   In advertising a dwelling for purposes of leasing it, or in negotiating a
   lease with a prospective tenant, or during the term of a lease, a
   landlord may not unfairly discriminate against such prospective tenant or
   tenants, or the members of such tenants household or the bona fide
   visitors of such a tenant, on one or more grounds, including race,
   gender, sex, pregnancy, marital status, sexual orientation, ethnic or
   social origin, colour, age, disability, religion, conscience, belief,
   culture, language and birth.

In addition to the above, the Rental Housing Amendment Bill endeavours to
address certain implementation problems which we have encountered since the
promulgation of the Act in 1999 by effecting the following amendments.

Section 5 of the Act is amended to clarify aspects pertaining to the
issuing of receipts by the landlord and the payment of deposits by tenants;
the provisions pertaining to the composition of the Rental Housing
Tribunals, as contained in section 9, are amended; section 13 of the Act is
amended to allow Rental Housing Tribunals to make a ruling that a person
must comply with the provisions of the Act and to provide that rulings by
Rental Housing Tribunals must be enforced in terms of the Magistrates’
Courts Act of 1944; and section 15 of the Act is amended to empower the
Minister to make regulations, whereas in the past this power was vested in
the MECs - this amendment has been necessitated by the need to ensure
uniformity throughout the country with regard to procedures followed by the
Rental Housing Tribunals as well as rulings made by them.

It is our view that these changes will bring about much-needed uniformity
in the rental housing market which will enable it to be a dominant feature
of resolving some of our problems.

As the consultations over the Bill have revealed, our interaction with the
housing sector shows that the sector approves of and is ready to accept
these changes. We want to catapult rental housing so that it is on par with
the best in the market, as the rest of the world enjoys today. We are sure
that it is possible for us to use this hugely untapped capacity - the
potential of this rental sector - as a major provider of affordable rental
housing accommodation that should not be underestimated.

In short, the Bill seeks to strike a balance between the security required
by the landlord and the important rights of the tenant. It further seeks to
curtail abuse of power by the landlord. The necessary steps have to be
taken to seek recourse. It makes for a fairer instrument and we want to
commend it to this House. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms Z A KOTA: Chairperson, Ministers, comrades and colleagues, I greet you
this afternoon. Allow me, Chairperson, to congratulate the Minister of
Housing, Dr Lindiwe Sisulu, on the building of houses in Gugulethu-New Rest
during the month of August – the women’s month - particularly the fact that
you said that volunteers should form themselves into a consortium so that
they could participate effectively in the building of houses. Let me also
thank SA Women in Construction, Sawic, for spearheading this process.

The Rental Housing Amendment Bill before Parliament is aimed at amending
the Rental Housing Act, Act 50 of 1999. The Rental Housing Bill intends to
make further provision for rulings by the Rental Housing Tribunals; to
expand the provisions pertaining to leases and to extend the period allowed
for the filling of vacancies in the Rental Housing Tribunals; and to
provide for matters connected therewith, as well as to broaden the ambit of
the definition of unfair practice.

Section 2(1) of the principal Act states that the government must promote a
stable and growing market that progressively meets the latest demand for
affordable rental housing among persons who were historically disadvantaged
by unfair discrimination through the introduction of incentives, mechanisms
and other measures that are aimed at improving conditions in the rental
housing market; to encourage investment in urban and rural areas; to
correct the distorted patterns of residential settlement by initiating,
promoting and facilitating new developments in or the redevelopment of
affected areas.

It is important therefore to note that this amendment will assist in the
implementation of the Social Housing Bill, whose intention is to fast-track
the building of rental housing stock. It will also create a conducive
environment for rental households, particularly as far as the relations
between landlords and tenants are concerned.

This amendment, in particular, will also facilitate sound relations between
tenants and landlords as it prohibits landlords from performing unlawful
lockouts of tenants. It also prohibits them from shutting off basic
services such as water and electricity to the rental housing properties.
But it states as well that tenants must also honour their obligations to
pay rent and the good maintenance of rental housing properties.

According to this amendment, the issue of bona fide visitors will be left
to the discretion of Rental Housing Tribunals. This amendment states very
clearly that the issue of evictions must be referred by the Rental Housing
Tribunals to competent courts. Competent courts must deal with this so that
the Rental Housing Tribunals themselves do not deal with the issue of
evictions but the orders they grant must be executed by competent courts.

What has been reported to the committee, in particular, is the fact that
many of the orders granted have not been carried out by the judiciary. This
is an area that needs our continued engagement with the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development in order to find out what the
problem is, because the inability to act timeously renders the work of
Rental Housing Tribunals ineffective.

In our visits as a committee to the Rental Housing Tribunals in the Western
Cape, it became clear that more resources were needed to deal with the
backlog. But what also became clear was that both tenants and landlords did
not take these Rental Housing Tribunals seriously, particularly the
respondents or the plaintiff. Some of them did not keep their appointments.
This is a resource provided free of charge by government to these
beneficiaries to resolve conflicts that arise between landlords and
tenants. It is important that those affected make use of this mechanism for
the speedy resolution of any conflict that arises from this relationship.

One of the challenges faced by the Rental Housing Tribunals is that of
filling vacancies. The Act states that it should be done within a period of
a month. This creates difficulties in getting competent people to fill
these vacancies. This is why this amendment states that we recommend doing
so within a period of three months.

Somlomo, mninzi umsebenzi owenziwa ngala maziko alawula uxambuliswano
phakathi kwabaqeshi bezindlu kunye nabaninimzi, kodwa bakwabaninzi nabantu
abangalufumaniyo uncedo kuwo, ngoba abawazi la maziko, kwaye urhulumente
uzizisa simahla ebantwini ezi nkonzo. Kuyafuneka siwuqaphele kakhulu umba
wabantu abangathathi ntweni nabahlawula amaxabiso aphezulu erente phaya
ezilokishini.

Ngoba kaloku aba abantu baqashisa abantu abangaziintsapho ezisuka
kwisibhozo ukuya kwishumi kwindlu emagumbi mane kuphela. Bathini ngemeko
yokuba abantu abahlala apha bahlamba njani, kwaye baphila njani kulo
mbodamo, ngoba maxawambi aba baqeshisi okanye oomastandi bona abahlali
nalapho, kwaye abanankathalo ngabantu? Loo nto ibeka iimpilo zabantu
esichengeni ngoko masiwuqaphele loo mkhwa.

Nokuba uhamba phaya ematyotyombeni kuxinene ngoba oomasitandi bona bafuna
nje imali abacingi ngabantu. Abacingi nokuba umlilo ungavela, nto leyo
engadala abantu abaninzi baphulukane nemiphefumlo yabo. Xa kutshe abantu
bona baza kutyhola urhulumente nangona ingabo abantu abathatha ezi mali
zingekho mthethweni.

Iyafuneka kakhulu intsebenziswano phakathi kwabantu, ooceba kunye
neenkokheli zasekuhlaleni ukuze senze impilo engcono yawo wonke ubani.
Urhulumente kaKhongolozi uthe qgolo ukwakhela abantu izindlu, kodwa
akakwazi ukwakhela wonke umntu ngexesha elinye. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, Rental Housing Tribunals have a lot of work to resolve
conflicts between tenants and landlords but there are also many people who
do not get help from these institutions and the reason is that they do not
know about them and that government offers these services for free to the
public. We must take note of poor people who cannot afford rentals which
are very high in our townships.

Landlords give their tenants small four-roomed houses and do not care how
many people occupy a house, and these numbers usually range between eight
and ten family members. In many cases landlords are not responsible for the
needs of the tenants and sometimes they are not around to take care of
them. Tenants find themselves in dangerous situations and all of us must be
cautious about this bad behaviour.

In informal settlements shacks are very close together and there is hardly
any space between shacks and the landlords are not worried about that as
they are interested in the money. They do not think about fires which can
destroy the entire settlement and result in the death of people. When the
problem arises they blame government when they are the ones who benefit
illegally from the rentals.

Co-operation between the public, community leaders and councillors is
necessary in order that everybody can enjoy a better life. The ANC-led
government will continue to build houses for people but not all at the same
time.]

The Rental Housing Tribunals are still addressing the problems of these few
people who are aware of this avenue. This amendment is aimed at
strengthening the provisions of the Rental Housing Tribunals and to assist
them in executing their mandate. The South African Department of Housing
has eight years left to meet its objective of having a nation free of slums
by 2014, and this is a deadline it intends to meet.

In his 2007 state of the nation address, President Thabo Mbeki said that
government remained committed to intensifying the integrated housing
programme. Furthermore, the President emphasised the need to speed up the
eradication of informal settlements in South Africa, in line with the
Millennium Development Goals of 2015. He added that this fast-tracking must
integrate communities and build a nonracial society.

So, this piece of legislation, together with all other related pieces of
legislation, will assist the Rental Housing Tribunals in addressing the
challenges of rental households. The ANC supports this amendment. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr A C STEYN: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the original Rental
Housing Act, Act 50 of 1999, provides for the establishment of provincial
rental housing tribunals, through which conflicts between tenants and
landlords can be speedily resolved and at a minimum cost to the parties.

The Act went so far as to confer the powers of a magistrate’s court on the
Rental Housing Tribunals and that is: a ruling by the tribunal is deemed to
be an order of a magistrate’s court, in terms of the Magistrate’s Court Act
of 1944.

However, once an order has been granted, it is then up to the justice
system to implement and enforce such an order. The lack of enforcement of
such an order has been identified as one of the shortcomings of the Act.

Another shortcoming identified was in the composition of the tribunals. The
Act provides for a chairperson and deputy chairperson to be appointed by
the relevant MEC. Due to the fact that the tribunal members are not full-
time appointees, it has been experienced, on occasion, that both the
chairperson and the deputy chairperson have been absent from a scheduled
hearing, and therefore the hearing had to be postponed.

The Rental Housing Amendment Bill before us for approval today seeks to
specifically broaden the definition of what constitutes an unfair practice,
and the Minister referred to it. It also seeks to make further provisions
for rulings by rental tribunals; to expand the provisions pertaining to
leases; to extend the period allowed for the filling of vacancies in the
tribunals.

It must be noted at this point that rental tribunals have not, to date,
been established in all nine provinces. Nevertheless, it is encouraging
that they have indeed been established in the most populous urban provinces
and are reported to be working particularly well in Gauteng, the Western
Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.

It is also interesting to note that the number of cases handled by the
tribunals has escalated exponentially despite very little, if any,
marketing done by the tribunals to advertise their services.

Another housing-related Bill – the Social Housing Bill - is scheduled to be
tabled before this House in October. The effectiveness or otherwise, as the
case may be, of the outcomes achieved with the Social Housing Bill, will
have a direct bearing on the workload and efficiency of the rental
tribunals.

I make this statement because the aim of the Social Housing Bill is to
promote the supply of rental housing. It therefore goes without saying that
the role of the tribunals will become more important as the objectives of
the Social Housing Bill become a reality.

I briefly want to touch on some of the amendments before us, one of which
is of section 13 of the Act, which states that a ruling by the tribunal is
deemed to be an order of a magistrate’s court. Unfortunately, the
shortcomings related to the implementation of such orders cannot be
addressed in this Bill. It has to be done in the justice cluster, and I
appeal to the Minister to liaise with that cluster in this regard.

What is of concern to me, however – and the Housing Department has not
commented on this at all - is this: One of the submissions by a magistrate
indicated that the magisterial powers given to tribunals were a violation
of section 170 of the Constitution. Indeed, he suggested that “a tribunal
is not a court and cannot in this clandestine manner obtain that status”.
The state law advisers did not concur, and this clause was amended by
adding a subclause that said, “The tribunal does not have jurisdiction to
hear applications for eviction orders.”

The committee also inserted a clause giving the members of the tribunal the
authority to elect a temporary chairperson for the purposes of a hearing if
both the designated chairperson and deputy chairperson are absent.

The amending Bill before us addresses the shortcomings identified over
which it has jurisdiction, and the DA therefore supports the Bill as
amended. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, I am just a carbon paper for my
colleague who unfortunately cannot be here to take part in this debate.

However, the IFP supports this Bill because it protects the rights of both
landlords and tenants. We hope that this will resolve difficulties which
are experienced between the two and lead to a better understanding and
working relationship. The other arguments are reserved, but we support the
Bill. Thank you.

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, the Bill before
us seeks to address certain shortcomings in the Rental Housing Act of 1999,
such as widening the definition of an unfair practice.

The Bill seeks to clarify and extend the powers and functions of the
tribunals with regard to eviction orders, rulings that a person must comply
with the Act, the power of the tribunals to issue spoliation and attachment
orders and interdicts, and that rulings by tribunals must be enforced in
terms of the Magistrates’ Courts Act. These important amendments will
hopefully improve the functioning of the tribunals and the level of redress
they can offer.

Another important matter addressed in the Bill is to shift the power of
making regulations from the provincial level to the national level. The
intention is to ensure uniformity in procedures and the rulings made by
various tribunals. The UDM supports this Bill. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. Our national Constitution enshrines
that everyone is entitled to adequate housing. With respect to South
Africa’s state of poverty, it is a harsh reality that a large number of
South Africans are living in informal settlements with minimum access to
basic services.

On another level, South Africans who do not have the means to own homes but
rather have to rent also find themselves in financial difficulties in
keeping up with rentals. In other instances, it is the landlord who is
often compromised and with stringent eviction laws they often suffer a
loss. Either way, the MF finds it crucial that the landlord-tenant
relationship, be it private or public, is governed by legislation.

In respect of the amending Bill, the MF is supportive of all provisions,
but would like the department to look into body corporates that often, with
no legal authority, exercise rights over tenants and the occupancy of
rental property.

There has been much aggression by persons awaiting state housing as well as
by residents of informal settlements who are often relocated. We ask why
the government has only opted to build freestanding houses, and not flats
and apartments.

Government has a number of properties that are not in use. The MF suggests
and appeals to the government that it investigate utilising these
government properties that may be converted into flats for temporary or
long-term occupancy. Minister, we hope that you look into this matter as
well. The MF supports the Rental Housing Bill. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, the demand for rental
housing will be on the increase, with an expected 81 000 units needed per
annum. As more people turn to the renting of property, the role of the
Rental Housing Tribunals becomes critical to ensure that the tenants and
landlords enjoy the best possible benefits rental housing can offer.

Controls on rental housing must be strengthened to protect residents
against the drug trade and criminal elements. The effective functioning of
the Rental Housing Tribunals is required if a fair and reasonable practice
is to be enforced upon both tenants and landlords. The tribunals should be
given sufficient authority, in co-operation with the Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development, to enforce orders of eviction when required
to do so.

Our courts are overstressed with case backlogs. It would be in the best
interests of the relevant parties that the tribunals be given reasonable
powers to effect efficient and timely justice in cases of any unlawful or
unfair practice. The FD believes that the rental housing sector must be
protected with the best legal framework possible and we, therefore,
wholeheartedly support the Rental Housing Amendment Bill. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Deputy Chair. My Whips and I
are in complete agreement that this is a very good note on which to end
this session of Parliament where there is complete agreement between
ourselves and opposition parties. I would like to thank everybody for their
participation. I think we have had a very good session on this Bill.

I would like to say to the member of the MF that we are dealing with the
matter you raised. I think the hon Steyn did say that there is a follow-up
Bill, the Social Housing Bill, which will deal very directly with that.

We are extremely seized with this matter. Comrade Zo, this could only mean
that your steering of this committee is a very good indication of things to
come, and I am very grateful to you and to all the members here. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The Bill will be sent to the
National Council of Provinces for concurrence. Before going to Member
Statements, the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party has requested an
opportunity to move a motion. I now grant him that opportunity.

   ESTABLISHMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON MATTERS RELATING TO EX-MINEWORKERS
                                    UNION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House establishes an Ad Hoc Committee on Matters Relating to the
   Ex-Mineworkers Union –

     1) the committee to consist of 13 members as follows: ANC 8; DA 2; IFP
        1; and other parties 2;

     2) the committee to investigate matters raised in submissions from the
        Ex-Mineworkers Union;

     3) the committee to be drawn from members of relevant portfolio
        committees, including Labour, Minerals and Energy, Health and Social
        Development;

     4) the committee’s deliberations to take into consideration records,
        reports and submissions by stakeholders who have previously been
        involved in this matter, including the Premier’s Office of the
        Eastern Cape, the Office of the Executive Mayor of the O R Tambo
        District Municipality, the Office of the Mayor of Tshwane, the
        Presidency and Government Departments, such as Labour, Minerals and
        Energy, Health and Social Development;

     5) the committee to exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist
        it in carrying out its task; and

     6) the committee to make recommendations that could assist in
        addressing the above-mentioned and related problems by not later
        than 31 October 2007.

Agreed to.
                     CONDOLENCES TO THE HERBOLDT FAMILY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S S T NJIKELANA (ANC): Chairperson, two weeks ago Ronald Herboldt, the
only African to participate in the Cuban revolution, died in Cape Town
after a short illness.

In December 1958, Ronald, then a 21-year-old from Salt River, Cape Town,
was working on the cargo ship, Constantia, which docked in Cuba to load
sugar just as the Cuban revolution was reaching its climatic moment.
Fraternising with the members of Fidel Castro’s rebel army, Ronald was
instantly attracted. He left the Constantia and participated in the
liberation of Cuba from the Batista dictatorship. In 1962 he married Martha
Rangel Sandoval and raised a family in Cuba. Throughout his long exile,
Ronald never lost his love for Cape Town and his South African family, or
his desire to return home to a liberated South Africa.

In 1975 and again in 1987, Angola asked for Cuban help to repulse the South
African invasion. Ronald was amongst the first to volunteer for duty in
Angola. His knowledge of Afrikaans provided invaluable assistance to Cuban
military intelligence. South Africa’s retreat at Cuito Cuanavale marked the
defeat of the racist oppressors and the collapse of apartheid. Ronald
served as a Cuban representative in the Joint Military Monitoring
Commission that oversaw South Africa and the Cuban military disengagement
from southern Angola. He never lost his love for his adopted country, his
Cuban family and his determination to come home.

Finally able to return home 10 years later in 1998, Ronald was reunited
with his South African family. The ANC expresses its condolences to the
Herboldt family at home and abroad. Thank you. [Applause.]

                        MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J MASANGO (DA): Chairperson, this is a statement by the hon Mr
Labuschagne.

The Department of Trade and Industry recently indicated that a revised
version of their Motor Industry Development Plan was likely to be another
six months away. We hope that the MIDP is not like the Lotto in this
regard, for as it is, the reigning uncertainty has already resulted in
South Africa being unable to compete for some export-oriented manufacturing
contracts.

Given this situation, the unnecessary escalation of the current strike in
the motor vehicle component industry by the National Union of Metal Workers
will be irresponsible in the extreme. There exists no doubt in the DA’s
mind that the situation would have been much easier for employers to
resolve were it not for the wrangling in the tripartite alliance ahead of
the ANC December Congress and the leadership elections. We urge Numsa as
well as the industry to negotiate in earnest in order to achieve a fair
wage for all. Thank you.

                           DURBAN SOUTH EXPLOSIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Hon Chair, on Tuesday evening residents of the
Bluff and Island View in Durban South were rocked by massive explosions and
huge blazes at the Island View liquid storage tank zone.

This storage facility is home to more than 1 000 tanks, some of which
contain highly volatile liquid fuels. Residents of suburbs and areas in the
southern part of Durban in close proximity to all storage tanks and
refineries were thereby exposed to many health and environmental risks. It
is for this reason that the city should have well-working evacuation and
emergency plans in place.

Residents, however, were very critical of the evacuation after the
explosions, and they claim that people in the area did not know about an
emergency evacuation plan. The South Durban Community Environmental
Alliance claims that they have been trying to persuade the city to draw up
a clear disaster management plan for 11 years.

A thorough investigation must be conducted into the cause of the explosions
and the resultant risks the surrounding communities now face. Action must
be taken in order to avoid such incidents from happening again in the
future. We in the IFP also urge the relevant authorities to work together
with communities in drafting a clear disaster management plan, and making
the communities aware of such plans. Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.]

     INAUGURATION OF AFRICA CHAPTER OF INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR GENETIC
                        ENGINEERING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M MORKEL (ANC): Chair, President Thabo Mbeki recently inaugurated the
Africa Chapter of the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology which is housed at the Cape Town Institute for Infectious
Diseases and Molecular Medicine at the University of Cape Town, the third
such centre in the world after India and Italy.

The centre has received R40 million in funding from the ANC-led government.
However, a further R80 million is required in order to ensure that seven
research programmes are launched by scientists ahead of 2010. This
laboratory will exploit biotechnology and genetic engineering to tackle
diseases such as sleeping sickness, bilharzia, malaria and HIV and Aids.

We remain on course in building a caring society where science and
technology, amongst other things, will take us forward in becoming part of
the knowledge economy. The most technologically advanced economies in the
world today are truly knowledge-based. As we increase our investment in
research and development, we must ensure unprecedented innovation and
ensure that there is no chasm between research and development and products
on the market to enhance our citizens’ quality of life. I thank you,
notwithstanding some noise. [Applause.]

                CELEBRATING THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UDM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM is proud to announce once again
that on 29 September 2007 we will be celebrating our 10th anniversary at
Gallagher Estate. The UDM was the first serious political party born under
the new democratic Constitution. We were launched without access to
taxpayer funding afforded to parties already represented in Parliament and
without the artificial and immoral benefit of floor-crossing.
In September 1997 we gathered a diverse group of people from all sectors of
society and embarked on the road that has brought us here today. Within
less than a year of its launch, the UDM held its first national congress
where we elected our national leadership, unveiled our policy documents and
our party constitution. Within 18 months of our launch, we contested our
first national and provincial elections in 1999 and proved that we had a
legitimate place in the political landscape. Since that time, we have gone
through many ups and downs and shown that we have withstood the knocks.

We are proud to say that we have reached this important benchmark in our
existence, and would like to thank each and every person who has over the
years contributed to the growth of the UDM. I thank you, Chairperson.

 NEW CONSTITUTION AT UNIVERSITY OF PRETORIA PROHIBITS STUDENTS ELEGIBLE FOR
  ELECTION TO STUDENT COUNCIL FROM EXPRESSING THEIR POLITICAL OR RELIGIOUS
                                    VIEWS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (VF Plus): Voorsitter, universiteite is sentrums van
uitnemendheid waar idees vrylik uitgeruil word en nuwe idees ontgin word.
Dit was nog altyd so en dit sal altyd so bly, maar klaarblyklik nie by die
Universiteit van Pretoria nie.

Die Universiteit van Pretoria, waar die VF Plus reeds vir 10 jaar in ’n ry
studenteraadsverkiesings wen, het vanjaar ’n nuwe studentegrondwet op die
studente afgedwing wat dit onwettig maak vir studente wat aan verkiesings
deelneem om hulself te identifiseer wat hulle politieke of hulle
godsdiensoriëntasies betref.

In die studenteverkiesing wat verlede week plaasgevind het, het
studenteleiers wat die VF Plus ondersteun byna skoonskip gemaak. Die
universiteitsowerhede het egter nie die feit aanvaar nie en kla nou die
suksesvolle kandidate aan dat hulle onder andere te kenne gegee het dat
hulle hul vir Afrikaans, Christenskap en hoë standaarde beywer.

Die bestuur van die universiteit dink waarskynlik dat dit moontlik is om ’n
leierskorps groot te maak wat geen standpunt, geen lojaliteit en geen
politieke oriëntasie het nie. Dit is nie duidelik wat hulle hiermee beoog
nie, maar dit is wel duidelik dat daar by die Universiteit van Pretoria
inbreuk gemaak word op die beginsels van demokrasie, vryheid van
uitdrukking en vryheid van assosiasie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES (FF Plus): Chairperson, universities are centres of
excellence where ideas are freely exchanged and new ideas are explored.
That has always been the case and will always be the case – but apparently
not at the University of Pretoria.

The University of Pretoria, where the FF Plus has now won student council
elections for ten years running, has this year imposed a new students’
constitution on the students, which makes it illegal for students
participating in elections to identify themselves in terms of their
political or religious orientation.

In the student elections that took place last week, student leaders
supporting the FF Plus virtually made a clean sweep. However, the
university authorities have not accepted this fact and are now charging the
successful candidates with, among other things, committing themselves to
Afrikaans, Christianity, and high standards.

The university management appears to believe it is possible to raise a
leadership corps that has no opinions, no loyalty, and no political
orientation. It is not clear what they are aiming to achieve, but what is
clear is that the principles of democracy, freedom of expression and
freedom of association are being infringed upon at the University of
Pretoria. I thank you.]

                          DEATH OF INKOSI MTHETHWA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu Z KOTWAL (ANC): Sihlalo, amalungu ahloniphekile, isizwe senkosi
yaseMkhono ngase-Piet Retief, inkosi u-David Mthethwa, sihlezi emanzini
siyalila emuva kokukhothama kwenkosi ngoLwesibili mhla ka-18 Septhemba
2007.

Inkosi izotshalwa ngoMgqibelo ngomhla ka-29 Septhemba 2007. Inkosi
uMthethwa ibingumuntu olungileyo isebenzela abantu bayo. Ubelamula phakathi
kwabantu abasebenza futhi abahlala emapulazini nabaqashi okungabanikazi
bamapulazi. Inkosi ibingumuntu ohloniphekile futhi inguSihlalo Wedlu
Yabaholi Bendabuko eMpumalanga. I-ANC ithanda ukwedlulisa amazwi enduduzo
emalungeni onke omndeni nasesizweni sonke. Sithi kini nonke dudu. Hamba
kahle, nkosi. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr Z KOTWAL (ANC): Chairperson, hon members, the subjects of the inkosi of
Mkhono, near Piet Retief, inkosi David Mthethwa, are in mourning after the
death of the inkosi on Tuesday, 18 September. The inkosi will be laid to
rest on Saturday, 29 September 2007.

Inkosi Mthethwa was a kind person who worked hard for his people. He was
the mediator between people who are working and living on farms and the
employers, who are the owners of farms. He was a respectable person and he
was Chairperson of the House of Traditional Leaders in Mpumalanga. The ANC
would like to extend its condolences to all members of the family and the
nation at large. Rest in peace, Nkosi. Thank you. [Applause.]]

               GRADE 12 PUPILS AFFECTED BY KHUTSONG UPRISINGS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Chairperson, there has always been debate on what
is in a name. On the one hand, there are those who believe that if you give
a dog a bad name, you really consign it to be hung, while others feel that
it doesn’t matter. The question of Khutsong in Carletonville in the North
West province has come to dominate the news. If it is not people marching,
it is this or that teacher in court for having caused a strike.

Khutsong may mean a place of rest or a cursed place. It is clear that the
first definition doesn’t fit in with what is going on there. That place is
tending to answer to that of a curse and that is unfortunate. The North
West provincial government has done much to ensure that schooling is
salvaged, particularly for the Grade 12 learners.

We appeal to all concerned: the central government, the North West
provincial government and the residents of Khutsong to make that place a
place of peace. The UCDP further appeals to the residents of Khutsong to
await the decision of the Constitutional Court and refrain from mounting
marches and stayaways while their concerns are being attended to.

The fact that pupils were taken to Taung to prepare for exams against the
will of the majority of residents is inconsequential, as these learners
were not abducted. They boarded buses voluntarily and their parents have
access to them, as and when they wish to see their children. The UCDP calls
on all involved in this matter to allow the students to prepare themselves
for the future without any disturbance. I thank you.

  MEDICATION CONTAINING PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE LINKED TO BLEEDING ON THE BRAIN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Chairperson, it is reported that more than 100 000
people in America die every year as a result of adverse reactions to
medication. I hereby inform you that all drugs containing
phenylpropanolamine, also know as PPA, have been recalled. It has been
linked to bleeding on the brain. There has also been use of certain
medication that causes strokes and seizures in children.

There are a number of medications containing these ingredients. We feel it
is necessary that we introduce strict investigations into medication
administered with no prescription, as that is the method that needs to be
introduced to keep South Africa informed of these medical findings, and
ensure that all medication vendors are kept abreast of these advancements.
We would also like a study to be conducted on fertility as a result of
adverse reactions to medications in South Africa. I thank you, Chairperson.

                   SALARY INCREASES FOR EDUCATORS WELCOMED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Thank you, Chairperson. It is a pity the Minister is
not here. The DA welcomes the substantial salary increases announced this
week for educators, and we are delighted that the Minister of Education has
been able to obtain approval for them.

Educators are the backbone of our country. Every one of us sitting here has
benefited from their dedication and hard work. The success of our economy
rests on the quality of teaching that our children receive in the
classroom. For those educators who are committed to their responsibilities,
it must be said that even with these increases their salaries will not
begin to match what they do.

As the Minister of Education herself has stated, “We need to assert
excellence and challenge mediocrity.” While there is a great amount of work
involved in doing this, one of the most important steps is to offer
salaries that do not deter the best and the brightest from the profession.
These salary increases will be a significant step in that direction. Thank
you.
                  SABC HANDS HOUSE TO FAMILY IN KHAYELITSHA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M R SONTO (ANC): Chairperson, on Friday, 7 September 2007, the SABC
handed over a house to a blind woman and her family in Khayelitsha on the
Cape Flats. The house was built through a joint venture by the broadcaster,
the Department of Correctional Services and the provincial department of
housing and local government.

The house was constructed by prisoners after the SABC highlighted the
plight of the woman during Women’s Month. The woman’s daughter is a rape
survivor and they will share the house with another daughter and her
mentally unstable husband. The recipient is fortunate to be alive today
because the shack in which she previously lived was flattened by a stolen
vehicle shortly after she was moved out of her shack to a place of safety.

SABC staff dedicated a full Saturday, about four weeks ago, to assisting in
the construction of the house. On that day, the woman broke down in tears
when she heard that she would soon become a homeowner.

The ANC congratulates the SABC, sponsors and government departments on
contributing to making the dream possible for this family to own their
house. We further call on other institutions and sponsors to follow the
example they set and to join hands in the fight against poverty. Thank you
very much.

      SECTION 21 INGWAVUMA SCHOOLS HAVE NOT RECEIVED ANNUAL ALLOCATIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Hon Chair, the IFP notes with concern that in the
education district of Ingwavuma, a number of section 21 schools have not,
to date, received their annual allocations from the provincial department
of education.

What is more worrying is the fact that some of these schools are schools
which have been declared no-fee schools. What an irony. These schools
indeed have no money to run their day-to-day activities. We urge the
national Ministry to investigate this unacceptable state of affairs before
the provision of basic education suffers further damage. I thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I certainly didn’t want to interrupt the hon
Mpontshane in his second statement of the afternoon.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Is that a point of order?

Mr M J ELLIS: This is a point of order, Mr Chairman, yes. As I say, I
didn’t want to interrupt the hon member in his second statement of the
afternoon, but I do believe that it is in fact a Rule of the House that a
member can only make one statement. Consequently, the IFP member, in making
two statements, was out of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We will come back to that one. We
will note the point of order.

                  DIVISION OF LAND GIVEN TO LUTHERAN CHURCH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rre M S MOATSHE (ANC): Modulasetilo, e ne e le ka 1867 fa barongwa ba
Majeremane ba sedumedi ba kereke ya Lutere ba ne ba ikabela lefatshe la
Wallmansthal, mme ba le aroganya ka dikarolo di le nne. Tse tharo tsa tsona
ba di rekisetsa batho ba bontsi ba bona ba neng ba sa dumelane le kereke ya
bona. Ba ikabela karolo e e mo gare go nna lefelo la kereke. Ba amogela
batho ba e leng ba kereke go aga, go rua le go lema mo lefelong leo. Lefelo
le la itsega jaaka lefelo la baruti, fa mafelo a mangwe a itsege jaaka kwa
diteneng.

Ka 1967 baagi ba Wallmansthal ba tlosiwa ka pateletso fa lefelo leo le ne
le kaiwa e le la basweu. Ba rwelwe ka dilori tsa puso go ba latlhela mo
gare ga dikgwa kwa Radium. Go ne go se na ditlhabololo dipe e bile go le
kgakala le madirelo a kwa Tswane. Bana ba bona ba ne ba tlogela dikolo
gonne ba tlositswe mo gare ga ngwaga. Lefelo leo la Radium e ne e ka nna
dikilometara di le tlhano go tloga Belabela le go feta dikilometara di le
80 go tloga Wallmansthal eo e nene e ka nna dikilometara di le 20 go tloga
mo Tshwane. Ba ba sa rateng go ya Radium ba ne ba fudugela kwa Leboneng kwa
Temba, bangwe ba ya Ga-Rankuwa, Mabopane, Soshanguve, jalo le jalo.

Re galaleletsa e bile re rorisa ka boipelo puso e, e e eteletsweng pele ke
ANC, ka go busetsa batho ba Wallmansthal lefatshe la bona. Ka 8 Lwetse 2007
re bone Tona ya Temothuo le Merero ya Mafatshe, Mme Xingwana, a neela baagi
makwalo a boagi [title deeds]. Se ke sesupo sa go bontsha gore ANC e a
dira, e bile e kgathalela batho. Re re seno a e nne selo-modiro, batho ba
boelwe ke mafatshe a bona, ba boele mo go robetseng badimo ba bona. Re a
leboga. (Translation of Setswana member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M S MOATSHE (ANC): Chairperson, it was in 1867 that the German
Missionaries of the Lutheran church annexed the Wallmansthal land and
divided it into four parts. Three of those parts were sold to the majority
of people who did not concur with their church. The central part of the
land was given to a missionary and only church members were allowed to use
it for farming and housing. This land became a sacred place for the
missionary, while other places were neglected.

In 1967 residents of Wallmansthal were forcibly removed from that land when
it was declared a whites-only area. They were transported with government
lorries and dumped in the middle of a forest in Radium. There were no
developments and that area was far from Tshwane industries. The fact that
they were removed in the middle of the year, resulted in children being
forced to leave school. Radium was about 5 kilometres from Bela-Bela and
more than 80 kilometres from Wallmansthal which was about 20 kilometres
from Tshwane. Those who did not want to go to Radium went to Leboneng in
Temba, and others went to Ga-Rankuwa, Mabopane, Soshanguve, etc.

We would like to praise and congratulate the ANC-led government for
restoring land to the residents of Wallmansthal. On 8 September 2007, we
saw the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, Mrs Xingwana, giving the
residents their title deeds. This is evidence that the ANC really works and
cares for the people. We say this should be a continuous thing; people
should get their land back, where their ancestors were laid to rest. Thank
you.]

   PERFORMANCE BONUSES PAID TO STAFF AND BOARD OF NATIONAL LOTTERIES BOARD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Chairperson, it is now 153 days since the suspension
of the Lotto. This week the DA lodged a complaint with the Public Service
Commission over a 42,4% increase in the performance bonuses that were
awarded to the staff and board of the National Lotteries Board, the NLB.
It is impossible that this increase in performance bonuses could be
justified or even deemed reasonable, because the NLB had neither a staff
performance appraisal system in place as required by the Public Financial
Management Act; nor did it succeed in carrying out its mandate in terms of
advising the Minister properly on the issuing of a licence to conduct the
lottery. It also could not carry out or administer the lottery distribution
agencies, as they were disabled for much of the year.

While the actual National Lotteries Board is claiming no wrongdoing and
that the Minister signed off on the bonuses personally, the Department of
Trade and Industry tells the press it is a matter that is entirely internal
to this troubled lotteries board.

Who is wrong and who is right? One can only surmise that it is the same
chaos and confusion that can ultimately be blamed for the suspension of the
Lotto.

                        SOCCER PROGRAMME IN ALEXANDRA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M D NXUMALO (ANC): Chairperson, the community policing forum in
Alexandra recently initiated a two-month, one per street, soccer tournament
in the parking lot of the Alexandra Stadium. According to the CPF’s
community liaison officer, the goal of the programme is to uplift the youth
in Alexandra and to take them off the street away from crime.

The programme further aims to encourage the youth to participate in sport,
to change community perceptions about the policy and to reach out to the
youth. Plans are also being made to organise a similar women’s tournament.

The tournaments bring together young men and women between the ages of 16
and 25, from 1st Avenue to 22nd Avenue in the township. Each week the CPF
volunteer goes door-to-door looking for aspiring strikers, fullbacks and
goalkeepers, who stand a chance to ultimately compete for 15 bursaries
donated by the local business school.

Registration in the programme is free and participants are provided with T-
shirts and meals for the day. Through this initiative, learners in Grades 8
and 9 have been recruited to volunteer at police events and at the
station’s youth desk.

The ANC congratulates the CPF and police in Alexandra on their efforts to
fight crime and their commitment to reaching out to the youth and building
safer communities.

Ngiyabonga sihlalo. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

                    MEMBER’S STATEMENTS – ONE PER MEMBER

                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The point of order that was raised
is indeed valid and it is in order. Therefore, to the member who made the
second statement: that statement is invalid and is ruled out. We are
warning the hon member that in future he should not do so, because indeed
it is within the Rules and we need to respect the Rules. So the second
statement is therefore ruled out.

That concludes the members’ statements. There were quite a number of
Ministers in the House earlier. I see two Deputy Ministers over there. Are
there any Ministerial responses?

   PERFORMANCE BONUSES PAID TO STAFF AND BOARD OF NATIONAL LOTTERIES BOARD

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms E Thabethe): Chair, I just
want to give some clarity on the last statement raised on the matter of the
distribution agencies of the lottery and its suspension. As far as we are
concerned, from the Department of Trade and Industry, it was the court
order that challenged how the award was given to Gidani - not the running
of the distribution agencies and all that. So, the suspension was based on
that.

As the Minister reported before, he was looking at that issue and the
Lotteries Board met with him and discussed different options. He said that
he would make an announcement at the appropriate time. I hope the hon
member can wait for that and then deal with the other issues. If she has a
problem with the distribution agencies, she can put this in writing and
send it to the department, but must not make assumptions because that is
why there is a lot of confusion and all other issues that she raised. That
is not why the Lotto was suspended. The suspension was based on the agency
that was going to run it and not the distribution agencies.

I think that all the other statements were for the different clusters and
for Agriculture which is part of Land Affairs, etc. But they were all
appropriate, I’m sure. We wish hon members well in doing their constituency
work. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Deputy Minister. Are
there any other Ministerial responses? There are none.

Before concluding the business of the day, I wish to remind members that
buses are waiting outside to take them to the book launch at the Cape Town
International Convention Centre.

The House adjourned at 18:33.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bill submitted

     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (a)     Spesiale Aansuiweringsbegrotingswetsontwerp (Finansiële
             Jaar 2007/08) [W 37 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Special
         Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/08 Financial Year) [B 37 –
         2007] (National Assembly –sec 77), as introduced in Parliament.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The President of the Republic

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2006-2007 [RP 198-2007].

2.    The Minister of Labour
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
         Sector Education and Training Authority (SAS-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 84-2006].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Education
         and Training Authority (CETA) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24—2007]
   (National Assembly - sec 74), dated 13 September 2007:

      The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
      having considered the subject of the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment
      Bill [B 24—2007] (National Assembly - sec 74), referred to it and
      classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 74 Bill,
      endorses the classification of the Bill and reports the Bill without
      amendments.

      The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


      1.    Background


      1.1   The Constitution Twelfth Amendment Act of 2005 (the Twelfth
           Amendment), amended the Constitution of the Republic of South
           Africa, 1996 (the Constitution), by re-determining the
           geographical areas of the nine provinces of the Republic of
           South Africa.


      1.2   The Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
           Matters Act, 2005 (Act No. 23 of 2005) (the Repeal Act),
           provided for consequential matters arising from the re-alignment
           of former cross-boundary municipalities and the re-determination
           of the geographical areas of provinces.


      1.3   In terms of the Twelfth Amendment and the Repeal Act, which came
           into operation on 1 March 2006, the provincial boundary between,
           amongst others, the provinces of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-
           Natal was altered so that the area that previously formed the
           local municipality of Matatiele (the Matatiele municipality) was
           relocated to the province of the Eastern Cape and new municipal
           boundaries were created as a consequence.


      1.4   The constitutional validity of the Twelfth Amendment and the
           Repeal Act was challenged in the Constitutional Court.  On 18
           August 2006 the Constitutional Court, in Matatiele Municipality
           and Others v President of the Republic of South Africa and
           Others 2007 (1) BCLR 47 (CC) (the Matatiele case), declared that
           part of the Twelfth Amendment which effectively relocated the
           Matatiele municipality to the province of the Eastern Cape to be
           inconsistent with the Constitution and therefore invalid.  The
           order of invalidity was based on a procedural defect, namely the
           failure of the KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislature to
           facilitate public involvement, as required by section 118(1)(a)
           of the Constitution, when it considered whether or not to
           approve that part of the Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill of
           2005 that effectively relocated the Matatiele municipality from
           the province of KwaZulu-Natal to the province of the Eastern
           Cape.  As a result of the interrelationship between the Twelfth
           Amendment and the Repeal Act, the Court also declared that part
           of the Repeal Act which relates to the Matatiele municipality to
           be inconsistent with the Constitution and therefore invalid.
           The orders of invalidity were suspended for a period of 18
           months, during which period Parliament has the opportunity to
           correct the constitutional defect that led to the orders of
           invalidity.


      1.5   It is apparent from the above dates that the Constitutional
           Court's judgment in the Matatiele case was handed down after the
           provincial boundary between the provinces of the Eastern Cape
           and KwaZulu-Natal was altered and the Matatiele municipality was
           relocated to the province of the Eastern Cape.


      1.6   In the Matatiele case the Constitutional Court dealt with the
           question whether the Twelfth Amendment was adopted in a manner
           that is consistent with the provisions of the Constitution.
           This question was raised by the Court itself and not by any of
           the applicants in the case.  The judgment specifically dealt
           with the procedural defect by the provincial legislature of
           KwaZulu-Natal, namely its failure to hold oral hearings or to
           invite written representations to facilitate public involvement
           as required by section 118(1)(a) of the Constitution.  In this
           context the Committee noted that the Constitutional Court did
           not find any defect in the procedures adopted by the National
           Assembly (the Assembly) in the processing and passing of the
           Twelfth Amendment and the Repeal Act.
      2.    Objects of the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B
           24—2007] and the Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and
           Related Matters Amendment Bill [B 25—2007]


      2.1   The Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24—2007] (the
           Thirteenth Amendment Bill) deals with all the provincial
           boundaries pertaining to the province of KwaZulu-Natal as a
           natural consequence of the Constitutional Court's finding that
           the provincial legislature of KwaZulu-Natal failed to facilitate
           public involvement in its processes pertaining to the
           consideration and approval of certain portions of the
           Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill of 2005, that concerned it
           and consequently the related Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws
           Repeal and Related Matters Bill, 2005.  This failure being
           considered to be fatal in respect of that provincial
           legislature's approval of the boundary change between the
           provinces of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal in respect of
           the Matatiele municipality is equally fatal to the alteration of
           the other, less contested, areas of the provincial boundary
           between the provinces of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.


      2.2   In the light of the above, the objects of—
           (a)   the Thirteenth Amendment Bill are to amend the
                 Constitution so as to substitute and re-enact the
                 provisions of the Constitution;  and
           (b)   the Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related
                 Matters Amendment Bill [B 25—2007] (the Repeal Amendment
                 Bill) are to amend the Repeal Act so as to substitute and
                 re-enact the provisions of the said Act,
           that are necessary to re-determine the provincial boundary
           between the provinces of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal and
           to provide for consequential matters arising from that re-
           determination, in accordance with the directions given by the
           Constitutional Court to Parliament.


      3.    Constitutional requirements for the passing of the Thirteenth
           Amendment Bill


      3.1   In terms of section 74(3) of the Constitution, a Bill amending
           the Constitution must also be passed by the National Council of
           Provinces (the NCOP), with a supporting vote of at least six
           provinces, if the amendment, amongst others, alters provincial
           boundaries, powers, functions or institutions.  Provision is
           further made in section 74(8) of the Constitution that if such a
           Bill, or any part of such a Bill, concerns only a specific
           province or provinces, the NCOP may not pass the Bill or the
           relevant part unless it has been approved by the legislature or
           legislatures of the province or provinces concerned.  These
           constitutional provisions effectively give provincial
           legislatures a veto right in respect of proposed constitutional
           amendments that affect them directly.


      3.2   As mentioned in paragraph 2.2 above, the objects of the
           Thirteenth Amendment Bill are to amend the Constitution so as to
           substitute and re-enact those provisions of the Constitution
           that have been declared to be inconsistent with the Constitution
           and therefore invalid by the Constitutional Court in the
           Matatiele case.  The Thirteenth Amendment Bill is therefore
           intended to re-determine the provincial boundary between the
           provinces of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.


      3.3   In light of the above constitutional provisions and the objects
           of the Thirteenth Amendment Bill, it is clear that the
           Thirteenth Amendment Bill falls within the ambit of section
           74(3)(b) of the Constitution, and therefore requires the
           approval of both the Assembly and the NCOP.  However, in terms
           of section 74(8) of the Constitution, the NCOP may not pass the
           Thirteenth Amendment Bill unless it has been approved by the
           provincial legislatures of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.


      4.    Obligation to facilitate public involvement in legislative
           processes


      4.1   The Committee, during its consideration of the Constitution
           Twelfth Amendment Bill of 2005, engaged the public through a
           process of calling for written submissions.  The Committee
           considered the written submissions so received, as well as
           written submissions received from the public and provincial
           legislatures on that Bill that were submitted to the Speaker of
           the Assembly and the Chairperson of the NCOP by the Minister for
           Justice and Constitutional Development in terms of the public
           involvement procedure contained in the Constitution itself,
           namely in section 74(5) and (6)(a) and (b).  The content of
           those submissions remains relevant for purposes of re-enacting,
           by means of the Thirteenth Amendment Bill, those provisions of
           the Constitution that have been declared to be inconsistent with
           the Constitution and therefore invalid by the Constitutional
           Court in the Matatiele case.


      4.2   In terms of section 74(5) of the Constitution, the Thirteenth
           Amendment Bill was—
           (a)   published in the national Gazette for public comment;  and
           (b)   submitted to the provincial legislatures for their views.
           On 29 June 2007 written submissions received from the public and
           provincial legislatures on the Thirteenth Amendment Bill were
           submitted to the Speaker of the Assembly and the Chairperson of
           the NCOP by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
           Development in terms of section 74(6)(a) and (b) of the
           Constitution, for tabling in the Assembly and the NCOP,
           respectively.  Those written submissions were referred to the
           Committee by the Speaker of the Assembly and to the Select
           Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs by the
           Chairperson of the NCOP.


      4.3   The Committee, in terms of the Rules of the National Assembly,
           conferred with the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
           Government (the PLG Committee) in its deliberations on the
           Thirteenth Amendment Bill.  Both Committees received a briefing
           on the written submissions that were referred to the Committee
           by the Speaker, as well as the written submissions received from
           members of the public in response to an invitation by the
           Committee to make written submissions on the Thirteenth
           Amendment Bill, together with written submissions relating to
           the Repeal Amendment Bill.


      4.4   The Committee, sitting with the PLG Committee (the Committees)
           considered and deliberated extensively upon those submissions.
           The Committees noted that the content of those submissions may
           broadly be categorized into three distinct themes:
           (a)   The majority of the submissions contained no matters of
                 substance, but merely stipulated personal preferences,
                 either for the retention of Matatiele in the province of
                 the Eastern Cape or the inclusion thereof in the province
                 of KwaZulu-Natal.
           (b)   Some submissions substantiated their call for
                 incorporation of Matatiele into the province of KwaZulu-
                 Natal based on ethnic and cultural links with that
                 province.
           (c)   In a few submissions concerns were raised relating to the
                 possible future lack of service delivery by the province of
                 the Eastern Cape, in particular in respect of health and
                 education.
           From the submissions received from the relevant provincial
           legislatures, the Committee further noted that the provincial
           legislatures of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal do not oppose
           the introduction of the Bill.


      4.5   After having considered all the written submissions referred to
           in paragraph 4.3 above, the Committee was not persuaded that
           those submissions contained adequately substantive reasons for
           the Committee to amend the Thirteenth Amendment Bill, given that
           many of the submissions were head-count exercises, whilst in
           other submissions emphasis was placed on ethnic and cultural
           differences which are contrary to the basic principles espoused
           in the Constitution.


      4.6   During the consideration of, and deliberations on, the written
           submissions, the Committee called for a briefing on the status
           of service delivery in the area of the Matatiele municipality,
           as well as on the trends of expenditure of the province of the
           Eastern Cape.  Information presented to the Committees by the
           Department of Provincial and Local Government indicated no
           material breakdown in respect of service delivery levels in that
           area and that there is a significant committal by the newly
           constituted Matatiele municipality to the development of
           infrastructure up to 2009.  The Committee noted that there is no
           material under-expenditure in respect of, inter alia, services
           relating to health and education by the province of the Eastern
           Cape in relation to expenditure by the province of KwaZulu-
           Natal, or indeed other provinces.


      4.7   The Committees also received a briefing and deliberated on the
           implications of the Constitutional Court's judgments in Doctors
           for Life International v Speaker of the National Assembly and
           Others 2006 (12) BCLR 1399 (CC) (the Doctors for Life case) and
           the Matatiele case, where the Constitutional Court considered
           the nature and scope of the constitutional obligation of a
           legislative organ of state to facilitate public involvement in
           legislative processes.


      4.8   Having noted the Constitutional Court's findings in the Doctors
           for Life case and the Matatiele case, and understanding what is
           required of Parliament to comply with its constitutional
           obligation to "facilitate public involvement" in the promotion
           of the Thirteenth Amendment Bill, the Committee submits that it
           has taken all the steps that, in its view, are necessary and
           reasonable to comply with that obligation.


      5.    Consideration of the Thirteenth Amendment Bill by the provincial
           legislatures


      5.1   Having noted the specific findings by the Constitutional Court
           in the Doctors for Life case and the Matatiele case that relate
           to the obligation of provincial legislatures to facilitate
           public involvement in their legislative processes, it is clear
           to the Committee that the provincial legislatures of the Eastern
           Cape and KwaZulu-Natal must, in considering whether or not to
           approve that part of the Thirteenth Amendment Bill that concerns
           them, facilitate public involvement as required by section
           118(1)(a) of the Constitution.


      5.2   The Committees were informed that officials of the relevant
           Departments held meetings with the Speakers of the provincial
           legislatures of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal to discuss
           what is required of those provincial legislatures to comply with
           their constitutional obligation to "facilitate public
           involvement" when they consider the question whether or not to
           approve the Thirteenth Amendment Bill, as required by section
           74(8) of the Constitution.  The Committees were further informed
           that it was suggested to those provincial legislatures that they
           should consider the possibility of holding joint public hearings
           in the affected areas.  The Committees were also informed that
           the following motivation for that suggestion was given to those
           provincial legislatures:
           (a)   The effect of the suspension of the Constitutional Court's
                 orders of invalidity of the Twelfth Amendment and the
                 Repeal Act is that the provincial boundary between the
                 provinces of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal was changed
                 with effect from 1 March 2006 when those two Acts came into
                 operation.  This means that the provincial legislature of
                 KwaZulu-Natal would not on its own be able to hold hearings
                 in the Eastern Cape where, for instance, Matatiele is now
                 situated.
           (b)   From the Constitutional Court’s judgment in the Matatiele
                 case it is clear that the provincial legislatures of the
                 Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal are required to facilitate
                 public involvement in all the affected areas, in other
                 words in the affected areas that they release, as well as
                 the affected areas that they receive.
           (c)   It would, from a financial and practical point of view, be
                 more feasible to hold joint public hearings.
           (d)   Once the joint public hearings have been held, the
                 provincial legislatures of the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-
                 Natal should individually consider the question whether or
                 not to approve the Thirteenth Amendment Bill.
           It was indicated to the Committees that after the above-
           mentioned meetings with the Speakers of the provincial
           legislatures concerned, there is an indication that those
           provincial legislatures may opt for holding joint public
           hearings in the affected areas, although the Committee noted
           that there are other options available to those provincial
           legislatures.


      5.3   Accordingly, the Committee calls on all the provincial
           legislatures, and more particularly those of the Eastern Cape
           and KwaZulu-Natal, to take all the steps that, in their view,
           are necessary and reasonable to comply fully with the spirit and
           direction of the Constitutional Court's judgment when
           considering whether to approve or support the Thirteenth
           Amendment Bill, as the case may be.


Report to be considered.




2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
   on the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
   Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75) dated 13
   September 2007:



      The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
      considered the subject of the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws
      Repeal and Related Matters Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2007] (National
      Assembly – sec 75)), referred to it and classified by the Joint
      Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without
      amendment.



      The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


      Having conferred jointly with the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
      Constitutional Development on the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment
      Bill [B 24-2007] and the Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and
      Related Matter Amendment Bill [B 25-2007], the Committee has noted the
      report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24-2007]
      and concurs with its content.


   Report to be considered.


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on the
    Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B32-2007] (National Assembly –
    sec 75), dated 14 September 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services, having considered
        the subject matter of the Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B32-
        2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified
        by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
        Bill with amendments [B32A-2007].


                          MONDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      The Speaker and the Chairperson called a Joint Sitting of the National
      Assembly and the National Council of Provinces, as follows:

         CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT


         The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the
         Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu,
         in terms of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a Joint Sitting of the
         Houses of Parliament for Thursday, 20 September 2007, at 11:00 in
         order for the Houses to commemorate Heritage Day.

2.    Membership of Committees
      Defence
      Dr E A Schoeman has been elected as Chairperson of the Joint Standing
      Committee on Defence, with effect from 14 September 2007.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly

      Ms F Batyi lost her seat in the National Assembly with effect from 28
      August 2007. The vacancy caused by the loss of seat by Ms Batyi has
      been filled, with effect from 11 September 2007, by the nomination of
      Mr I E Jenner.


2.    Membership of Assembly (floor-crossing)

      Membership status of the following member has in terms of Schedule 6A
      of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed as follows:


         • Mr S Simmons has, on 14 September 2007, left the United Party of
           South Africa and joined the National Alliance, which is a new
           party in the National Assembly.

3.    Membership of Committees

      The following changes have been made to the membership of Portfolio
      Committees:


      Arts and Culture
      Appointed:  Tshivhase, Mrs T J


      Communications
      Appointed:  Vadi, Mr I
      Disharged:  Mohlaloga, Mr M R; Oliphant, Mr G G

      Correctional Services
      Disharged:  Vadi, Mr I

      Provincial and Local Government
      Disharged:  Mogase, Mr I D

      Science and Technology
      Appointed:  Oliphant, Mr G G

      Social Development
      Discharged: Tshivhase, Mrs T J

      Water Affairs and Forestry
      Disharged:  Mogase, Mr I D

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
         Standards for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
         for 2006-2007 [RP 105-2007].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
         Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
         Performance Information for 2006-2007.


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
         Development Agency for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2006-2007.

2.    The Minister of Housing

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
         Reconstruction and Housing Agency for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007.


3.    The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail
         Commuter Corporation Limited (SARRC) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 188-2007].

4.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
         Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 33-2007].
5.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
         Safety and Security for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 24 for 2006-
         2007 [RP 199-2007].


     (b)    Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for July
         2006 to December 2006, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the
         Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).


                         TUESDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees


      Science and Technology


      Mr G Oliphant has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
      Committee on Science and Technology with effect from 18 September
      2007.

      Communications
      Mr I Vadi has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
      on Communications with effect from 18 September 2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Government Notice No 522 published in Government Gazette No
           30013 dated 29 June 2007: Exemption for High Capacity
           Municipalities in terms of section 122(2) and (3) of the Local
           Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
           2003).

2.    The Minister of Science and Technology

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
           and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2006-2007, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
           2006-2007 [RP 131-2007].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      (a)   The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
           dated 6 September 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
           informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South
           African National Defence Force in the Central African Republic:


            EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR A
            SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE
            REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC


            This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have
            authorised the employment of the South African National Defence
            Force (SANDF) personnel to the Central African Republic (CAR),
            in fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic
            of South Africa towards the CAR. The SANDF members will be
            deployed, amongst others, to assist with the capacity building
            of the Central African Republic Defence Force and to renovate
            military bases in the CAR.


            This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
            of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of
            South Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act,
            2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).
            A total of eighty five (85) members were employed as soon as all
            logistic arrangements have been completed. The deployment will
            be until 31 March 2008.


            I will communicate this report to members of the National
            Council of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the
            contents hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


            Regards


            signed


            TM MBEKI

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on the Education Laws
      Amendment Bill [B33-2007] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 14
      September 2007:


         The Portfolio Committee on Education having considered the subject
         of the Education Laws Amendment Bill [B33-2007] (National Assembly
         –sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism as a Section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments
         [B33A – 2007].


                        WEDNESDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees


      (1)   Mrs T J Tshivhase has been elected as Chairperson of the
           Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture with effect from 18
           September 2007.


      (2)   Mr M Masutha has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
           Committee on Social Development with effect from 12 September
           2007.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Finance

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue Service
       (SARS) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
       the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 205-2007].


    b) Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
       Development Programme Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of
       the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
       179-2007].
    c) Government Notice No 809 published in Government Gazette No 30247
       dated 31 August 2007: Determination of interest rate for purposes of
       paragraph (a) of the definition of “official rate of interest” in
       paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in terms of the Income Tax Act,
       1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    d) Government Notice No 1062 published in Government Gazette No 30220
       dated 31 August 2007: Rate on the interest on Government loans made
       in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
       1999).

    e) Government Notice No R.815 published in Government Gazette No 30254
       dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 1 (No. 1/1/1342)
       in terms of the Customs end Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    f) Government Notice No R.816 published in Government Gazette No 30254
       dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 3 (No. 3/618) in
       terms of the Customs end Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

2. The Minister of Communications

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
       Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
       the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

3. The Minister of Science and Technology

    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of Science
       and Technology for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 for 2006-2007 [RP 200-
       2007].

4. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
       Council (ARC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 168-2006].

National Assembly

1. The Speaker

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating Unit
         (SIU) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 206-2007].


                         THURSDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Bills passed by Houses– to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 20 September
         2007:


         (a)     Housing Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill [B 6B
             – 2007 (Reprint)] (National Assembly – sec 76(1))


         (b)     Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


         (c)     Banks Amendment Bill [B 12B – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 75)


         (d)     Diamond Export Levy Bill [B 22 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 77)


         (e)     Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


         (f)     Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/2008 Financial
             Year) [B 37 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77)


         (g)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 75)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees

     (1)    Request from the Minister in The Presidency to recommend four
         candidates for appointment by the President to the Media
         Development and Diversity Agency Board in terms of section 4(1)(b)
         of the Media Development and Diversity Agency Act, 2002 (Act No 14
         of 2002).


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
         consideration and report.

     (2)    Request from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
         Development for the National Assembly, in terms of section 193(5)
         of the Constitution, to recommend a candidate from the nominations
         submitted for appointment by the President to the Commissioner for
         Gender Equality. The nominations and CV’s of prospective
         candidates have been submitted by the Minister for processing.


         Referred to the ad hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancy on the
        Commission for Gender Equality for consideration and report

2.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 20 September
         2007 and transmitted for concurrence:
         (a)     Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21 –
             2007] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2))


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Health of the National Assembly.


         (b)     Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2))


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Health of the National Assembly.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Auditor-General for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 134-2007].

 2. The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
         Bank for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
         (FSB) 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 91-2007].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud for
         Financial Services Providers for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

3.    The Minister of Communications

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
         Communications Authority of South Africa for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 155-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post Office
         Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

4.    The Minister of Health

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
         Schemes for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 75-2007].

5. The Minister in The Presidency

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
         Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements of Vote 7 for 2006-2007 [RP 194-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
         Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

  6. The Minister of Housing

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
         Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

  7. The Minister of Education

     (a)    Government Notice No 496 published in Government Gazette No
         29979 dated 8 June 2007: Appointment of ministerial committee on
         schools that work, in term of the provisions of regulations 20,
         Part 8, of the Treasury Regulations for Department, Trading
         Entities, Constitutional Institutions and Public Entities, issued
         in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999).

  8. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

