---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-06-01
---

FRIDAY, 1 JUNE 2007
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 9:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                             APPROPRIATION BILL



Debate on Vote No 2 - Parliament:


The SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members of the House, fellow South
Africans, the Budget Vote of Parliament is being debated on a very
important day, 1 June, which is International Children’s Day. This is a day
that signifies the importance of children, not only to our society, the
African society, but to humanity as a whole.

In our own country we have a few legal indications as to how important
children are to our society, and even to the work of this Parliament. We
have the Children’s Bill of 2005, which was passed by this Parliament; we
have the Children’s Charter; we have the AU Charter on the Rights of
Children; we even have, at a global level, the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child.

I’d like to call upon us today to rededicate ourselves to developing
vigilant communities that care for our children. We need to practise the
proverb, “It takes a village to raise a child”, as it typifies the
importance of the role of the wider community in raising, nurturing and
protecting children, not abusing them.

We often remind ourselves that children are the future. If you bring up
abused children who always experience violence or lack of love, you
actually are creating a society of bitter people who think that violence is
normal and who also think that abuse of other human beings is normal.
[Applause.]

Hon members, coming to Parliament, I’d like to start off by dealing with
issues relating to the governance of Parliament. Very early in the life of
the Third Parliament, the matter of the governance model was tabled for a
series of discussions. Based on lessons learnt during the First and Second
Parliaments and on recommendations coming from many discussions during
those times, the present governance structure was ultimately adopted.

According to this, there are two bodies that report to the Houses on
different aspects of running Parliament. The Joint Rules Committee focuses
on the core functions of Parliament as provided for in section 45 of the
Constitution. In order to remove the operational matters from bogging down
the Joint Rules Committee as in the past, the Parliamentary Oversight
Authority was created. It is, like the Joint Rules Committee, a multiparty
body co-chaired by the presiding officers, but is much smaller. It is
supposed to receive quarterly reports from the Secretary on operational
matters, and I will, upfront, confess that the Parliamentary Oversight
Authority has not met this year. I am quite sure that I’m going to get a
few, not just rocks, but bricks, coming my way on this matter.

The Joint Rules Committee and the Parliamentary Oversight Authority are
effectively two sides of the same coin. While the Joint Rules Committee
ensures policy formulation and implementation in regard to the core
business of Parliament, the Parliamentary Oversight Authority is
responsible for formulating policy directives in respect of the various
services and facilities of Parliament, and ensuring and monitoring
implementation of the policy.

The following forums feed into the Parliamentary Oversight Authority. There
is Chief Whips’ Forum and the forums of the two Houses that facilitate
consensus-building on matters of mutual interest as well as channel
members’ perspectives on policies affecting them. There is also the
Parliamentary Budget Forum, which is also a multiparty structure that
prepares Parliament’s budget; and the Quarterly Consultative Forum, which
facilitates the input of Members of Parliament on matters concerning
members’ facilities and support.

As should be expected, there have been some tensions between some of these
bodies. The Whips Forum and the Quarterly Consultative Forum, as I have
said before, are both structures that channel issues of backbenchers. This
matter, the fact that they tend to play the same role in this respect, was
brought up by the two structures. However, the apparent initial clashes
were thrashed out and some mutual approach as to how they can work together
was arrived at.

Let me now come to the question of the role of the Parliamentary Oversight
Authority, in particular as it relates to the question of the accounting of
Parliament. As you know, Parliament’s accounts are audited by the Auditor-
General. The question arises: What should happen if Parliament receives a
qualified audit? The National Assembly Rules provide that all the Auditor-
General’s reports go to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa.
There is no argument about that.

There has, however, been debate on these matters. One of the important
questions relates to the fact that Scopa is a committee of only one of the
Houses of Parliament. Parliament, as you know, constitutionally, is made up
of two Houses: the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces.
When, therefore, you are talking about Parliament’s reports, you are
talking about reports emanating out of joint business, out of the workings
of both Houses. So, this is a matter we need to apply our minds to, as to
how then do you say issues relating to the whole institution, which is made
up of two Houses, go only to a structure of one of the Houses? The debate
is still going on, but in the meantime we have ensured that the Secretary
to Parliament does appear before Scopa and does ensure that all questions
that need to be raised are answered.

At this point, I wish to straighten the record in relation to the much-
talked-about qualifications. The facts are as follows: Since the Third
Parliament started in 2004, we have received three Auditor-General’s
reports. The first one, for the 2003-04 period, reflected eight
qualifications covering the Second Parliament. The 2004-05 report reflected
one qualification. The 2005-06 report again had one qualification.
Therefore, I want to dispel this notion that is in the public domain, that
every year Parliament has many qualifications.

Parliament’s new audit committee was appointed in February 2007 and has met
four times since then. For the information of hon members, the chairperson
of the new audit committee is Mr Chose Choeu, who used to work for
Parliament some years ago. Other members are Mr Coovadia, Mrs Qunta, Mr
Nondabula, our own hon Mabe from the National Assembly and hon Botha from
the National Council of Provinces. That is the audit committee that audits
the books of Parliament on an ongoing basis to ensure that we keep to the
rules that are provided for, generally, and in particular the principles as
provided for in the Public Finance Management Act.

Hon members, having hit the mid-term point in November 2006, Parliament
came into 2007 with a keen sense of having less time ahead for us than
what’s behind us. That usually jolts one’s sense of urgency and need to
focus. Among the many things we still have to do before the next election
are the following: We still need to pass outstanding legislation giving
effect to the Constitution; we still need to repeal old apartheid statutes;
we do have the ongoing ad hoc committee reviewing Chapter 9 institutions,
which will table its report in another two months or so.

Parliament has to oversee the implementation of its recommendations,
including carefully looking at Parliament’s own capacity and structures to
engage in this area of the work of all these institutions.

Madam Deputy Speaker, in his reply to the state of the nation address
debate in February this year, the hon President engaged around Parliament’s
theme, Masijule Ngengxoxo, Mzansi [Let’s deepen the debate, South Africa.].
He suggested the following three points for consideration by an appropriate
parliamentary structure. Firstly, he raised the issues of social
transformation, including the important issues of national and social
cohesion and a national value system; secondly, he raised the issue of the
eradication of poverty as something that needs to engage us in a deep
debate; and thirdly, he raised the issue of the reduction and eradication
of crime. These are three such very important matters, hon members, that I
thought I should use this opportunity to remind us of them. We have to find
a way of engaging on these matters seriously.

Hon members, I have raised the matter of changing patterns in the
functioning of Parliament as we move further away from the beginning of the
democratic dispensation with its attendant institutions.

Previously during informal discussions on cutting down drastically on time
spent by MPs in Cape Town, a caution was raised. This caution related to
concerns from the executive in particular, that cutting down the time could
immobilise the institution when important legislation needs to be passed.
This is a valid concern that requires our collective careful consideration.


The question we need to pose though is whether we all need to be in Cape
Town all the time. If not, how should we reorganise our work and how do we
identify those matters that everyone should come to discuss? Which matters
must perhaps be left to fewer people to process while others do more
oversight work? If that is not the way to go, how should we change that?
The change might be effected only in the Fourth Parliament. But given that
it is us who are living through these times of changing patterns, where
fewer and fewer pieces of legislation are being passed - and we have
already said to ourselves at the beginning of the life of this Parliament
that we need to do more monitoring and oversight on delivery on the ground,
the responsibility then falls on us to engage in analyses and
recommendations for the future.

Hon members, let us also remember that the independent panel we decided to
create during the APRM process is presently at work. A reference group of
parliamentarians keeps contact with them and helps them when necessary. We
hope that the panel will be able to table a report before we rise at the
end of the year. The report of this panel will be a welcome mirror and a
tool to enable parliamentarians to engage constructively as it develops our
parliamentary democracy as envisaged by our Constitution - what are the
specific points we need to pay attention to and how? That will be a
positive engagement on debate about Parliament. There has been a lot of
issues raised but we think that a fuller basis for debate is something that
would help us to engage in that debate more constructively.

Before getting to the figures, I wish to touch on the hosting of the Inter-
Parliamentary Union’s 118th plenary assembly in April 2008. Hon members, we
expect between 1 300 to 1 500 Members of Parliament from more than 140
parliaments of the world. For Parliament, this will be the single biggest
gathering we will ever host. It will be a full week of activities for which
we have secured the Cape Town International Convention Centre as a venue. A
steering committee of more than 20 MPs is spearheading the preparations. In
addition, under the Department of Foreign Affairs, an inter-Ministerial
committee will handle a number of portfolios requiring the involvement of
colleagues from the executive.

Coming to the appropriation on Vote 2, Parliament’s appropriation increased
between 2003-04 and 2006-07, rising from R639,9 million to R1 billion - an
average annual increase of 16,5%.

I will quickly touch on the five programmes that drive our strategic
objectives to realise our vision and mission. Under Programme 1,
Administration, expenditure has increased between 2003-04 and 2006-07,
rising from R150,1 million to R216,1 million at an average annual rate of
12,9% as a result of increased human resource capacity, restructuring in
several components and additional accommodation. Our ICT requirements
increased due to the implementation of Parliament’s master systems plan,
including the introduction of the Oracle enterprise resource planning
system, a system to manage travel arrangements, etc.

Projects scheduled for this financial year include a members’ furniture
project for suitable office furniture and facilities for Members of
Parliament’s offices.

In Programme 2, Legislation and oversight, expenditure increased from R80,3
million to R73,5 million between 2003-04 and 2006-07 – an average annual
rate of 29,3%. Expenditure has been strongly influenced by the “Taking
Parliament to the People” programme of the NCOP; providing additional
oversight capacity mainly in the form of research, technical and content
support services for committees and implementing the initial phases of the
language project. The provision of additional oversight capacity and
support to the committees of Parliament in the form of research,
communication, technical and content support, is an ongoing project to
further improve the efficiency of Parliament’s oversight capacity.

In Programme 3, Public and international participation, expenditure
increased from R16,6 million to R84,5 million between 2003-04 and 2006-07
at an average annual rate of 72,1%. There were significant increases in all
subprogrammes, mainly influenced by increases in 2004-05 and 2006-07 in the
Public Affairs subprogramme to increase participation in Parliament. The
66,2% average annual increase in compensation of employees between 2003-04
and 2006-07 addresses needs in the areas of media relations, public
relations and events management. Overall expenditure has also increased due
to the hosting of a number of important international activities and
participation in several international forums.

Projects to be implemented in this financial year include the continuation
of the implementation of the language policy, the establishment of a
parliamentary call centre, the upgrading of publishing systems and video
conferencing facilities.
In Programme 4, Members’ facilities, expenditure increased from R87 million
in 2003-04 to R151,2 million in 2006-07 at an average annual rate of
R20,2%, mainly due to changes in the travel policy and related
entitlements, the rising cost of air travel and operational costs following
the 2004-05 elections.

In Programme 5, associated services, expenditure grew rapidly from R71,7
million in 2003-04 to R156,8 million in 2006-07 at an average annual rate
of 29,8% due to the 76,7% increase in 2006-07 in the Constituency Support
subprogramme for constituency and party administration allowances. This
trend continues over the MTEF period, when expenditure is predicted to grow
at an average annual rate of 21,1%, reaching R278,4 million in 2009-10 to
accommodate further support to members.

Madam Deputy Speaker, in conclusion I wish to say that in spite of our
challenges, we have also been making a lot of progress, about which rather
little is being said. Yes, we have had the travel voucher problems, but we
now have a successful new travel system and we wish that more stories could
be told about that success. Under our training programme, about which I
hope Madam Deputy Speaker will say more, 72 Members of Parliament graduated
on 10 May 2007. Given that the training is geared towards improving MPs’
capacity in their work in Parliament, we must be proud of this success
story. [Applause.]

Hon members, I can’t end without making reference to our beautiful new
emblem. It is a thing of beauty that celebrates the soul of South Africa.
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. I stand here in
support of Budget Vote No 2 and in this Vote the ANC puts the people at the
centre of, the reason for and the core around which the activities of
Parliament are arranged. Inseparably part of and lying at the core of
oversight and accountability is the issue of how this developmental state
ensures that those who are ordinarily excluded from the mainstream
activities - the rural poor, the indigent, women, the disabled, children
and the marginalised - are participants in and have access to Parliament.

One of the key tasks of Members of Parliament is to feed the opinions and
needs of the community they represent into the parliamentary processes.
Their very jobs depend on their ability to hear, understand and interpret
the views of the electorate.

Surely, this is a special skill, which they bring to work with committees
and which other types of inquiry processes cannot assess. Anyone can talk
to experts and the organised lobby groups but Members of Parliament are
especially placed to tap into the general community.

The ANC, at its National General Council meeting in 2005 stated that
participatory democracy should be enhanced and that the legislative arm
should discuss and implement mechanisms to address the following key
issues: a public participation unit to educate on the role of the public in
the elections process in relation to service delivery; government documents
must be simplified and where possible, they must be produced in languages
understood by the community; we need to explore appropriate mechanisms to
empower communities to engage better with the state; strengthen all formal
and informal nodes of contact between civil society, the executive,
legislature and administration; institute an aggressive national programme
of civic education that familiarises all citizens with the Constitution,
new structures, citizens’ rights and obligations, participation, and so
forth; government should be encouraged to systematically review whether a
hierarchy of recourse avenues exist for dissatisfied citizens, are
accessible to all and function effectively at all levels of government and
in all sectors.

Generally speaking, there are four basic reasons why we should get the
public engaged in a particular policy process. At first, we need to improve
governance that has to do with democratic legitimacy, accountability,
trust, citizens’ rights, empowerment, etc. Secondly, regarding social
capital and social justice, we need to tackle exclusion and increase
equity, build relationships, networks and ownership. Thirdly, we need
improved quality services, projects and programmes that are more efficient
that meet the needs and reflect broad social values. Lastly, there is the
issue of capacity-building and learning, which would build confidence,
skills, understanding, awareness and knowledge.

The ANC therefore welcomes, in the strategic plan and budget of Parliament
for 2004-09, the effort to expand access to Parliament in order to be in
touch with the people who are ordinarily outside of national debates in
society and the establishment of parliamentary democracy offices in each
province. These offices would play a key role of providing relevant
information about the oversight work of committees, provide opportunities
and arrange for the people’s voices to reach Parliament by allowing their
views and needs to be expressed in parliamentary committees, as well as
acting as the planning platform for Parliament and its committees to visit
the rural areas, where people are often excluded from our oversight.

Looking at the gallery section of Parliament, it has, since the ANC came to
power, become an accepted sight to see schoolchildren, grandmothers and
fathers, in fact, people who would otherwise not have been allowed into
this institution, to be part of the National Assembly. When they attend,
they become part of this Assembly, so that when we gather, we do not gather
as their representatives in an isolated, elevated way, removed from them.
[Interjections.] Rather, we gather as the people, for the people, with the
people as we legislate. We also oversee the implementation of policies
along which their lives are being transformed. In line with this view of a
parliament of the people, we developed a vision that in part says that we
are building –


   ... an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs of
   the people and driven by the ideal of realising a better quality of life
   for all the people of South Africa.

We have to be realistic and ask whether we are as accessible as we should
be. Do we use the budget allocated for this institution in ways that ensure
that we reach more people that do not have access to the oversight
activities of Parliament?

It has been noted that committees in the legislatures offer the most
important platform for public participation. Public hearings seek to obtain
the views of civil society on draft legislation and policy. Members of the
public may also be invited to make written or oral submissions to a
committee. We should do more to overcome the challenges of the system,
tending to favour those with the resources to attend and make submissions
at public hearings. Parliament currently makes provision in its budget to
enable those without funds to travel to Cape Town to make presentations and
as Home Affairs did recently, goes out to hear views on a Bill, despite
resource challenges.

There are a number of general constraints on the optimal functioning of
committees. Perhaps the most obvious of this is the inadequacy of budgets
and staffing in the legislature. This means that some committees inevitably
work better than others.

We have worked through a legislative programme that was more intense than
that of any parliament in Southern Africa in the past, and probably in the
world. We should build on the examples that we have had in this very
Parliament when the then Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
Technology developed a programme that aimed not only to bring people closer
to the legislative process by helping to demystify science and technology,
but also draws on the rich cultural traditions and indigenous knowledge of
the people. The knowledge, expertise and often neglected cultural forms of
sectors of our society are drawn into the mainstream of political and
economic life.

We can refer to the wonderful experience we have had over the years as
Parliament gathered with the people in what we refer to as the People’s
Assembly. We gathered in Soweto and recently in the rural area of
Oudtshoorn – we won’t talk about how the aircraft landed. When this
happens, the people are drawn into the experience of meeting
parliamentarians, seeing their leaders and representatives and speaking to
them. We, on the other hand, are humbled by the wisdom expressed in plain
language by these people when they tell us openly and honestly about the
shortcomings of our policy. We should, maybe, explore some other forms of
engagement and should maybe also explore things like e-government for
Parliament. It has the potential to involve citizens in the governance
process by engaging them in the interaction with policy makers, throughout
the policy cycle at all levels of government. This would strengthen civic
engagement and contribute to the building of public trust in government.

Gauteng has established a public participation and petitions office
separate from the information and communications directorate, with a
dedicated staff and budget and with a mandate to promote public
participation by marginalised constituencies. The office has engaged in an
extensive public education programme for many years now and has worked
effectively with the committee section to promote public participation in
committee hearings. Maybe we should see how this can also assist us, as the
public participation process needs to be designed with this in mind. It
should be robust and as independent as possible of party political
pressures. As the ANC, we celebrate our victories and good deeds but we
remain acutely aware of these shortcomings. We express this without fear,
knowing that by recognising our shortcomings, we shall, in future, continue
to develop this.

Developing a strong parliament or legislature involves articulating an
alternative concept of parliamentary politics, which fundamentally
unsettles the trivialising logic of oppositionism. More important is the
idea that a strong Parliament and legislatures are entirely consistent and
arguably required by our transformative political project.

We celebrate National Children’s Day and today in Bonteheuwel, in the
multipurpose community centre, there will be children’s participation and
we welcome the fact that children are being asked to participate here also.
Children will give messages by way of posters and there will be a panel
discussion where the children will ask the panellists some questions
relating to child abuse, health-related issues, the SAPS and issues
relating to social development. I thank you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, first of all, may I
say that I am humbled by my election to this position of Parliament and
secondly, I would like to pay tribute to my predecessor, the hon Gibson,
and the distinction with which he filled this post previously. [Applause.]

I want to talk today about the principles that both bind and inspire the
decisions of this House and the actions of public representatives that give
it life. Parliament’s annual report describes its vision as follows:


  To build an effective people’s parliament that is responsive to the needs
  of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realisation of a better
  quality of life for all the people of South Africa.


It describes its mission like this:

  As the freely elected representatives of the people of South Africa our
  mission is to represent and to act as a voice of the people in fulfilling
  our constitutional functions of passing laws and overseeing executive
  action.

The word “people” appears seven times in those two sentences. The people
are the reason we serve in this House. The good of the people is the ideal
that should inform our choices and guide our decisions. There is a word for
serving the people and that is “accountability”. That word is perhaps the
cornerstone of the democratic parliament. Every five years we each directly
are accountable to the electorate but on a day-to-day basis we have a duty
to remain accountable to all South Africans for every decision we take.

Parliament has provided us with mechanisms through which we can both choose
and, in the case of the Executive, be compelled to account for our
decisions and our actions. Speeches, parliamentary Questions, motions and
debates – all of these are designed to force us to explain and justify the
decisions we make to the people of this country.

There are some things that cannot be regulated or explicitly provided for
and which require a sense of duty and a commitment to transparency, if they
are to work. They are the things that define the spirit of Parliament,
which might not exist in black and white on paper, but are all important
nonetheless. They determine whether the executive is proactive and
forthcoming or defensive and belligerent. They determine whether Parliament
is managed in an open and responsible way or if its presiding officers meet
behind closed doors and its finances are shielded from public scrutiny.
They determine whether the debate is a platform to exchange ideas and
arrive at better solutions or just a chance to attack your critics and talk
past legitimate concerns. They determine whether the mechanisms available
to all members of this House are embraced and used to promote democracy or
opposed and marginalised.

No one can dictate the nature of the spirit which defines how Parliament
conducts itself. It is up to each member and each party to set the tone in
this regard. The DA, for one, is fully committed to the idea of an open
opportunity society and to an open opportunity parliament, both in practice
and in spirit. Now what do I mean by an open opportunity parliament? Two
phrases from Parliament’s vision and mission statement provide the answer:
An accountable and transparent Parliament that oversees executive action
and which is dedicated to realising a society in which anyone can fulfil
his/her ambition. It is perhaps questionable whether the ruling party, the
majority party in this House, is committed to those ideals. Too often it
conducts its business in a manner which suggests it is not the people it is
answerable to but rather the ANC national executive. The ruling party and
the management of the Parliament has yet to embrace, I believe, the vision
and mission of this Parliament wholeheartedly or to understand that every
decision it makes, is actually being made on behalf of others, of all the
people of South Africa.

Democracy does not exist on paper alone. Our Constitution and the laws and
regulations of the country are a guide. They inform the way we live our
lives but if our intentions run contrary to those principles, we will only
ever undermine the ideals they express. Nowhere is that more true than
inside Parliament. If the people outside of Parliament are going to get the
best results from this institution, then the people inside Parliament need
to embrace its ideals, not only in practice but in spirit too. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Deputy Speaker, Madam Speaker, hon members, once again we
meet to discuss the Budget Vote of Parliament; a time to reflect on where
we are and where we are going. A year ago we were here discussing what we
all considered to be important matters affecting Parliament. Amongst the
issues I raised last year, were: the necessity to empower Members of
Parliament by providing all of them with private secretaries and the tools
of the trade needed to carry out their responsibilities; the issue of the
adequate pensions – the matter was at that stage already before the
Moseneke Commission, but I specifically asked what pressure the Presiding
Officers were putting on the commission to speed up its work and to deliver
an early and comprehensive report. During last year’s debate I raised many
issues that members were concerned about, such as the numerous outstanding
matters relating to the LG 19, for example, overnight accommodation for
members travelling in excess of 800 km; the unilateral decision of the
officials to limit AA rates to the cost of an air ticket on the shortest
route. The latter two issues have only just been finalised – many, many
months later.

I raised the fact that members are living in dilapidated houses in the
three villages, furnished with old, unsightly furniture and electrical
appliances and the fact that many members are stuck in these villages for
16 hours a day, because they don’t have adequate transport facilities. At
last, changes are taking place as we speak and for this we say: Thank you.
But then one has also to comment and say that the workmanship in the
construction taking place is not of the standard that one would have
expected. [Applause.]

I raised the issue of administration, in some instances I would say the
lack thereof, which at the time I believed left a great deal to be desired.
I am unable today to say I feel any differently. I have, on numerous
occasions, expressed concern that matters submitted to the Secretary to
Parliament to deal with are left unattended to. To get a response to any
correspondence sent to the Secretary’s office on important matters is
almost impossible. I specifically raised the issue of Mrs Mars’s stolen
laptop. Madam Speaker, I am sure you were expecting this one. Her laptop
was stolen out of a locked office early last year. In June last year I
raised this matter and it had already then been outstanding for nine
months. Despite numerous written and verbal requests to you and the
Secretary to Parliament, now, 20 months later, Mrs Mars still does not have
her laptop; despite the fact that there are other members that have had
them put in place within three months. I think it is not only unacceptable;
it is deplorable.

Then there is the issue of accountability and transparency. A few days ago
I requested my researcher to obtain the figures on underspending for this
past year. He was informed by the finance department that they are not
permitted to give members any information, unless the Secretary to
Parliament has so authorised. And to date, he has not done so. One wonders
where the accountability and the transparency of this institution is.

Much has changed – some things for the better, many for the worse and I
fear a great deal more window dressing. Let us look at the governance
structure that you talked about, Madam Speaker. We will talk now but
another brick is coming your way with regard to the Parliamentary Oversight
Authority, the body that was put into place some two years ago; a body that
could be very powerful and very successful, were it to meet regularly and
were it to ensure that the decisions taken at this level are immediately
implemented. To the best of my knowledge, not only has the POA not met this
year, it has not met since October 2006 and few, if any in fact, decisions
have been implemented. If private companies were to run their business on
this basis, they would be all out of business by now.

The Moseneke report eventually found its way to Parliament but was far from
comprehensive and did not even begin to address the real issues of concern
to members, specifically the pensions which members are so anxious to see
finalised. In recent discussions with the commission, we were informed that
the proposed grading had been run by Parliament and accepted, yet most of
us who had served on the special task team that put together submissions
had never seen these figures. I propose to the Minister of Finance that
legislation should be passed by Parliament to deal with the issue of
members’ pensions. Madam Speaker, I ask you in the interest of all members
to personally pursue this matter with the Minister as a matter of urgency.

Last year and again this year we have seen gross underspending of
Parliament’s budget. There is still a sad lack of consultation with members
by management. Members are merely informed of decisions taken by Parliament
unilaterally and usually at the eleventh hour, if at all. Communication is
totally bad – worse than you can imagine.

The changing of Parliament’s emblem is just a typical example. We were all
told about it at the last minute and yet members are still waiting for the
stationery that we were going to be so happy to have at the time. Members
are still waiting for that stationery and I hope the Secretary is seriously
listening to what I am saying. [Interjections.]

One must ask: What has really changed? All that has happened is that time
has passed, the long list of outstanding issues grows by the day and this
term of office is nearing an end. I believe the time has come where we take
stock of the issues, the serious outstanding issues, the lack of
responsibility by management to implement the decisions taken by
Parliament. The time has come for Members of Parliament to put management
on terms to deliver the goods. Let us ensure that this time next year we
can truly say: There have been great achievements, not merely pipe dreams.

Much has changed. Much is good and I agree that when it comes to the
changes in structures of Parliament, we are seeing major changes put on
paper. We have yet to see those changes coming to fruition. We see lots of
things being decided on paper. We don’t see these decisions being
implemented. We talk about issues that need to be refined. We put it on
paper but we don’t deal with the detail. I have great admiration for you,
Madam Speaker, and I think you are a wonderful person, but I really think
that it is time that you put your little foot down and made sure that the
Secretary to Parliament and his staff really, really do what they are
supposed to be doing. [Interjections.]

To those very many staff members that really are assisting us and that go
out of their way and give us a 120% and more, I say: Thank you very much.
To the opposition parties, the way we work together ... and when I say
opposition, I include the majority party. We work well together - they are
our opposition, after all. [Laughter.] I believe the Chief Whips’ Forum is
one of the forums that actually achieves things in this Parliament, and I
want to thank all involved.

Madam Speaker, we are there to assist you. We will do what we can but we
really do need to make some dramatic changes to ensure that the
administration of Parliament becomes something we can be proud of. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you
very much. Since 1994 this people’s Parliament has passed a total of 936
transformative Bills. Following the first democratic elections, significant
transformation has occurred through the legislative process. The period of
1994 to 2004 saw a sustained focus on eradicating the discriminatory
legislation on the Statute Book, and on laying the foundations for a
democratic and open society. The first five years saw an increase in Bills
introduced and subsequent Acts passed.
Generally speaking, this tabled parliamentary budget demonstrates a
commitment to providing the necessary funding for services required by
Members of Parliament across all political parties in order to effectively
and judiciously perform their constitutional obligations of passing laws,
conducting oversight, facilitating public participation, appointing public
officials and participating at an international level. Some of the
modernisation programmes that we completed in the previous financial year
included the refurbishing and upgrading of some of the committee rooms and
the introduction of a digital sound system and digital recording systems –
and we were informed this morning that the interim parliamentary website
has gone live. I think we need to applaud the parliamentary service for a
new website. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait until you see it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The completion of these
institutional programmes has, once again, demonstrated our parliamentary
commitment to responding with all the necessary seriousness and
determination to all these challenges.

The focus group on committees is in the process of finalising the best
practice guide that will become our institutional tool to enhance the joint
planning, monitoring and oversight effectiveness of parliamentary
committees.

In these periods of major organisational transformation and development,
restructuring, building and improving a Parliament that is based on and in
line with the information society and knowledge-based parliaments of the
world, improvement in the capacity of members and officials of Parliament
is becoming critical, and building the required oversight capacity will
require an increase in the budget allocation.

I should mention in this regard that our Parliament is currently developing
models, frameworks and strategies on oversight and accountability,
governance, public participation and education, competence development and
training and development to further improve the functioning and
effectiveness of the vitally important parliamentary committee system.

In this year, some of the strategic projects envisaged will include the
establishment of a training programme for members and staff in oversight-
related areas; the establishment of a communication and co-ordination
mechanism across committee clusters; the implementation of a video
conferencing system, with the development of a parliamentary website, as
already mentioned; and the improvement of the parliamentary intranet. This
will also go as far as development of a public participation model and
system, linked to parliamentary broadcasting, parliamentary constituency
mechanisms and the integration of knowledge management systems.

The major outputs expected from these projects will include enhanced
capacity for the monitoring of delegated legislation; the implementation of
people-centred training; and the development and implementation of an
institutional knowledge management strategy, policies, culture and capacity
to acquire, create, share, modify, store, apply and manage the
institution’s knowledge so that our democratic people’s Parliament can
perform its constitutional obligations.

We all agree that in order for our people’s Parliament to effectively
execute its oversight mandate, there is a need to increase the research and
analytical capacity of committees. One of the strategic projects of our
Parliament is designing and implementing the enhancement capacity project
aimed at facilitating the rapid recruitment of 97 specialised support
capacities to committees over a three-year period. It is envisaged that the
recruitment drives under this project will attract support capacity of
subject-expert researchers, content analysts, librarians and administrative
assistants to provide members and committees with substantive knowledge and
specialised information pertinent to their oversight work. The three-year
recruitment cycle has already begun. Some of the strategic projects, as
outlined, will be completed by 2008-09.

Committees take their law-making mandate very seriously, and I would like
to use the example of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development. This committee is faced with very complex and transformatory
legislation, which legislation requires intense scrutiny, redrafting and
amendments; and the committee is in consultation with stakeholders and
civil society. The committee takes its work very seriously – so do others
as well – and yet they are regularly criticised in the media for delaying
the passing of crucial and significant pieces of legislation.

It would help the nation more if journalists took the time to understand
the complexity of some of the pieces of legislation and the processes
before being negative. I must hasten to say that some journalists have
assisted in putting the issues out there for debate. This has certainly
assisted Parliament. Parliament is not a rubber stamp; it takes its law-
making very seriously.

Committee oversight over the department’s strategic plans, budgets and
annual reports has improved tremendously from what it used to be. An
analysis of oversight programmes submitted recently for the scrutiny of
Budget Votes, revealed that some committees intended spending up to 84
hours doing oversight. This was followed by a second group averaging around
50 hours, and a third group around 30 hours.

I want to say to the presiding officers of the National Assembly that the
committees are on track and we can be proud of the work that is going into
oversight. Of course, that is not seen by the nation as our committee rooms
are not all televised, and the sound feeds to the SABC are so poor that we
are depriving the nation of this information. What we would encourage more
is the presence of Ministers and not just that of officials in the budget
briefings.

During the third term committees will be concentrating on the proposals of
the Fiscal and Financial Commission and its recommendations to this House.
We have identified 15 committees, which we will soon be assembling for a
detailed briefing and presentation by the FFC, after which they will break
away and individually consider these recommendations and report thereon.

Other oversight highlights of the third term will also be the interrogation
of the departments’ annual reports in terms of which committees will be
assessing the progress made by the departments and will be reporting to
Parliament.

While we support the 2007 Parliament Budget Vote, what needs to be done at
a political and administrative level is to hold individuals accountable for
their actions and performance. This will imply reviewing performance
contracts and developing implementation plans for all the strategic
projects we have mentioned today, as contained in the 2004-08 parliamentary
strategic plan, especially when it comes to the project of enhancing
support capacity for committees doing oversight in respect of their subject-
expert researchers, librarians, content analysts and administration
assistants.
This is what the committee of chairpersons will be embarking on and
reporting to the presiding officers. Ours is not to do oversight, but to
make recommendations where we identify shortcomings specifically in the
resourcing of and support for committees. For those that do not know, this
is in keeping with our mandate.

Lastly, let me come to the committee budget process. The committee of
chairpersons is unanimous that the current budget and allocation process is
totally flawed. It is unacceptable and the flat-rate allocations, whether
interim or not, are to be rejected. [Applause.] The chairpersons have made
it clear that their previous years’ business plans and budget requests have
been ignored and the current allocations are a reflection of that.

I am more than willing to convene a task team of chairpersons, some of whom
are experts in this field, which can work with the Secretary and senior
management to find a permanent solution to this impasse. I have written to
the Secretary as a follow-up to an earlier meeting on this issue, and we
eagerly await his response.

Finally, let me thank my colleagues, the hon Obed Bapela and the hon Sandra
Botha, in her capacity as a House Chairperson, for their collective support
and co-operation. We worked well together. I would also like to thank my
dedicated team of Nina Makubalo, Zingi Gcwabe and Moses Manele. I am sure
that I am not the easiest person to work with. You have done well so far.
Keep it up. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M R BALOYI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Speaker, hon members of Parliament
... Avusheni? [How are you?]

One of the instruments Parliament uses to realise its vision is
constituency work. This is an arrangement in terms of which we as MPs are
deployed to various geographical areas so that we provide services to the
people in these areas, as we have been directly elected by those people as
individuals to represent them in this House and in Parliament in general.

We have so far managed to use this instrument to represent the views of
those people where our respective constituency offices are and also in
addressing issues of national interest, and this reality cuts across the
political divide.

We listened to members reflecting on issues in their constituency areas as
they were participating in the 2007 state of the nation address, which gave
opportunity to the President in his reply to commit the government and
inform the nation that those issues stand to be addressed.

We listened to MPs giving Member’s Statements in this House and they
reflected on those developments that are taking place in their respective
areas or on those instances where service delivery needs some boosting.

This clearly demonstrates that MPs are hard at work in their constituency
areas, because it would not have been possible to make case representations
on the following issues, to mention a few, if it were not due to the fact
that the members concerned had gone to those areas, either to facilitate
such developments or make such observations.

Some of these are: the issue of defects in RDP houses at Maquasie Hills in
North West; the issue of a lack of public participation in DA-controlled
municipalities in the Western Cape due to their negative attitude towards
the ward committee system; active community involvement in fighting crime
at Kgalishiwe in the Northern Cape; the water supply crisis in the
Sekhukhune region of Limpopo; the launch of agricultural hubs at
Bronkhorstpruit in Gauteng; accelerated service delivery in the Tswelopele
Municipality of the Free State; water delivery success stories in the
Umzumbe Municipality in KwaZulu-Natal; a need to address the issue of grant
money used for gambling and microlending activities identified in the
Eastern Cape, but prevalent all over; and active participation in ward
activities by the community of Ikageng in Mpumalanga. These statements not
only generated Ministers’ responses, but such responses were recorded as
commitments for action to follow on the issues so raised in the statements.

We saw MPs put constituency-based questions to the Ministers as an
accountability mechanism to check on government performance in the various
areas of performance, the most common of which are the following: water
supply challenges; electricity supply backlogs; housing delivery-related
questions; crime prevention challenges; facility provision, discipline and
professional management at schools; health and related issues; and roads
infrastructure provision.

In this regard as well, Ministers responded in a manner that either gave a
reflection that all is well or that there is a programme of action to deal
with those issues. I think that when we take stock of government
performance as we analyse the annual reports later this year and in the
future, and as we deal with the day–to-day assessment of the oversight
performance of Parliament, we will have to revert to these replies to
questions with a view to establishing the factual linkages between what is
said in this House and what gets done subsequently.

Of course MPs themselves will be of assistance to evaluate the situation
and make follow-ups on the issues raised. Even as we say that there is room
for improvement in the use of constituency work as a tool for effectively
achieving the vision of a peoples’ Parliament, we can say from this record,
which is a small microcosm of a bigger picture, that there is active
interaction between the public and public representatives who are MPs.
But when we analyse the general understanding of what constitutes
constituency work, when constituency work is supposed to be done, how
constituency work manifests itself and how constituency work may be
measured, we realise that there is a lot of deliberate distortions,
fallacies, biased generalisations and party-politicised insinuations.

And often MPs are put on the defensive, largely unfairly so. On the 14th
April 2007 for instance, the Cape Argus, and reportedly later, or earlier,
the Pretoria News, carried an article that reflected on what they called
absence without leave of some members of Parliament.

This came after they allegedly did a random survey by calling the
constituency offices of some 40 MPs. The Cape Argus wrote:


   Fifteen days into Parliament’s month-long period for MPs to visit their
   constituencies and serve communities, some of our elected representatives
   appear to be absent without leave.

They reportedly phone the offices once and yet concluded as such
nevertheless. They reportedly left some messages in the voicemail boxes of
members and they concluded when they did not get call–backs, most probably
on the same date, that those members were just as bad.

They found some voicemail boxes full and then concluded that those people
were not accessible. Out of a list of 40 members, they mentioned the so-
called bad elements, the so-called absentees without leave, and that
happened to be three members of the ANC, one member of the UIF, one member
of the IFP, the only one member of the UPSA and one member of the ACDP.

Although there are other parties that have been left out as a point of
convenience, the fact that the DA is not mentioned may explain the tone of
the article. [Applause.] It is clear from this style of writing that the
intention of the author was to find fault to justify a tone full of a
deliberate desire to selectively discredit without verifying the facts.

We may want to give the authors and their friends the benefit of the doubt
that they just didn’t understand the concept of constituency work.

In that regard, we want to provide the following basic information about
constituency work, in addition to what hon member Mike Masutha already said
when he was giving a statement one day.

One is that it takes place throughout the year on a daily basis, even
during parliamentary sessions. It is performed simultaneously with other
pressing responsibilities of MPs. It is not all about sitting in the office
and working through computers and papers; it involves interaction within
individual constituents, a small group of people, a large group of people,
a community and the entire society.

It involves giving feedback to people, not always in offices and through
telephones and cellphones, but where it is most accessible and convenient
for the public. It involves attending to general problems of the people by
giving advice on dealing with those issues. It involves networking. It
involves oversight over government departments in the local areas. It
involves a lot of driving around to meet the people when it is convenient
for those people.

The list is long, but the reality is that people should not adopt a narrow
understanding of constituency work such that they equate it to sitting in
the office and answering of phones and that the absence of this can be
construed as absence without leave. [Applause.]

As I draw to a conclusion, it is necessary that I should reflect on some of
the challenges that Parliament needs to address so that the missing links
in dealing with constituency work may be attended to.

One of the challenges is that MPs are on their own doing constituency work
and in some quarters they are even bullied, also by some of the officials
in the three spheres of our governance over which Parliament has an
oversight role.

As a result of this, we find that the purpose that these constituency
offices serve becomes somewhat invisible. We want to remind members and the
entire community that our constituency offices are the extension of
Parliament so that throughout the country people may have access to the
interaction with their elected leaders.

We are taking Parliament to the people through the constituency offices and
constituency work. The other challenge that we have is that, at the moment,
constituency work is party-politically managed and there are no generic
guidelines for all MPs in this regard.

It is for that reason that, even as we can say as the ANC that the doors of
our constituency office are open to all citizens irrespective of political
affiliation, the same cannot be said for some of the parties represented
here. This state of affairs further complicates what constituency work is
and it is time that we applied our minds on this matter. There is a
thinking that we need ... [Time expired.]

Mr L W GREYLING:  Hon Deputy Speaker, it has been only a short time since I
became the Chief Whip of my party, the ID.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. [Laughter.]

Mr L W GREYLING: I have spent that time trying to understand the inner
workings of this institution and some of its more bizarre practices. Allow
me to share some of my observations.

My first observation was that the Chief Whip’s Forum is a bit like a soap
opera in that you can miss ten episodes and still know what is going on.
Sometimes the cast changes, but the dramas keep repeating themselves. It
has, for instance, been almost two years since the last floor-crossing and
yet we still have not managed to resolve the issue of seating in the House.

The larger parties simply refuse to budge on this issue and as usual it is
the smaller parties who find themselves getting the short end of the bench.
Unless you as the Speaker institute basic principles to guide seating in
the House I can guarantee you that we are going to have the same mess after
the next floor-crossing. As for security in the parliamentary villages, all
I can say is thank goodness I don’t stay there, because this item has been
on the agenda of the Chief Whips’ Forum ever since I started attending.

These are by all accounts petty issues though and what I want to
concentrate on today is the theme for this year’s Parliament – Deepening
the Debate. As a young parliamentarian who some might call idealistic, I
have a vision where this Parliament becomes a place which can inspire the
nation. Our country is demanding leadership on crucial issues and it is all
of us seated here today who should be providing exactly that.

Unfortunately, though, I have been horrified to watch debates over
important issues degenerate into personal slanging matches, where the only
intention is to score cheap political points and to prove the other person
wrong. While we might be amused by these antics, it does not inspire the
nation at large and in many ways sets back nation-building in this country.
Some might say that this is just politics, but it is the same kind of
politics that the people out there have been turned off by; particularly
the youth in this country, who have moved on from these old divisions that
we continually reflect in this House.

One tangible change that we can make is to do away with proportional
speaking times. How can a smaller party be expected to deepen the debate
when they are only given a minute to speak on important issues? By
contrast, the governing party is allowed to speak ad nauseam for forty
minutes on the same debate. This does not translate into robust and
insightful debate in the House and we urgently need to revisit this
practice.

Finally, I would like to see two things happen in this Parliament to show
true leadership to the nation. I would like you to convene an ad-hoc
committee to discuss the long overdue issue of party funding as suggested
by the President three weeks ago. I would also like to see you make
Parliament carbon neutral by installing solar panels on the roof and
encouraging all members of Parliament to plant trees. Who knows, maybe then
I will even start to wear a tie. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, Speaker, hon Ministers and members,
first of all, the ACDP identifies with hon Baloyi’s comments regarding
erroneous reports in the Cape Argus. The one member of the ACDP that the
press referred to was not even an ACDP member. That was just sloppy
journalism at its best, and we got no apology or correction after we set
the record straight.

Since the first democratic elections, Parliament’s focus was on
legislation, and laws were passed feverishly with a view to eradicating
discriminatory legislation for better or for worse. Since 2004, as
Parliament’s strategic and policy focus moved to areas of oversight, public
participation and international participation, a different Parliament
emerged, at least in some respects.

While demands on MPs with regard to the law-making process have not exactly
diminished, these processes appear to have stabilised. At the same time
there is a greater emphasis on the oversight role of members of Parliament
which I believe has begun to breathe life into processes which had become
exceedingly predictable and frustrating.
Today’s Parliament is a vastly different place to the one I found when I
first arrived in 1999. Analysts also observe this change, and refer to a
maturing of our democracy and that of the political thinking. I won’t argue
with that. Certainly, the rubber-stamping disappeared and while this
doesn’t mean MPs vote outside of party lines, they at least interrogate the
issues and sometimes even challenge the thinking of the departments and
their Ministers.

Whether or not the play-play politics was embarrassing for the Ministers I
wouldn’t know, but fortunately for us we have been, at least to some
degree, rescued. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, for your frank comments
and commitment to helping majority party MPs out of their robotic state and
indeed all of us out of our misery.

Right about now someone, I am sure, is regretting having generously offered
the ACDP five minutes to debate on this budget. After all the time smaller
parties have spent griping about time allocations, I must say that there is
some evidence that the majority party has relented and decided to at least
try to be reasonable. With one minute’s input from smaller parties, debates
were little more than a farce.

Parliament’s 2007-08 budget increased from R782,1 million in 2006-07 to
R835,7 million - an inflation-adjusted increase of just 1,7%. Although
implementation of a number of strategies will require Parliament to
increase its staff complement from 1 071 to 1 430 in this budget year,
decreases in budgets for administration, legislation, oversight and public
and international participation raise concerns as to how this will be
possible.

Increases to allow for research support to committees and increased
constituency allowances are long overdue as MPs have been severely
restricted in their capacity to do oversight and to be available in their
constituencies. For me, the importance of this budget shift cannot be
stressed enough. In an effort to address the need for Members of Parliament
to be more accountable to their constituencies, a change of electoral
system was even proposed.

In reality this would not have addressed the problem. For members to be
accountable, they must be available to their constituents and without the
budget to do so, it is impossible. It is also impossible to achieve if
Parliament occupies every waking minute of an MPs time. This people’s
Assembly is taking shape by design and at times by force.

In August 2006 the ACDP welcomed the Constitutional Court decision to
return the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Act to Parliament,
when it was challenged by Doctors for Life. While this was a costly
experience for Parliament, the judgment highlighted the legislature’s
priorities during the passage of Bills and placed an increased emphasis on
the importance of genuine public participation. This has underscored
Parliament’s commitment to public participation in legislative processes,
bringing to an end the years where hearings were at the discretion of the
majority party only and those out of line with the majority view were
intimidated and in some instances excluded.

Has Parliament adequately budgeted for these sorts of court challenges?
Parliament is gearing for another attempt at a Youth Parliament this month
- a potentially powerful project which can backfire if handled the way it
was handled in 2006. Instead of MPs listening to the youth, they took the
opportunity to lecture them. No prizes for guessing how the youth reacted.
This was very unfortunate and left a bad impression, countering all good
intentions. Members of Parliament have, to date, had no indication of what
preparations are taking place with regard to this year’s Youth Parliament
and certainly no input. This is of great concern.

Lastly, if time allows, due to failure by Parliament to pronounce on
matters in respect of members involved in the Travelgate scandal the ACDP
is forced to call on the Speaker to act decisively and in a manner which
will help restore the tainted image of Parliament and its members. I must
commend Parliament on the new travel system which is a vast improvement and
help to members. Despite the many challenges facing Parliament, the ACDP
will support this budget. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Chairperson, parliaments were
created in the main to defend the weak and vulnerable against the strong
and mighty in the evolving societies which were dominated by one class -
the haves. Hence most of the parliaments pronounce themselves as people’s
tribunes. Our Constitution in Chapter 4 states that the National Assembly
is elected to represent the people and to ensure government by the people
under the Constitution.

There is also a debate in the public discourse that Parliament is weak. The
question is: Is it true or just a perception? Others say parliaments are
becoming elitist and far removed from the people they ought to be
representing and that the executive holds sway and is dominant in our
democratic society. The view is only that the executive and the judiciary
are visible and robust in the three arms of government and that the
legislative factor is not so much felt.

We need to take cognisance of these views and engage on issues raised as we
continue with the exercise of strengthening the legislative sector. We hope
the eminent group called the panel of experts, recently appointed to review
the role of Parliament in relation to its constitutional mandate and its
execution, will be able to provide the context in which to debate on this
matter based on factual points. The panel was appointed as a result of the
participation of Parliament in the African Peer Review Mechanism. We are
looking forward to and are ready to engage on this interesting topic.
The issues raised by the critics include the fact that Parliament for the
past 13 years has failed to pass legislation amending the money Bills, was
not robust in its oversight over the executive and holding it accountable
and that it was very boring and had boring sessions. However, I would want
to say here that I do not subscribe to the notion that Parliament is weak.
I do not walk the streets of Johannesburg, where my home is, or those of
Kempton Park and Tembisa where my constituency is, or those in Cape Town
where I do my legislative work, or go around the world and the continent
representing Parliament with a conscience that says: ``Obed, you are a weak
parliamentarian”, or “You belong to a weak and boring parliament’’.
Certainly not! I am not and I do not think that hon members in this House
feel the very same way, that they are weak. They are not weak!

Often we are told that we must rock the boat, or take on the executive.
What is not said is that the Constitution, while recognising the
independence of the three arms of government – Parliament, the executive
and judiciary – goes further to say that we are interrelated and it enjoins
us to deliver on the constitutional mandate for a better life for our
people.

Yes, there are challenges and to some extent the critics are correct that
the legislative sector has to assert itself. Parliament and the
legislatures must begin to fulfil their mandate of overseeing the executive
in action and those of the organs of state. Parliament must enhance its
internal mechanisms and strengthen them in order to become a champion of
the views of the electorate and the citizens as a whole.

We, as Parliament, have been involved in the process of developing
mechanism which include maximisation of the current mechanisms to effect
accountability of the executive and exercising oversight on the executive;
and we will be making a proposal to the Joint Rules Committee on 20 June
and hope that there will be an adoption of the oversight model that is
before the Joint Rules Committee.

Among some of the issues that are going to be presented is the long-awaited
amendment procedure for the amendment of the money Bills. Also, we are
proposing that the Extended Public Committees, which are currently utilised
for the Budget Votes should be utilised for engagement and debates, because
debates and engagement are meant to reach consensus on most of the complex
topics that have been already been proposed here in the House; and the
Speaker has given a list of those.

The Westminister system of public debates as practiced in the world and in
our Parliament is confining but at the same time not so very much conducive
to fair, open, honest and in-depth engagement. It’s mainly parties playing
to the public gallery. We have a number of discussions on which the nation
is awaiting to hear our voice as Parliament. And I’m not going to repeat
those particular issues alluded to earlier by other speakers.

In addition, we are also proposing seminars which will include involvement
and engagement with experts and opinion-makers. These seminars should be
held regularly as we did recently with one of them – The Postcolonial
Africa: A Reflection on the Challenges of Africa - and also on the great
debate of the union of African states. We hope therefore that such seminars
will be held by Parliament often, so that we can then engage seriously on
those matters and reach a certain consensus.

Expenditure obviously around the issues of the oversight, accountability
and public participation model will have to be looked at again so that we
can then begin to increase that budget.

On the international situation and the role of parliaments, we have adopted
as Parliament a policy which will guide us in our engagement in bodies we
have affiliated to such as the SADC Parliamentary Forum, the Africa,
Caribbean, Pacific, the EU, the CPA, Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
and the Pan-African Parliament and also the International Parliamentary
Union.

As Parliament we have also agreed within that policy that we should then
engage further in the parliamentary diplomacy, which work includes
bilateral relations with Africa and the world, with various parliaments,
some at strategic levels and others as friendship groups. We will be
formalising the Parliamentary Group on International Relations, PGIR, a sub-
committee of the Joint Rules Committee on 13 June.

Among other things, to embark on the creation of the focus group that will
involve parliamentarians to serve in these bodies, we have affiliated to
the friendship groups on the development of the protocol for members when
representing Parliament and in the international forums, in bilateral
meetings. But at the same time we will also have to then look at the
preparations, particularly around the issues of content of members.

We are proposing here that in August when we deal with capacity-building we
should include a period or two days where we should train members to
understand the policy on international relations and on South Africa’s
foreign policy in the main to understand the global situation, the
ideologies that inform that particular agenda of the global situation and
on how we locate ourselves as South Africa and this Parliament as we
participate in those bodies.

We need also to develop an agenda of how we want to go about the
affiliation of ourselves to those bodies; how do we transform these bodies
to be institutions relevant to engaging on the creation of a just and a
better Africa? There is also a need to increase resources.
Lastly, as we prepare for the hosting of one of the biggest International
Parliamentary Union general assemblies next year in April, we need to begin
to become involved in the preparation of political matters for
consideration in the conference.

Again, we should as Parliament inform members of the forthcoming CPA Africa
meeting which is going to be hosted by this Parliament at the end of July.
In terms of the Constitution of the CPA, all of you are members of that
body by a mere affiliation of your Parliament. What we have to do then is
to, convene a branch meeting in which we are to elect a branch executive
that would then begin to engage on the affairs of that particular body and
prepare delegations as and when they go for conferences.

We also have responded to members and hope we will soon be able to present
after processing the matter in the PGIR to the Joint Rules Committee on the
restructuring and improvement of the services being rendered by Parliament
in as far as the International Relations Section is concerned. We now have
a section manager, Ms Lindiwe Mokate, and hope she will rise to the
challenge.

In conclusion, I would like to express a view shared by many other members
that a parliament is constituted by parliamentarians and therefore they
need to be respected and that they deserve better. As one member once said:
What is honourable about MPs if we are not being treated so well? I hope
therefore that future programmes and policy matters that involve
parliamentarians will indeed be with consultation with parliamentarians.

I would also want to take this opportunity to thank my House Chairpersons,
hon Doidge and hon Sandra Botha, for inducting me into that office. I also
want to thank my office staff, Mpho, George and Alida from the Speaker’s
Office for the work that you do for International Relations, and, lastly,
Cecilia and Eva for the drafting of the oversight model and the assistance
there, and my colleagues, hon Doidge, hon Nene and hon Setona for the
midnight sessions and the long meetings that we have held in trying to
bring the matter together. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, in the limited time available to me, I would
like to deal with two issues. Firstly, sir, I would like to react to the
speech by the hon Bapela just now, specifically with regard to what he said
regarding dealing with the executive. I don’t think it’s a question of
whether Parliament should be taking on the executive or not. I think what
we need is for the executive to understand what Parliament is all about.

If you look at our Constitution, Parliament consists of its two Houses.
This House represents the people and our other House represents the
provinces. Therefore I think it is important that the executive recognises
this, and when they deal with important issues that impact on the people
and on the provinces, they come to this House and announce it here.

I also want to mention the example of what was done this week by the hon
Minister Fraser-Moleketi, who used this platform when she dealt with the
current strike situation. She came to Parliament and put this matter on the
table, giving Parliament an opportunity to deal with that important issue.
I think that is what needs to be done. [Applause.]

The second issue that I would like to deal with is the question of the name
boards in and around Parliament. In 2002 we had a situation where the name
boards around Parliament or the notice boards that indicated the direction
to the different buildings and conference rooms reflected only one
language, English. At that stage we did write to the Secretary to
Parliament and to PanSALB and said that that was a problem and that it
should be rectified, and it was rectified. We then had notice boards in and
around Parliament that did reflect different languages in South Africa, as
the Constitution indicates.

Unfortunately, with the unveiling of our new emblem we moved backwards in
the sense that if you look around Parliament now, you will find that all
the notice boards are again in one language, namely English.

Now I want to ask the Secretary to Parliament and Madam Speaker to look
into this issue again. We, as Parliament, should set an example in terms of
our constitutional provision that says that we must recognise all our
languages.

The last point I would like to deal with, Madam Speaker, is that we all
would like to see that the messages of Parliament are broadcast to the
public and to the people so that they know what is happening in Parliament.
I’ve heard that there’s a practical problem in terms of the cameras that we
see around here. The technical people from the SABC say that these cameras
are so outdated that they cannot use the feed in an effective manner and
they need them to be replaced. But it’s not for the public broadcaster to
replace them, it’s for Parliament to make that possible. I want to ask that
we also put that on the agenda.

My colleagues have reflected on all the other issues that are quite
important, but from the FF Plus’ point of view, we will support the budget.
Thank you very much.

Mrs L MALONEY: Chairperson, hon members and distinguished guests, it is an
honour for me to participate in the parliamentary Budget Vote. I am really
humbled to address this august House, especially today being International
Youth Day.

This Budget Vote debate takes place after a string of historic events, one
of them being the Africa Day we celebrated in this Parliament, as well as
the International Youth Day that we are celebrating today. I know for a
fact that the international Youth Day Book was launched in Asia and is
going to be launched in our Parliament soon.

Let me deal with the topic I have to cover, which is about Parliament’s
role in international affairs. As we know, ladies and gentlemen, the 21st
century has been declared the African Century. So as South Africans in
South Africa we have an obligation, also as this Parliament, to promote
this noble concept. In promoting this concept, the way to go is to promote
the democratic Parliament, with parliamentarians elected by the people in
elections that are free and fair.

Parliament is one part of the state machinery that can be used to promote
unity, peace and stability by our passing legislation, moving motions and
reading statements in Parliament that condemn the disturbance of stability
on the continent and in the world around us.

Parliament, as a respected institution, remains a strategic state organ to
promote awareness of government programmes and also to encourage public
participation. The state of the nation address can be a useful tool for
Parliament in carrying out both legislative and oversight functions.

Committees must ascertain whether these concerns are due in part or on the
whole. The address also outlines the priorities of government departments.
The address could also be used as a matrix for parliamentary oversight.
This is the reason parliamentarians should be capacitated to meet the
challenges and responsibilities they are faced with.

Chairperson, if you will allow me, I want to congratulate Members of
Parliament who managed to pass their leadership skills course, especially
the women who participated in the course. As you know: You teach a woman,
you teach a nation.

Coming to global issues, globalisation is emerging to be a challenge to the
world. It is a system of redistribution of opportunities and benefits,
which may enhance the economy or lead to rising inequality and aggravate
poverty. The challenge for South Africa is to ensure that women benefit
equally with others in the society. Some of the challenges facing
Parliament include coming up with legislation that is biased towards women
and to make sure that it has a proper tool to monitor such legislation.

The work of Parliament is much broader than just monitoring and
implementing the strategic imperatives of the departments. Parliament also
has the responsibility to reaffirm issues of international relations, which
amplifies government’s position on those issues that the country is engaged
with, especially those that deal with the consolidation of the African
agenda and influencing global governance.

Parliament is positioned to discharge a key role in terms of international
policy imperatives. For example, how Parliament contextualises the debates
and better articulates the country’s stance on issues such as the debate on
Iran and the use of nuclear energy.

Parliament has a role in monitoring developments in SADC, especially the
implementation of the indicative strategy development plan. Parliament’s
commitment to promoting democracy was also witnessed when a multiparty
delegation was sent to SADC and the DRC to monitor elections.

Nepad’s programmes are also monitored by Parliament. Parliament is also
involved in strengthening the country’s evolving process of legislation
against terrorism, especially on matters relating to specific rights of
citizens.

Parliament, as an organ of state, with its responsibilities enshrined in
the Constitution, has a duty to use its Treasury allocation in a
transparent manner, reporting back to the nation on how it is going to
spend its monies. This is a requirement and not just an option.

Even though Members of Parliament are overstretched, they still remain
committed to their work and I think they deserve to be paid accordingly.
Before I leave this podium, let me thank Madam Speaker and her deputy, and
their team, for the sterling work they are doing to keep the decorum of
this House.

Sithi malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi! [We say, let women’s name be
praised.]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe [Let it be praised!]

Let us not forget the leadership they are providing internationally. I also
want to thank the Table staff for the legal advice it is always giving in
this Chamber.

I also want to thank our service officers who keep us awake by making sure
that we drink water every time we are here, and for other domestic chores
that they are doing.

Chairperson, more was said by the Minister of Foreign Affairs during her
debate on international issues. I hope that hon members have read her
speech. The ball is now in our court, as Parliament, to use effectively the
resources that are allocated to us. Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The women’s name!] [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, this Budget Vote comes at a time when
Parliament is going through a major process of transformation called the
“Strategic Plan for the Third Parliament 2004-09”, and by making a visible
shift from the old order to a new democratic dispensation.

To prevent uncalled for contradictions amongst political parties coming
from different orientations, we have crafted a vision and a mission for an
orderly change. This resulted in the introduction of so many systems that
made even those who came here years ago appear to be ordinary learners. All
of us are indeed students of a new order. Our vision and mission are
straightforward and read as follows –

   ... Parliament of South Africa is to build an effective people’s
   Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the people and that is
   driven by the ideal of realising a better quality life for all the people
   of South Africa ...

... or Azania as we call it.

The administration of Parliament is gradually improving. The executive,
management and staff are receiving support and professional corporate
services and with time things may improve for the better.
The PAC of Azania encourages the secretariat to improve on consultation.
This will curb the unwarranted workers’ strike actions planned by Nehawu
members recently. Cordial working relations and a good working environment
may result in much needed excellence and good performance by staff members.
This is what the PAC of Azania subscribes to and believes, Comrade
Secretary.

We must at this stage, as a party, thank the administration for the
introduction of new technological devices to the Parliament. To compete on
par with other countries, for the transformation of Parliament we should
include the use of modern technology.

The programmes on members’ facilities have become a backbone in the
performance of members in fulfilling their legislative and constitutional
obligations. We may only hope that with time it will improve to close some
noticeable shortcomings in our daily operations.

We must thank the Office of the Speaker and other relevant offices for
their political will to help the plight of members. The only areas that
need improvement are the secretarial support of members, especially since
we have to share secretaries. Another issue is that members have to work
with in-house researchers and this must be revisited. The issue of only
certain members being covered by the members’ facilities after the
expiration of their term in office is a concern. Our proposal will be: Once
a Member of Parliament, always a member.

It is a disgrace to this Parliament to meet a member who once served as an
hon member in a very dire state of affairs. Pensions alone will not solve
the problem; something else must be done.

In conclusion, let me borrow from the wise words of one of the pioneers of
Pan-Africanism, Kwame Nkrumah when he said:

   We have in Africa everything necessary to become a powerful and modern
   industrialised continent. Far from having inadequate resources, Africa is
   probably better equipped for industrialisation than almost any other
   region in the world.


This was said in 1964 when announcing the seven-year development plan for
Ghana.

The PAC further wants to express its appreciation for Parliament’s
programme of financial support to all political parties represented in it.
We propose that the formula of allocation should be revisited as both the
majority and the minority parties are not happy with it. But we recognise
the big increase made especially in constituency allowances to parties for
outreach to their constituencies. The PAC supports the Budget Vote. I thank
you.

Ms L L MABE: Chairperson, I would like to start by indicating to you, Madam
Speaker that you took me by surprise when you made an announcement that I
am a member of the audit committee. You caught me off guard, but I would
like to promise this House and you that I will remain vigilant in the audit
committee so that you can get the information that you need to ensure that
this Parliament becomes a success and moves from where it is, especially in
terms of managing its finances, to a better space where we can be proud of
it. I promise that I will be vigilant, and please, as presiding officer,
give me that support. [Applause.]

I want to state, in context, the mission of this Parliament that as the
freely elected representatives of the people of South Africa, our mission
is to represent and act as the voice of the people of this country, in
fulfilling our constitutional functions of passing laws and overseeing the
executive function. It should be understood that Parliament is not of lower
status to the executive or the judiciary. All of them are on par. They are
all on par. It should be understood that whatever Parliament raises, in its
oversight function or in its oversight role, should be taken with that
regard that Parliament makes laws and it must see to it that those laws are
implemented, and this should not be compromised.

I would also like to state that our oversight function is a constitutional
obligation. The Constitution gives us that right and that power to have
oversight. The question that I want to raise is that usually in our debates
we raise issues about service delivery; we raise issues about what happens
in the department; and we raise issues about what happens in the judiciary.
Where do these issues end? Are we raising them and nobody takes care of
them? That is why I say that the oversight function of Parliament is very
important. It is a constitutional obligation.

We expect that departments should take this into consideration. It is not a
matter of trying to ensure that there is some bad relationship between
Parliament and the executive or Parliament and the judiciary, but it should
be understood that Parliament must do its function, because they are
elected representatives. If they don’t do their part as Members of
Parliament, people on the ground will fight. They will revolt against
Parliament and we don’t want that type of situation to happen.

I would also like to ask whether the questions that we raise, as Members of
Parliament during question time, are taken care of. Do departments follow
up in our constituencies? Are those things implemented or not? We don’t
raise these things for the sake of raising them, but to ensure that all
three arms of government work together as one engine for the success of our
country. [Applause.]

I would also like to raise the matter of portfolio committees and their
oversight functions. Portfolio committees are the engines of Parliament’s
oversight, and if the issues that portfolio committees raise during budget
debates or budget hearings, and when they make legislation, are not taken
care of by departments, it means that Parliament is being undermined. But,
I am not saying the executive undermines Parliament. I should be understood
very clearly. I am saying that with regard to what Parliament raises during
Budget hearings, and what communities raise, Parliament is expected to
ensure that the executive implements those issues. They are the issues
raised by the people who have elected us and that should be understood
within that context. I want to say, are the issues that portfolio
committees raise in their budget hearing reports taken care of or are they
just looked at and put aside?

The observations I made as I was studying other reports of portfolio
committees were that some departments do not take those things into
consideration when they make their budgets, and this should be addressed.

I would also like to say that the portfolio committees look at strategic
plans of departments, vis-à-vis the annual performance of the departments.
It would be very nice when portfolio committees can check, when they call
the Ministers to the portfolio committees, whether Ministers take up the
issues especially when it comes to the performance of senior managers in
the department. I say this because it is a crucial fact that when
departments allocate performance bonuses, you know, sometimes it is a
disgrace that those performance bonuses are allocated to people who do not
deliver as per portfolio committees’ expectations.

Recently Scopa raised the problem of the CEO of the Land Bank getting a R1
million performance bonus when people on the ground complain about the Land
Bank, especially that they do not have access to funds that the Land Bank
must assist them with. These are some of the questions that we cannot keep
quiet about, as Parliament.

I would also like to raise the issue of spending by Parliament. I would do
this House an injustice if I don’t raise it. Why do I say that? Initially I
said that portfolio committees are the engines of Parliament. They are the
engine rooms, and portfolio committees cannot do their oversight function
if they do not get a satisfactory budget. I am really disappointed that
this year the budget of portfolio committees has been slashed by 50%.
[Applause.]

I am really disappointed, but the power is in our hands. The power is in
our hands! We must ensure that that budget must go to where it should be so
that we can do our oversight function. We can’t be confined to Parliament
because money is not allocated to us and not do the oversight function out
of Parliament.

I would also like to say that we cannot keep quiet about qualified reports
of Parliament. Yes, there has been an improvement and we would like to see
Parliament’s audit reports not being qualified because we must do our
oversight function over the budgets of the departments. There is a lot of
improvement, but we are looking forward to a clean report with less
emphasis on the matter.

Concerning what Madam Speaker has indicated about the role of Scopa, there
is this question - and it’s a long debate which is very old and has been
there for 13 years – of whether Scopa can have oversight over Parliament.
The question is, if Scopa doesn’t do it, who will do it? If the Joint
Budget Committee doesn’t look at the monthly spending of Parliament, who
will do it? Who will inform presiding officers about what is happening with
regard to the budget? In the meantime, for as long as there is no structure
that assists the presiding officers to have a full understanding of what is
happening about Parliament’s budget, these two committees must continue to
do oversight functions over Parliament’s budget so that the presiding
officers will know how to address problems that are within Parliament.

I would also like to raise this matter. You know, it is a simple issue. We
get annual reports. We get books in our offices. What happens to those
books? Why is it difficult to deliver those books that I am not using
anymore to my constituency so that the libraries can use them? Why is it
difficult? Rather than us wasting, there are schools that desperately need
those books and we must make it easy to transport those books to the
constituencies.
Also - a simple thing - we have functions in Parliament and what happens to
the leftovers? Somebody may ask what we should do with leftovers. They may
think we are undermining other people, but there are destitute people who
are taken care of by the NGOs. If we could have a programme of ensuring
that communities around here get that food, we would have done a lot. That
must be looked into. [Applause.]

I would also like to say that the Joint Budget Committee finds it difficult
to operate. It is a joint committee of both Houses and it is difficult for
it to fulfil its role, because members of the select committee are members
of the joint budget committee. How is it possible that the Joint Budget
Committee could apprise your office on a monthly basis of what is happening
with regard to spending by different departments? I am requesting that this
should be looked into as a matter of urgency so that there can be smooth
functioning of that committee.

In addition, remember that the NCOP has provincial weeks and what happens
during provincial weeks?

Finally, I want to indicate that I am happy to be part of this debate for
the first time since I came to Parliament and that I could raise issues.
But remember, I said I will remain vigilant in the audit committee and I
hope that I will have easy access so that from time to time I can appraise
you on the situation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, in terms
of the strategic plan of Parliament 2004-09, Parliament is guided by its
new vision, which is to build an effective people’s Parliament that is
responsive to the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
realising a better quality of life for all people in South Africa.

With Parliament’s duties arching over the oversight of the executive,
monitoring and implementing of legislation as well as passing, amending and
rejecting legislation, we require a good parliamentary administration. The
MF is pleased with Parliament’s decision to increase its staff
establishment from 1 071 in 2006 to 1 430 in 2007. We find that in
comparison to last year’s budget much remains the same in priorities. The
MF would like an explanation for the decrease in Programme 1, and how it
will affect the administration of Parliament.

In view of Parliament’s commitment to legislate the oversight, the MF
expresses its concern over the decrease in allocation to Programme 2 by
R8,5 million. We would like an explanation for this decrease and its
intended outcome. We, however, acknowledge that the decrease of 50,9% to
Programme 3, public and international participation is as a result of the
personnel restructuring process.

The MF hereby enquires as to the progress in increasing public
participation and visibility. We are excited about the introduction of the
parliamentary democratic officers and hereby also enquire into the progress
made in this regard. Regular oversight and interaction with these officers
need to be made by Parliament to ensure accountability. To allow members to
travel entitlements, the MF supports the increase in Programme 4. In view
of the much needed technical support and research support, the 36% increase
in Programme 5 is supported.

Parliament plays a vital role in the transformation of discrimination in
domestic South Africa. We do so with our foundation, the National
Constitution of 1996, that paves the values, principles and fashion this
democracy is built on. In light of the Bill of Rights and one of its
crucial endeavours to instil the ensured gender equality the MF is
extremely concerned about the absence of mention of Parliament’s endeavours
for this year in terms of gender, youth and disability. We question why
this is not being prioritised.

We thank all members, in both Houses, and our impeccable administrative
staff for their effort in fulfilling Parliament’s portfolio. We applaud our
committees under the auspicious leadership of our Chairs for their
fantastic work. Honour must be given to our Speaker and Deputy Speaker for
their dedication and commitment to delivery.

Lastly, I thank all South Africans for having faith in us. Today being
Children’s Day, the MF wishes all our children a happy Children’s Day. God
bless our children, and remember you are the leaders of tomorrow. The MF
supports the Bill. Thank you very much.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, over the past years Parliament has
successfully produced a strategic plan which sets out a clear vision for
the future business of this Parliament as a part of the transformation
agenda and this is what Azapo would like to support, that the
transformation agenda should continue up until we reach where we want to
go.

The correct interpretation of the vision and the transformation agenda
brings to the fore interesting ideas: firstly, an effective people’s
Parliament; and secondly, a Parliament that is responsive to people’s needs
and with a view to realising a better life for all South Africans.

The question to ask is whether this Parliament has acted in a manner that
is consistent with this vision. At the same time we should respond to yet
another important question, that is, people’s participation in the shaping
of the laws that are enacted by Parliament.

Azapo believes, firstly, that the greatest challenge facing Parliament is
the method it uses to consult people before laws are passed. Secondly, we
should also look at the extent to which consultations are sufficient to
make us believe in our rich conclusions that our people understand the
intent and implications of the laws we normally approve.

Experience has shown that public hearings conducted by portfolio committees
have often been largely platforms of the elite and the rich who are able to
access resources and other means of communication to articulate their views
and that the poor have no platform from which they can be considered. This
state of affairs requires consideration of institutional changes as well as
methods by which we consult with various communities.

Perhaps by assessing what it means to engage ordinary citizens, we can set
the stage for addressing some of the daunting challenges that came to the
fore recently in Khutsong, Matatiele and Mutse and other parts of the
country where communities differ with the way in which we have consulted
them.

In this context, therefore, our responsibility is to link the wellbeing of
the poor and the marginalised to policies and laws that we passed. This
linkage with the poor will make us better legislators and can actually
result in happier citizens and a better Parliament.

When laws that we have passed become the subject of ridicule or people
refuse to implement them, we as legislators should find a better way of
interacting with our citizens. We support the budget. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mong M J G MZONDEKI: Ke a leboha Modulasetulo. Ke re ke utlwile hantle ha
Mme Baleka are o lebelletse hore puong ena o tla betswa ka majwe. Ke tla ba
mohau Mme, ka ha o se o na le maqeba, ke mpe ke foke feela ka letswai,
hobane re dumela hore, hore leqeba le fole ka pele le tshelwa letswai.
[Ditsheho.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Thank you Chairperson. I clearly understood hon Baleka
when she said that she was expecting to be stoned for this speech. I will
have mercy, madam, since you are wounded already. I will just add salt
because we believe that for a cut to heal quickly, salt should be rubbed
into it.] [Laughter]

It gives me great pleasure to participate in this very important debate
today. It is more so because I was one of those who were given the task by
my party to be on the political committee that advised on the new emblem of
Parliament. In my little notebook, this will be one of the highlights.

When we launched that new emblem we also agreed that the new emblem puts a
challenge to all of us, and as public representatives we need to review
whether our work indeed speaks to the mission and vision of Parliament. We
all agree that in order to do this and to fulfil our mandate, it is
important that we have a certain level of support.

Last week on Monday, I received a message from one of my colleagues in
Parliament, the message was: “Hey Chief, I am all by myself here, can you
help me?” This message came from the hon Maxwell Moss.

I also received another call from a member, who was saying: “Hey Chief, I
happen to have a personal assistant, and I have recently bought a car, I
now need another assistant because my personal assistant cannot drive.”
This member is in a wheelchair.

I also received a call from another hon member, the Chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology. He was saying to me: “Chief,
I have been complaining to the IT section about my computer and I have been
sent from pillar to post until my computer completely died.”

Last year, around November, I had to leave my office, which I had been
occupying since 1999. The reason was that I could not take the air
conditioning anymore because I have no control over it, and I was beginning
to have chronic sinus. I have since moved to another office. Another hon
member was saying to me: “Chief, my office has not been cleaned for the
past three months.” I said I needed to make an appointment with the manager
of Household Services. And I still need to have that meeting.

This is just an indication of some of the issues that are facing us as
Members of Parliament to be able to fulfil our mandate. While we understand
and we appreciate that South Africa cannot have as many resources as some
of our First World counterparts, a certain level of support is nonetheless
required to enable members to fulfil their constitutional mandate.

Some of the resources that we need relate to training to enhance our
capacity as Members of Parliament and includes committee staff,
researchers, library services, secretarial support, administrative support,
IT and others.

One could look at two problems, for instance, with regards to the staffing
needs. One is the lack of adequate skills. Many of us have staff allocated
to us, but they do not have adequate skills that would enable us to do the
work that we do, and our observation as many members is that we think we
really need a skills audit.
With regard to the committee section, we need to ensure that we have
skilled staff that will enable the chairpersons of committees to
concentrate more on their political issues rather than on administrative
and procedural issues. I think we also need to clarify the role of the
committee staff in this regard.

With regard to research, I think we would all agree that we come from
various backgrounds. Some of us have never seen a computer before; we have
never heard about international research but we might have done some
research in some other way. It becomes a necessity that when we are Members
of Parliament we do need that kind of support. I doubt that we do have
enough research capacity.

We do have library services but given the new system that we have in
Parliament, we need to ask: Are the times appropriate for us? Are we able
to access the library at the times that we need to access it? I doubt if we
do have that kind of support.

I have already spoken about IT. We are given computers but I have heard one
of my colleagues from the opposition party saying that he had a problem
with his computer. You have a computer but when you need to get it serviced
it becomes a serious problem and I think that needs attention.

Many members still do not have secretaries allocated to them and I think
that is a matter that requires serious attention.
Let me also talk about the diversity we have as Members of Parliament. We
have women who have special needs because of the nature of their work. We
cannot pretend that we do not live in Africa, where, other than being a
Member of Parliament you also have other roles. You come to this Parliament
as a mother and you have children: Do we have the necessary support for you
to be able to look after the children and still do the work effectively as
a Member of Parliament? [Applause.]

With regard to people with disabilities, we appreciate the fact that we do
have a policy on disability in place. But I think we need to review that
policy, because it seems to treat all of us as if we as disabled persons,
are all the same but our needs differ a lot.

I have already quoted the situation of hon Maxwell Moss, the situation of
hon Bengu and the situation of hon Ipeleng, who said to me: “When I am here
in Parliament there is a bus that takes me from the village to Parliament,
but do we have the bus when I am in my constituency; how am I expected to
do my work while I am in my constituency?”

You might argue and say: Can’t these members afford to employ drivers;
can’t they afford to employ people to look after their children? But do
they have enough resources to do that? I think that is the question we need
to look at.

Chairperson, I don’t want to go into the issue that has already been raised
by the hon Seaton, namely that of the commission that talks to our
remuneration as Members of Parliament, and this includes our salaries,
pensions, medical support, telephones, travel expenses and so on. I don’t
have to remind members that some of us have two homes to look after; some
of us have two cars to maintain, and it is a serious problem. I think it is
a matter that all of us need to give attention to and I hope that we need
to give it serious attention, and very soon. [Applause.]

Other than the other support that I have talked about, I think we also need
to look at our health as Members of Parliament. I have already mentioned
the situation of my office where I had to be moved from one office to
another which is also not convenient because it is too small for my needs.
I don’t understand how those offices were designed. The housing conditions
have already been mentioned by one of the colleagues from IFP.

In conclusion, I would like to remind all of us that our biggest task is to
ensure that our work indeed does change the lives of our people for the
better. We can succeed in doing this by once more committing ourselves to
the transformation agenda of our country.

We also have a bigger challenge to lead the transformation agenda of the
continent, because of the confidence that the rest of the country, if not
the world, has in us. Our role as MPs is to go beyond our boarders and we
can only do this if we have the necessary support. I thank you. [Time
expired] [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, Deputy Speaker and colleagues,
allow me to express my sincere thanks and gratitude to all Parliament’s
role-players, including the hon Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Chairpersons,
Deputy Chairpersons, Secretary to Parliament and all Table and support
staff for their relentless efforts to ensure that all concerned are served
in the manner in which they are. It is truly appreciated.

The Constitution stipulates that Parliament’s primary function is to make
legislation, but equally important is that Parliament is mandated to
perform an oversight role; oversight over the activities of the executive.
In order for this to happen, a number of variables need to be in place. We
cannot hope for a Parliament that is efficient and effective if the basics
are not in place. We only need to look at what is needed for represented
political parties to make a meaningful contribution as part of Parliament’s
oversight duty. In this regard I want to point to two issues - work ethics
and party resources.

Firstly, the integrity of the institution is under serious threat if this
House more often than not just about makes a quorum. Too many parties allow
members to neglect their attendance in this House. It is not only members
that need to step up their commitment in the House, the presiding officers
also need to explain why it is that it seems that they, whose primary place
of work is here in Parliament, are constantly abroad. I trust the hon
Speaker would be able to give us an indication of the extent of presiding
officers’ travelling abroad and the costs thereof.

Secondly, the issue of resources available to political parties is one that
is not, I believe, adequately addressed, the good progress that has been
made notwithstanding. We need to remember that as representative parties we
are here to perform an oversight role requiring us to have our finger on
the pulse of what is happening whenever and wherever. For this, Chair, we
need staff, specifically quality research staff that will provide much
needed empirically sound and analysed information. The debate time smaller
parties enjoy in this House does not mean we should make inferior
contributions. All parties have to perform the same job of oversight and
therefore all parties need to have the quality of support staff and
sufficient time when debating matters in this House.

The United Party of South Africa will support the Vote. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, my colleague the hon Mr Ian Davidson spoke about
the need for the ANC to embrace a democratic spirit. This is a need which
not only applies to the ruling party, but generally to the management of
this institution as well. There are various examples of the way in which
this institution is run which affects the very people who are expected to
ensure democracy works in this country. I want to say that I believe
Members of Parliament are becoming more and more sidelined in the way
Parliament runs. And who really runs Parliament is not really clear at all.

The Secretary to Parliament has become something of a distant figure and, I
believe, out of touch with MPs. His role in the running of Parliament
becomes more and more obscure but one suspects that his authority has grown
dramatically to the extent that it is he and not the presiding officers who
run this institution. And if he is that distant a figure it means in turn
that we do not know what he really does, what authority he really wields
and to whom he really reports.

Even the Parliamentary Oversight Authority to which he reports meets less
and less frequently. The Speaker made reference to that this morning. I’m
not quite sure where Madam Speaker is; we don’t want to throw rocks at her
particularly, but it certainly is an untenable situation which should not
be allowed to continue.

Of course it may be that the oversight authority does not meet too often or
hasn’t met this year, in fact, because members of this authority were
assured that the liquidators involved in Travelgate would appear before
them to inform them fully about the Travelgate issue. No doubt some very
important secrets may have been revealed. So, maybe the easy way out is
simply not to call the oversight authority.

But it is an untenable situation which cannot be allowed to continue,
particularly when we look at things like unqualified audit reports. No
matter how minor they are, why should we as Members of Parliament have to
put up with the totally deficient Hansard, with the sound system that
breaks down far too frequently, with the security systems that are a joke,
with communication systems that are embarrassing. And no one seems
accountable for all this or takes responsibility for them.

Now we heard from the hon Mulder that the TV cameras are old and inadequate
as well. Do we wait for them to break down before we do anything about it?
It’s an untenable situation which cannot be allowed to continue.

I want to say, Mr Chairman, the fact that the Travelgate spectre continues
to hang over Parliament, and will do so until parties concerned indicate
what action they will take with regard to their erring members, is simply
one matter which cannot be allowed to continue. It certainly cannot be
ignored; it will not go away until the parties concerned have dealt with
it.

But while the huge bureaucracy under the Secretary’s control continues to
grind along, we MPs are left to make the best of an indifferently run
institution. And quite frankly, where we do have some say, we do little
better than the bureaucracy itself.

I am sure that we as Members of Parliament, have our hands full to make
Parliament a better institution, to demand more accountability, and to set
standards which we believe are attainable. But quite frankly, often all we
do is sit back and complain. Even that aspect of Parliament which we do
have total control over – the programme of Parliament – is a poor
reflection of our ability to do things right.

By the programme of Parliament, I do not mean just a structure of our daily
programme - I think Madam Speaker made some important and relevant points
with regard to this - but I refer to every aspect of the programme: how we
run debates, question time, motions and statements.

I said in the debate last year that Parliament was more boring today than
it was yesterday and tomorrow it will be more boring than it is today. This
year, I believe we have to say that Parliament is more boring this year
than it was last year and next year it will be even more boring than this
year and if we are not careful, and don’t do something about it, very soon
we will be talking in decades of boredom in this place.

The best example of this is question time which should be the most vibrant
part of any parliamentary programme but which in our Parliament is
unalterably boring and has been for the past seven years. But we make no
effort to change it – probably because it suits the ruling party to have a
boring question time that no one listens to even though the executive is
being held to account. And as far as the executive is concerned, can they
account for the fact that of the 600 written questions asked by the DA
between 16 February and 11 May this year 323 remain unanswered? And quite
frankly, we have to accept too that there are many Ministers who adopt a
pretty flippant attitude to oral question time. Is it acceptable? But it
continues to happen.

Quite often, we deserve what we get because we do not demand more. Of
course, a problem that the ANC face and therefore that we all face is that
most decisions affecting Parliament cannot be taken within Parliament
itself but rather by the ANC National Executive Committee, hundreds of
kilometres away.

This in itself is a sorry situation and adversely affects the running of
this institution. And I refer of course to my colleague, the hon Andries
Nel, Acting Chief Whip of the Majority Party for six months and still he
does not know if he will be given the position because it has not yet
appeared on the agenda of ANC National Executive Council. [Laughter.] You
can’t hurry these things you know.

Parliament has set very few examples for the rest of the country to follow,
in terms of how it runs. Perhaps this is the reason why Judge Moseneke
decided to look so poorly upon MPs. But why he chose to pick on back-
benchers and not the decision-makers in this institution is beyond most of
us. But more seriously, the whole Moseneke Commission Report was a massive
disappointment to MPs generally and I believe we have every reason to be
massively disappointed.

There is a lot to do in this institution to make Parliament a far more
vibrant place than it is. Parliament is not just about celebrations and rah-
rah functions. It is more about hard work, taking tough decisions and
helping to make South Africa work for all its people. And this is best done
in an environment that is exciting, absorbing and dynamic, without the
drabness that we face on a daily basis at present.

You made reference, Madam Speaker, to the budget of Parliament and how it
has increased over the years. I believe that, regrettably, this simply
shows that allocating more money to a problem is not the answer but in
actual fact we have to make a deliberate effort to correct the problem
areas. Spending money is simply not the answer; we need to take some
constructive and good decisions in order to make Parliament a far more
vibrant place.

But despite all these things, Mr Chairman, we acknowledge the fact that
there are many people, including the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the
Table staff who really try to make an enormous difference to the running of
Parliament. Consequently, the DA will be supporting the budget. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, Deputy Speaker,
hon members, comrades and friends, and the future MPs of our nation who are
seated in the gallery there ... [Applause.] ... this year marks the 40th
anniversary of the death of ANC president and Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Nkosi Albert Luthuli. This outstanding representative of our people was a
beacon of hope during the dark days of apartheid tyranny. His visionary
leadership of the ANC inspired many, including the volunteers who 52 years
ago organised the Congress of the People at Kliptown.

It is in that tradition of the volunteers, those who gathered at Kliptown,
that the ANC as an organisation continues to involve the masses of its
members and the masses of the people of South Africa in discussion and
formulation of policies. That’s what we are busy with now and what we will
be doing in June and December.

That is the reason, when the ANC NEC gives direction to us in Parliament,
it does so on the basis of the mandate of the masses of our people, and
that simply can’t be wrong. I don’t know why the DA consistently chooses to
raise a nonsense issue. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

I would be interested to know how your federal council relates to your
caucus, but, in any case, that’s a matter we can discuss some other time.
The same applies to the election of your leaders in caucus by having
opinion polls.

We, in the ANC, are very happy to be deployed and will act happily until we
are deployed in any other capacity. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Nel, I’m sorry, there seems to be
a point of order. Would you take your seat, please?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I have to confess, it’s not a point of order. I
just want to point out that we do make decisions in our party.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I’m sorry!

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Today our people’s
aspirations, hopes and desires are anchored on the firm foundation of the
Constitution. This is itself a legal expression of the noble ideals
contained in the Freedom Charter.

Our Constitution is supreme, has an entrenched Bill of Rights and contains
the values that guide all the branches of government in their work. The
inspiration we draw from the brave and heroic acts of Nkosi Luthuli, O R
Tambo, the 1956 movement’s march, the 1976 Soweto youth uprising and the
many unsung heroes of our struggle reminds us of the sacred duty we have as
the democratically elected representatives of the people to remain loyal to
the cause of our people.

The ANC supports Parliament’s budget in the firm conviction that the work
we continue to do remains consistent with the ideal of realising the vision
of a united, nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa.

In its 13 years of existence the democratic Parliament has completely
overshadowed its pre-1994 predecessor: a racist, unrepresentative and
closed institution that passed repressive laws. Today’s Parliament is an
open, transparent and participatory institution that is dedicated to the
creation of a better life for all.

Much progress has been made and many notable achievements have been scored
in the past years. We wish, at the outset, to express our appreciation to
the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, the Chairperson
and Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, House Chairpersons and the Secretary to
Parliament for their leadership and tireless efforts.

In March this year Parliament unveiled the new parliamentary emblem that
projects the vision, mission and values of Parliament to our people and the
world. Madam Speaker and many other speakers have outlined the significant
progress that has been made and I shall not repeat these.

However, correct philosophy teaches us that the process of social
transformation is a long and complex one, and that the solution of certain
problems will give rise to new ones. We must, therefore, guard against the
twin dangers of, on the one hand, suggesting, as some have done here, that
nothing has changed or that there has been retrogression, and, on the other
hand, pretending that there are no problems and that our forward march
cannot be accelerated.

We wish to raise three related challenges. The first issue is often raised
in these debates and elsewhere, and is about the alignment of resources. Is
Parliament’s allocation of resources aligned with the vision and mission
that we have adopted?

This is a matter that needs to be debated constructively in the budget
forum and the Parliamentary Oversight Authority. We also wish to urge all
members to participate actively in Parliament’s budget process.

Secondly, we wish to raise the notion that Parliament has an existence
independent of Members of Parliament. In a representative democracy not a
single one of Parliament’s functions is capable of being executed without
the members that constitute Parliament.

Consider the absurdity of a parliament without members, passing
legislation, overseeing executive action, facilitating public
participation, promoting co-operative governance, overseeing international
relations or debating matters of national concern. Without the Members of
Parliament the buildings that house Parliament would be reduced to little
more than a museum, an architectural landmark, a tourist attraction or a
conference facility.

Yes, the wheels of parliamentary administration would continue turning, but
would do so without any forward movement or delivery on the mandate that
determines Parliament’s reason for existence. A parliament is a parliament
through its members and the voters they represent. There can be no
parliament without Members of Parliament or the citizens who elect them.
[Applause.]

Unfortunately, this does not always seem readily apparent in the manner
that certain administrative processes are conducted. At times one is left
with the impression that some are of the view that parliamentary
administration is something that exists for itself, rather than something
that exists to support Members of Parliament in executing the mandate given
to them by the Constitution and the people of South Africa. [Applause.]

The importance of a people-centred and member-centred approach to the
administration of Parliament needs to be understood and internalised at all
levels of parliamentary administration. The manner in which certain events
and programmes are planned and executed suggests that Members of Parliament
are an optional add-on or an exercise in logistic management.

Consider the example of the following statements that are contained in the
strategic plan for the third Parliament. On page 29 the statement is made
that, and I quote:

  Parliament also embarked on training programmes for members, empowering
  them in their oversight roles.

Would a more correct statement not have been that, and I quote:  “The
administration of Parliament, at the request of Members of Parliament,
facilitated training programmes for members on their oversight roles.”
[Applause.]

On page 32 the statement is made that in relation to the establishment of
parliamentary democracy offices, and I quote:

  ... an ongoing key activity in the parliamentary democracy office would be
  political discussion to obtain people’s views on matters of national
  importance and major policy or legislation before Parliament.

It is not made clear who will be party to these political discussions, but
the absence of a clear reference to Members of Parliament must be a matter
of concern.

On page 37 the assertion is made that, and I quote:


  The creation of an internal culture and external reputation for
  Parliament supporting the delivery of effective and efficient services
  remains one of the key challenges of Parliament. This will include
  initiatives to educate members and staff on the desired behaviour aligned
  to Parliament’s values.

It is not clear who the Parliament is that will be educating members and
staff, and about what.

Again on page 37, it is stated that, and I quote:


  Locally the key focus is on the critical concepts of public involvement
  and the involvement of the people. Issues within this sphere relate to
  gearing Parliament and members, the institution’s systems and processes
  towards fulfilling the needs of all South Africans through public-
  participatory-democracy-based and sustained approaches targeting special
  categories within this broader parliamentary constituency for special
  affirmation and empowerment.

Implicit in the first part of the statement is, again, the notion that
Parliament and Members are somehow separate entities, whilst the latter
part of the statement implies that Members of Parliament, instead of being
central, are an element of a broader parliamentary constituency.

Third, and related to the above, are questions concerning institutional
governance of Parliament. Unfortunately, I’m not going to have time to
cover that in detail, but basically I want to say that I think that we are
all in agreement with the move from the old Rules-Committee-based system to
the parliamentary-oversight-based system. The fact of the matter is that we
are not elected as Members of Parliament to come and manage and run
Parliament. That is not our job. It can’t be our job and we should never
pretend to try and do that.

However, we must have the space, as Members of Parliament, to express what
our needs are and to set the minimum levels of support that we need to
carry out our constitutional mandate. [Applause.] And I think Madam Speaker
already adequately covered this issue at the beginning of the debate – the
fact that the oversight authority has not met for more than six months,
which is a matter of concern.

We’d like to thank the Secretary to Parliament, Secretaries to the NA and
the NCOP, members of the parliamentary service, the security personnel,
catering staff, cleaners, service officers, Hansard staff, Table staff,
legal advisers, researchers, finance staff and the Office of the Leader of
Government Business and parliamentary liaison officers. We would like to
thank the support staff of the different caucuses, the Whips of all
parties, the presiding officers and the House Chairpersons. Let us
intensify the struggle against poverty as we advance in unity towards the
realisation of a better life for all. Let us build a people’s Parliament.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, at times one doesn’t know where to start,
because when one hears the words of the Acting Chief Whip, one actually
gets worried about the institution and what is actually one’s role. The
report he referred to I got as I was seated here yesterday afternoon and I
showed it to the Deputy President and asked: “What am I supposed to do with
this report on the eve of a debate?” I had already started working on my
notes and I did not get into it, but I am happy that the Acting Chief Whip
did mention it.

I have also listened very patiently and with concentration to what was said
here this morning. I think our Members of Parliament are very right in
saying that we don’t have and we don’t enjoy the status that we have been
given by the people of this country. [Applause.] Maybe some of the things
that I am saying will encourage you to applaud me, but I saw in my last
speech that it takes time from my speech. So, when I stop you I am not
being rude, I just want to finish what I am trying to say here. [Laughter.]

I am mentioning this report that I got yesterday. On that white envelope,
Secretary, it was written “Deputy Speaker”. I think I deserve better than
that. I deserve a typed envelope which indicates my status as was given to
me by the people of this country – not a pen-written “Deputy Speaker”.
[Applause.] I will deal with the detail of that because this is not the
forum; it’s just that I had to respond to what the Acting Chief Whip
mentioned.

Our Members of Parliament, as a collective, can assist in improving the
working efficiency of Parliament, if we succeed in hearing their voices. We
need to foster a culture that says to members: You are part of this
institution. In fact, this Parliament is here because you, the
parliamentarians, are here, and not the other way round. I am happy to hear
that, at last, overnight, there is a website - which does not, however,
have the list of members of the National Assembly. It has a number of
links, and some of them are not working, if not all of them. As you know, I
spend most of my time on the website.

I have the privilege of involvement with Members of Parliament in a number
of projects such as the New Identity and Emblem of Parliament, the
Interparliamentary Union and the Leadership Development Programme. In those
projects, I work with MPs from all parties and at all levels of politics.
It has, on every occasion, been a heartening and a humbling experience.
Despite heavy workloads, MPs never hesitate to take on yet another
responsibility and more work. The people of South Africa can rest assured
that, in this Parliament and in this Assembly, they are well represented,
which is as it should be.

The Members of this Parliament are the representatives of the people of
South Africa, and no function or project of this Parliament can take place
without being given political leadership and guidance by the MPs. Any
attempt to exclude MPs from the leadership of Parliament is an attempt to
undermine our hard-won democracy. [Applause.] That is something I am
confident will never happen, as in this House and from all parties there is
a shared commitment to assume those responsibilities that this leadership
of our Parliament gives us.

When MPs are given responsibilities and opportunities to exercise their
talents, they do so with enthusiasm and success. This year we have had our
ups and downs, but despite it all, we have managed to pass a substantial
body of good legislation. Mr Doidge has just mentioned that – and Mr Bapela
is not listening.

We have deepened the gains of our democracy by demonstrating again that we
will protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
as we are expected to do as public representatives.

When one of the artists and designers of the new emblem project made the
following comment at the conclusion of piecing together elements of the
emblem, it was summed up very well. He said:


  This activity represents yet another step in a journey for freedom; it
  also reflects the convergence of different energies in the freedom
  stream. This innovative initiative symbolises a people’s wish.

He went on to say, in Setswana: “Tlhako ya kwa morago e gata mo ya kwa pele
e gatileng teng.” [We follow in the footsteps of our predecessors.]

He meant that we are standing on the shoulders of our predecessors who
fought for this freedom we are celebrating today. He said that the
parliamentary emblem marks yet another era that celebrates the achievement
of a people. We are leaving footprints for generations to come, which they
will follow in in preserving this democracy.

It is our light that we are scared of and not the darkness. Nations of the
world cannot be wrong in their judgment to trust us and rely on us so much.
There is something about our parliamentarians which we need to encourage
and support, as an institution.

Another such moment of pride was the celebration, after long and laborious
months of hard work, of the graduation ceremony of our Leadership
Development Programme. This programme, run under the guidance of Rhodes
University, saw our members graduating on 10 May. Well done to all of you!
[Applause.] I personally made sure that I sent you all DVDs of that
graduation ceremony. I hope you have received them.

At the event, the real celebration was one of enhancing our capacity for
leadership and democracy. It is a leadership that is engaged with hearts
and minds. Our society needs such leaders. We are a diverse society, one
that still carries the burden of the past. We need to shrug off this
burden. It is within this context that transformational leadership becomes
salient in leadership development for democracy.

The parliament of apartheid South Africa was for many years isolated and
not admitted to membership of a number of international bodies, including
the Interparliamentary Union. That was done in protest against the fact
that millions of South Africans had no voice in this country. Through our
democracy, we are now a leading member of the IPU, with full status and
recognition.

Having recently returned from Bali, Indonesia, as leader of the delegation
of the 116th Interparliamentary Union, one would have expected me to have a
tan. However, I, together with 13 other Members of Parliament who travelled
to the 116th IPU Assembly, can only profess to having seen the inside of
the conference venue, the airport and our hotel rooms.

The involvement of the Parliament of South Africa at this year’s IPU
conference was once again comprised of weeks of preparation, strategic
engagements and participation at all levels of the IPU governance process.
While I want to thank all members who actively participated in the IPU
Assembly and standing committee meetings, I want to single out a few
members such as Adv Madasa from the ANC, who not only developed a legal
opinion for the SADC delegates while we were at the Assembly, but has also
been elected to the bureau of one of the standing committees of the IPU.
[Applause.]

Hon Madikiza from the UDM played a leading role in the drafting committee,
negotiating amendments to resolutions and ensuring that topics proposed by
South Africa for the next IPU Assembly were incorporated into the
discussion. [Applause.]

Hon Mfundisi from the UCDP led one of several bilateral meetings with
Germany, while hon Sulliman from the NCOP led bilateral meetings with
Malaysia and Zimbabwe, amongst others. [Applause.]

Besides the individual contribution of our committed delegates, our
participation also reflected a spirit of collaboration across party lines
in the interest of advocating the country’s position.

Working closely with the DA’s representative, hon Kalyan, I led discussions
on global warming during the plenary session. While she also developed
inputs on this topic, she later contributed to the formulation of one of
the topics for the next debate of IPU Committee 1.

Hon Njikelana, hon Khunou and hon Maloney had to deal with so many other
bilaterals and they all did so without any complaint, working long hours
and starting very early in the morning, and at times not having their
dinner. [Applause.]

If you thought Mr Van der Merwe had left his humour in South Africa, wait
until I tell you that when we met with the United Arab Emirates, he asked a
question that was completely out of order and said: “Gentlemen, I am told
that you have a lot of oil. Are you actually very rich?” [Laughter.] I had
to remember that, as a presiding officer, I had to rule him out of order.

We benefited immensely from the experience of Mr Bapela in Kenya and from
the wealth of knowledge that was built up by people such as Mr Van der
Merwe, Mr Bapela, Mr Njikelana and the members that I have already
mentioned above. Of course, we had support from the ambassador in
Indonesia, Mr Memela. We were later joined by Deputy Minister Sue van der
Merwe. Thank you very much for being the only executive members who was
there with us. [Applause.]

In addition to our participation at the conference as well as bilateral
meetings held during lunch or after hours, we also ensured that our
steering committee members met with the IPU secretariat and Bali organising
committee in order to prepare for our hosting of the 2008 IPU Assembly. As
Madam Speaker noted this morning, South Africa will be hosting about 1 500
delegates from 148 countries in April next year. Since the IPU Assembly is
to parliaments what the General Assembly of the United Nations is to
governments, we have to ensure that we work together to make this assembly
a success.

A steering committee of Members of Parliament is at the heart of this event
and has been tasked by the presiding officers with providing guidance and
political direction to our parliamentary officials. That steering committee
is soon to be expanded to include more MPs. I therefore want to take this
opportunity to thank our IPU steering committee members for the work they
have done thus far and to wish them well over the next few months as they
prepare to showcase South Africa to the world. It is, however, imperative
that all our hon members take an active interest in the 2008 assembly,
since it is only through your guidance and support that we will be able to
make this the best IPU Assembly ever hosted.

As we celebrate International Children’s Day today, I would like to say:
Happy children’s day! [Applause.] I was a little bit out of order there
because children are not supposed to be part of the debate but, as a
mother, I had to remind them that it is their day.

An HON MEMBER: Rightfully so!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, sir. As we celebrate International
Children’s Day today we must note that we will dedicate a day later this
year to children when we will launch one of the books provided by the
Interparliamentary Union, as we did with other publications such as the
Cedaw Handbook for Parliamentarians which was launched by Speaker Mbete and
the then Cedaw executive member, Mavivi Mayakayaka-Manzini. This new book
is entitled Handbook for Parliamentarians, No 13 of 2007. To spearhead this
campaign and the launch, is the hon Greg Schneemann from the ANC with hon
Bhengu from the IFP and hon Mazibuko from the ANC in the NCOP. Give them a
big hand, they have done a lot of work in this regard. [Applause.]

As part of this initiative, we are expected as parliamentarians to do the
following: within Parliament, initiate a review of or debate on the extent
to which child rights are built into training curricula and programmes of
all those who work with or for children; initiate a parliamentary inquiry
into the contribution of the media to raising awareness on the impact of
violence against children; initiate a review on gender stereotyping; and in
our constituencies, propose a survey in local schools concerning children’s
knowledge about their rights. We will be expected at some stage to report
back to the IPU on this issue and we are waiting for your guidance, Mr
Schneemann. As the hosting country for 2008, we must lead by example.

Part of our programme of Taking Parliament to the People has seen us
successfully hosting the Youth Parliament, Women’s Parliament and People’s
Assemblies since 2004. When we did that in the past, MPs were spectators.
Now we have put in place steering committees to make sure that MPs are
there to give guidance at all times. [Applause.]

As we prepare for 2007, we will request the Whips to allow the House to
reflect on what the aspirations of our people are, as articulated through
declarations from these bodies. The best way to do this would be to
initiate debates in the House on the reports of each of these events prior
to our events for 2007. Additionally, a political steering committee of MPs
has been established to give members a hands-on role in the content and
organisation of these events. The steering committee has already met. As
Madam Speaker said, we are adding more members to that steering committee.

As I conclude, allow me to thank, on behalf of the National Assembly, you,
the members of the National Assembly, for your continued hard work despite
many constraints. I would like you to give yourselves a big hand.
[Applause.]

I do not see Dr Mulder here, but the issue of languages has been addressed
and very soon there will be changes. We are just waiting to brief the Whips
about some of the changes that we are going to make. If this House is not
going to use those 11 languages – in fact those nine languages, because two
languages are already benefiting, it’s going to be difficult for those
languages to be promoted.

A proposal has been given to the Speaker. She has looked at it. Of course,
we will start with Afrikaans because we will go in alphabetic order, not
because of any preference but we felt that that is what we are going to do.
So we will be conducting proceedings in the House in all those languages. I
thought members are going to be happy. [Applause.] Can you imagine hon
Sandra Botha conducting the business of the House in Tshivenda! How
wonderful! [Interjections.]

I had hoped that all the improvements in the parliamentary villages and
enhanced facilities in the parliamentary complex were going to be
mentioned, because these are some of the positive things. I know that your
houses look much better. [Interjections.] Not all, but some; so at least
something positive is coming.

We really want to thank the secretariat of Parliament together with the
Minister of Public Works. They will continue to bring changes to your
offices. At least, I can say they have shown us what your new offices are
going to look like. We have looked at your new furniture and we hope that
soon that will put smiles on your faces again.

I must also note that, hon Greyling, we took your advice and the advice of
this House on dealing with global warming. We committed our Parliament to
help in the fight against greenhouse gases, over and above good
legislation, by planting trees. We have a commitment that each one of you
will have an allocation of 10 trees and you will choose where to plant
them. [Applause.] When that programme starts, I will personally invite
Wangari Mathai to be in South Africa to help us plant the first trees.
[Applause.]

You have raised, during this session today, a number of issues, which I
have documented because I don’t have the power to deal with those. That,
coupled with copies of the Hansard, I will forward to Madam Speaker. I have
requested her to make a statement in the House responding to all the issues
that you have raised. While this will undoubtedly be attended to, let me
thank you for always putting our Parliament and the nation first. It is
this dedication that makes our South African parliamentarians unique in
their leadership.

I would also like to extend my thanks to the staff of the Speakership. They
are an incredible, hard-working team to whom we owe a great debt of
gratitude. Similarly, I would also like to extend my thanks to the entire
staff of Parliament, in particular our Secretary to the National Assembly,
Mr Mansura, and his team. We thank each one of you for the contribution you
make to the running of the institution.

In closing, I did mention that you are unique and we need to help you
because we don’t want to keep you in those boxes. You want to fly. As
presiding officers, we need to create that environment for you to shine, on
behalf of South Africa.

I would like to remind us of the words of the former President of South
Africa, former President Mandela, who pointed out that our deepest fear is
not that we are inadequate, our deepest fear is that we are powerful beyond
measure. It is our light, not our darkness that must frighten us. We ask
ourselves: Who am I to be brilliant, gorgeous, talented, fabulous?
Actually, who are you not to be? You are a child of God. Your playing small
does not serve the world. There is nothing enlightened about shrinking so
that other people won’t feel insecure around you. We are all meant to
shine, as children do.

We were born to make manifest the glory of God that is within us. It is not
just in some of us, it is in everyone. And, as we let our own light shine,
we unconsciously give other people permission to do the same. As we are
liberated from our fear, our presence automatically liberates others. I
thank you very much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, I hope you will find it
in order if I say: Thank you, our gorgeous, fabulous, talented Deputy
Speaker! [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

            SCHOOLS REFUSING TO PLAY RUGBY AGAINST A CERTAIN TEAM

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr B M KOMPHELA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC is alarmed at an allegation
made by the White River Primary School in Mpumalanga that their school
rugby is being disrupted in the Lowveld over the inclusion of five black
players in the first rugby team.

According to the headmaster of the White River Primary School, other
schools are refusing to play against their team because the five black
players are physically too strong and look older than their age. All five
black players in the first rugby team have earned provincial colours. Their
headmaster says that two primary schools have already indicated that they
are pulling out of rugby and preventing other teams from playing against
the black players. Birth certificates of the five players qualify them to
be included in the team – all of them having been born in 1994.
The headmaster of one of the schools who refused to play against the school
with black players in their team, Nelspruit Primary School, says it is the
schools’ choice to decide whether they will participate in games.

The ANC calls on the Department of Education urgently to investigate this
matter. We further express our disappointment that the provincial rugby
union, the Pumas, have avoided the issue by urging the schools to resolve
this matter amongst themselves. [Time expired.]

                     DIRECTORSHIPS HELD BY BOARD MEMBERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Chairperson, the Minister for Public Enterprises, Alec
Erwin, should be taken to task for the disdain showed by his department for
the necessity and importance of the oversight role played by Parliament.

On Thursday Minister Erwin finally submitted a report on the directorships
held by board members of the state-owned enterprises under his authority.
The report was submitted more than one and half months late and without any
written explanation to Parliament and seemingly after having been released
to the media first.

In addition, the suspicion created by the delay is unfortunate for a
Minister already suffering from a credibility deficit. The report confirms
that our ailing national carrier SAA is tended to by an overstretched board
and a CEO with an average of more than 11 directorships for each board
member.

Similarly, Eskom is also saddled with five board members, including the
board chair and the finance director, who hold an astounding 105 board
positions between them. It is incomprehensible how these board members can
contribute to the effective management of SOEs if they hold so many
directorships.

Does the Minister even care to investigate the number of board positions
held by board members before they are appointed? By virtue of its contents,
the report clearly indicates the need to investigate the institution of
guidelines or restrictions on the number of directorships held by public
entity board members to avoid mismanagement and conflicts of interest.
Thank you, Chairperson.

                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP notes with shock the increasing
number of deaths of learners caused by other learners. As a result the
Department of Education and society at large are faced with the big problem
of installing safety measures at schools and their surroundings.

The increasing number of deaths, however, is not only the department’s
problem, but everyone’s, because a school is supposedly the safest place
for a learner to be. Nowadays that is no longer the case.

These killings have happened in almost every province within a very short
period of time. In KwaZulu-Natal a 17-year-old boy was stabbed to death by
another learner outside the school. Another stabbing incident took place at
a school in the Western Cape. Another incident also happened in the Western
Cape at a different school where a 17-year-old boy was accused of murdering
a fellow learner with a pair of scissors. Two underaged boys are expected
to appear in court for the murder of an eight-year-old boy who was axed to
death.

This is not only the department’s problem, but that of the nation and a
summit should be called to address this issue which is crippling our
society.

            ASSISTANCE GIVEN TO THE ROBERTSON BEHAVE BOXING CLUB

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M SOLO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC believes that sport and recreation
are an integral part of developing a healthier society. Robertson is a town
in the Breede River/Winelands Municipality in the Boland. It has a high
unemployment rate, especially amongst the youth. Because of the youth
involvement in drinking and drug abuse, a boxing club was established,
called the Robertson Behave Boxing Club. This assisted in attracting to the
club especially the youth who are not playing soccer.

All their equipment was wiped out in a fire, which destroyed some shacks in
the area. We were then approached by some of the boxers and their manager,
Mr Nkosi, for assistance. We then raised this matter with the Department of
Sports and Recreation SA, and Mr Greg Fredericks in particular. The
department responded very positively by giving them 10 punch bags, four
speed balls, 16 gloves, six gum shields, vests, shirts, eight head guards,
six protectors, 10 punch bag gloves, boxing pads and skipping ropes.

The new equipment attracted more youth to the club. Boxing SA has
introduced the Baby Champions. These champions are operating in other areas
in the Boland, and these clubs have participated in some of the
tournaments. The community is very thankful for the assistance and support
from the Department of Sport and Recreation SA. This is the realisation of
the contract that the ANC entered into with the people. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                            PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Chairperson, as South Africa faces mass action by
public servants, the ACDP acknowledges the rights of workers to express
their dissatisfaction through strike action which is peaceful and calls on
protesters to conduct themselves in a manner which will not discredit their
cause and professions.

We appeal to those in emergency services not to neglect their duties where
the lives of people are at stake. We also call on government to stop
burying their head in the sand and to put an offer on the table that does
not further insult public servants.

The ACDP has called on all parties to continue to commit to a negotiated
solution. However, government will have to show a greater appreciation of
the seriousness of the workers’ predicament. We recognise that many public
servants who would normally not consider such drastic action find
themselves in a dilemma and many more are just plain angry at the state’s
handling of their situation.

Those who are committed to service and professional excellence in their
chosen professions are not only concerned for their situation but for the
future of their professions. The ACDP has for some years been calling on
relevant Ministers to attend to salaries and conditions of service which
are causing skilled and experienced people to leave their professions. This
is a major concern as pools of excellent, dedicated professionals have
dried up and recruitment has been reduced to a mere trickle.

Arguments that an across-the-board increase cannot be given because of the
nondelivery by many are not acceptable. Yes, we do have a serious problem
as inflexible labour laws protect those who do not work or choose to
disrupt services. But government’s insistence on retaining this protection
cannot be used as an excuse. [Time Expired.] Thank you.

                          SECURITY LEVELS IN eNaTIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (VF PLUS): Voorsitter, die einde is nog nie in sig ten
opsigte van die omstrede eNaTIS-stelsel nie. Die VF Plus wil graag hê dat
ons ’n effektiewe, moderne en veilige voertuigregistrasie- en
lisensiestelsel het. Dit is ook wat die Suid-Afrikaanse publiek verwag,
maar tans is dit nie die geval nie.

Die nuutste onthullings is dat die eNaTIS-stelsel verskeie gebreke bevat
soos, eerstens, dat daar te maklik by die stelsel ingebreek kan word;
tweedens, dat geen wagwoord benodig word om as administrateur toegang tot
die stelsel te verkry nie; derdens, dat dokumente op die stelsel nie
beveilig word nie; en vierdens, dat lêers op die stelsel onbeskermd
rondgestuur word.

Die ontstellendste is egter dat hierdie gebreke in die stelsel reeds op 21
Februarie vanjaar onder die aandag van die betrokke direkteur-generaal van
die departement gebring is. Nie net is niks daaraan gedoen nie, maar daar
is onverantwoordelik voortgegaan met die implementering van die stelsel.

Die VF Plus doen ’n beroep op die Minister om onmiddellik in te gryp en
hierdie saak reg te stel. Die publiek verdien beter. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)
[Dr C P MULDER (FF PLUS): Chairperson, with regards to the controversial
eNaTIS system, the end is not yet in sight. The FF Plus would very much
like to have an effective, modern and safe vehicle registration and
licensing system. It is also what the South African public expects, but
currently this is not the case.

The latest revelations are that the eNaTIS system has many shortcomings.
Firstly, it is too easy to hack into the system. Secondly, no password is
required for administrators to gain entry to the system. Thirdly, documents
on the system are unsecured and fourthly, files on the system are
circulated without protection.

However, what is most disconcerting is that these shortcomings in the
system were already brought to the attention of the relevant director-
general of the department on 21 February this year. Not only was nothing
done about it, but the irresponsible implementation of the system
continued.

The FF Plus calls on the Minister to intervene immediately and to put this
matter right. The public deserves better. I thank you.]

                        CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr M S MOATSHE (ANC): Chairperson, in 1994 Garankuwa, Mabopane, Winterveld
and Hamanskraal - areas that were part of PWV region before the
establishment of the nine provinces - were smoothly integrated into the
North-West province, conversant with the transitional arrangement agreed to
at Codesa. Local organisations and community structures were thoroughly
engaged on that matter, hence no confusion was experienced.

After the 2000 local government democratic elections, these areas became
Tshwane cross-boundaries and their local government services were provided
by the Tshwane Metro Municipality; whilst provincial government provided
major services such as education, health, social welfare and safety and
security. Provincial roads were also serviced by North West province.
The ANC has the pleasure of informing this House that the Constitutional
Amendment Act NO 12 of 2006, that pronounces the demise of cross-boundaries
was peacefully implemented on 1 April 2007, and the final handover of 39
schools in the former North West region was received by Gauteng MEC for
Education, Comrade Angie Motshekga, on 19 May 2007.

The incorporation of this Gauteng’s 15th region was attended by officials
from various Gauteng and North West governments, school managers and
educators from the 39 schools, student representatives, Members of
Parliament and members of the provincial legislature.
This seminar was held in a peaceful atmosphere, with the knowledge that
South Africa is one country, and demarcations are done for the purpose of
administration and efficient service delivery. This entails that
negotiations will always bear fruit. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                    PAYMENT FOR THE USE OF PUBLIC TOILETS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE (AZAPO): Chairperson, Azapo has noticed with regret
that some local municipalities in Limpopo, particularly Polokwane,
Makhuduthamaga, Lepelle-Nkumpi and Greater Tubatse Local Municipalities,
have neglected their mandate to build and maintain public sanitation
amenities in some areas that fall within their ambit.

In certain areas, unauthorised persons are now maintaining these public
amenities at taxi and bus ranks, as well as in shopping malls. Members of
the public are charged fees to use the toilets and the unemployed are not
able to pay. Of importance to note, is that those who cannot afford these
fees relieve themselves wherever they find it convenient - thus creating an
unhygienic situation.

Persons who demand money do not issue receipts for the payments. In some
instances, members of the public fight physically for their rights to use
these amenities. Azapo calls on the Minister and the municipalities
concerned to investigate these matters urgently, so that members of the
public can access and use these public facilities without having to pay. I
thank you. [Applause.]

                           GOVERNMENT’S WAGE OFFER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE (DA): Chairperson, the DA is in favour of a fair wage
increase for public servants. However, we cannot escape from the importance
of awarding merit and encouraging skills retention in the public sector. We
therefore support the relevant components of the government’s wage offer
that seeks to address these issues.
Going forward, restoring good faith to the wage negotiation process will be
important, as we cannot allow interruptions to essential services to the
people because of further or intensified labour action. Consequently, we
call on the unions to do their utmost to clearly articulate the
government’s offer to their members in its entirety and to recognise what
positive components there might be in the offer.

Minister Geraldine Fraser Moleketi’s unfortunate statement that there had
been a “breakthrough”, seeks to have encouraged bad faith, and has
seemingly resulted in an escalation in the dispute. Does it perhaps not
mean we accept that Minister Fraser-Moleketi is no longer the best person
to lead the government’s charge and she be replaced as the government’s
negotiator-in-chief? I thank you.

                ESTABLISHMENT OF INTEGRATED HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs Z A KOTA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC continues to work hard in ensuring
that our people are decently housed and bringing up their families in
comfort and security. It is for that reason that the ANC welcomes the
recent statement made by the Director-General of Housing, Mr Benny
Gotswane, that compels all provinces to build houses of not less than 40
square metres, particularly, given the fact that the housing subsidy should
only be used for the top structure. This will go a long way in addressing
the concerns of developers, as well as that of beneficiaries.

It should be noted that this clarion call was supported by the Portfolio
Committee on Housing. The challenge is to ensure that the provision of
infrastructure goes hand in hand with the subsidy allocation. The centre of
provision of service led by municipalities is critical. This demonstrates
the caring attitude of the ANC government and its commitment in building
better quality houses for the poor.

The Breaking New Ground strategy calls for moving away from the provision
of houses to the provision of integrated human settlements. All houses
built should have social and economic amenities such as clinics, schools,
parks and trading areas. The ANC welcomes this positive development. I
thank you.

                     CLOSURE OF TRAUMA UNITS ON WEEKENDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP notes with sadness that
Johannesburg’s two functioning public trauma units are battling with skills
shortages, forcing them to shut their critical wards for hours at a time on
most weekends. According to recent press reports, Johannesburg and Chris
Hani Baragwanath hospitals take turns on busy weekends to close their
trauma and ICU wards.

This is the situation, despite the fact that these are the only hospitals
in the city with properly functioning trauma wards. Doctors reported that
crisis situations often happen on weekends and at the end of the month when
people have money in their pockets. Wards become full, often with
inebriated patients with stab or gunshot wounds.

The IFP urges the Department of Health to respond to these queries about
the closures. The majority of the health workers face many problems, such
as severe understaffing, that make their lives unbearable. There needs to
be a drastic movement on the part of government to address these bad
working conditions and improve delivery of health services nationwide. I
thank you.

                  PROVISION OF DECENT SERVICES IN CAPE TOWN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C C SEPTEMBER (ANC): Madam Chairperson, the ANC recently held a march of
about 10 000 people from mainly poor African and Coloured areas in the Cape
Metropolis to protest against the sharp increase in the costs of services
and rates in the city of Cape Town, and the pink letters issued by the
mayor of Cape Town to cut services to 455 000 households.

These increases amount to 15% for rates, 5,7% for electricity, 19% for
water and 125% for sewerage. Furthermore, the re-evaluation of houses has
increased rates massively. An RDP house previously valued at R50 000 is now
valued at R150 000. [Interjections.]

The ANC calls on the DA-led multiparty city council to adopt a pro-poor
policy on payment of services and to provide decent services to all,
especially the poor in Cape Town. I thank you. [Applause.]




               LACK OF TRANSFORMATION AT UMLALAZI MUNICIPALITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu NC S N NXUMALO: Sihlalo, kuyadabukisa futhi kuyashaqisa ukuthi emuva
kweminyaka eyi-13 leli zwe laphuma ebugqilini, likhishwa uKhongolose –
inhlangano yabantu, kodwa kusekhona abantu bakithi abayizwa ngendaba le
nkululeko. Umasipala waseMlalazi, Eshowe, uluzwa ngendaba uguquko. Selokhu
lo masipala wathathwa yiqembu le-IFP ayaziwa le-transformation, konke ne-
affirmative action ayaziwa.

Izikhundla zakhona eziphezulu zimi kanje: Imeya yindoda emhlophe. Imenenja
kamasipala yindoda emhlophe. [Ubuwelewele.] Oyinhloko yezobunjiniyela
yindoda emhlophe. [Ubuwelewele.] Oyinhloko ye-corporate services yindoda
emhlophe. [Ubuwelewele.] Oyinhloko yezokuvikeleka yindoda emhlophe.
[Ubuwelewele.] Oyinhloko yezezimali yindoda emhlophe. [Ubuwelewele.]
Oyinhloko yezezinsiza zomphakathi yindoda emhlophe. [Ubuwelewele.]

Umphakathi wakulo masipala waze wamasha ukhala ngalezi zinto kodwa imeya
yaphendula ngokuthi: “That is garbage which needs to be disposed of in its
proper place.” [Ihlombe.] [Ubuwele-wele.]
Izinsiza azifiki emphakathini. Uma umphakathi uthi uyayibuza imeya ngalezi
zinto, ivele ithi yethukiwe imeya, ibesabise ngamasamaniso abameli.
Siyacela uMnyango Wezohulumeni Bezifundazwe Nabasekhaya ukuthi ubalamulele
abantu bakithi. Izinsiza azifiki kubona. Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S N NXUMALO: Chairperson, it is sad and shocking that after 13 years
since this country was freed from slavery by the people’s party, the ANC,
there are still some of our people who have not tasted this freedom. The
transformation to the uMlalazi Municipality at Eshowe is mere hearsay.
Since this municipality was taken over by the IFP there has been no
transformation or affirmative action whatsoever.

All the top positions are as follows: The mayor is a white man; the
municipal manager is a white man. [Interjections.] The head of engineering
is a white man. [Interjections.] The head of corporate services is a white
man. [Interjections.] The head of security services is a white man.
[Interjections.] The head of finance is a white man. [Interjections.] The
head of community services is a white man. [Interjections.]

Even the community of this municipality marched against this and the mayor
answered by saying: “That is garbage which needs to be disposed of in its
proper place.” [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Services do not reach the community. If the community asks the mayor about
these things, the mayor in turn says he has been insulted, and threatens
the people with court summonses and lawyers. We ask the Department of
Provincial and Local Government to help our fellow people. The services do
not reach them. I thank you, Chairperson.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, on account of your
enthusiasm, it’s regrettable that I could not hear half of that statement.
[Interjections.]

                         DEBT OWED TO MUNICIPALITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W P DOMAN: Voorsitter, die totale skuld aan munisipaliteite het nou tot
R40 miljard gestyg. Daarom wil die DA twee metro’s, Kaapstad en Ethekwini,
gelukwens, wat so suksesvol is met die invordering van skuld dat hulle die
enigste metro’s is wat verskeie maande meer as 100% van die bedrag van die
totale rekening vir die spesifieke maand ingesamel het.

Dit wys vir ons dat waar daar goeie stelsels bestaan en die politieke wil
daar is, die skuld aan munisipaliteite afgebring kan word. Indien dié wat
kan betaal, nie betaal nie, kan dienste aan die gemeenskap nie behoorlik
gelewer word nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dit bly verontrustend dat die skuld deur nasionale en provinsiale
departemente - onder beheer van die ANC, natuurlik! - steeds hoog bly, en
die DA doen ’n beroep op die Minister vir Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering
om ’n aksie van stapel te stuur om te sorg dat departemente hulle skuld aan
munisipaliteite vereffen.

Die DA veroordeel ten sterkste die optrede van die Premier van die Wes-Kaap
en sy minister van plaaslike regering, wat verlede week ’n optog teen
Kaapstad se skuldinvordering gelei het. Dit terwyl Kaapstad maar net sy
plig suksesvol ingevolge die Wet op Plaaslike Regering: Munisipale Stelsels
uitvoer en in die proses in die nuwe jaar gratis dienste aan
hulpbehoewendes uitgebrei het. Vir dié twee openbare figure om deel te hê
aan die skepping van die valse indruk dat Kaapstad mense uitsit, terwyl dit
glad nie gebeur nie, is skokkend. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, the total debt owed to municipalities has now
increased to R40 billion. The DA therefore wants to congratulate the two
metros, Cape Town and Ethekwini, which are so successful with debt recovery
that they are the only metros that have, for several months, recovered more
than 100% of the amount of the total account for the specific month.

That shows us that where there are good systems and the political will, the
debt owed to municipalities can be reduced. If those who can pay do not
pay, there cannot be proper service delivery to the community.
[Interjections.]

It remains disturbing that the debt of the national and provincial
departments – under leadership of the ANC, of course! – remains high, and
the DA appeals to the Minister for Provincial and Local Government to take
steps to ensure that departments pay their debts to municipalities.

The DA strongly condemns the action by the Premier of the Western Cape and
his Minister for local government, who last week led a march in protest
against Cape Town’s debt collection, and that while Cape Town was only
performing its duty successfully in terms of the Local Government:
Municipal Systems Act, and in the process extended free services to the
needy in the new year. It is shocking that these two public figures could
play a part in creating the false impression that Cape Town evicts people,
when it is not the case at all. [Time expired.]]

                   THE CASE OF MR NQABISA AND MS MOKGOTSI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S A MSHUDULU (ANC): Chairperson, as a member of the ANC and especially
towards advancing the goals of the Freedom Charter under the theme, there
shall be houses, security and comfort”, the MEC for housing in Gauteng,
Comrade Nomvula Mokonyane, last year launched a housing project of 963
houses. Beneficiaries included Mr Nqabisa, who was in a wheelchair, and Ms
Granny Mokgotsi, who lives with her adopted child.

In the process, during the handover by Women in Construction, we realised
that there were other problems with these two people. Mr Nqabisa had
swollen hands and feet because of a long illness, which is suspected to be
arthritis. He is getting treatment at Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital, and
he has to pay for transport as it is too far. He could not handle his
wheelchair and the granny on the other side had the burden of the mother of
the child drawing or misappropriating the grants intended for the abandoned
child.

We intervened with the Livayi Mbatha Clinic as well as Social Development
and the outcome was that Mr Nqabisa was treated very close to home at
Livayi Mbatha Community Health Centre and his daughter completed the
necessary documents as a caregiver under Social Development. The case of Ms
Mokgotsi was taken over by Social Development and was also taken up with
the school.

I, therefore, on behalf of Mr Nqabisa, who is in a wheelchair and can’t
move it because of his swollen hands, call upon this Parliament, business
and any other organisation to donate an automated wheelchair for him as he
is at least now in a decent house. I thank you. [Applause.]

            SCHOOLS REFUSING TO PLAY RUGBY AGAINST A CERTAIN TEAM

                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS
                ESTABLISHMENT OF INTEGRATED HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I take this opportunity to
congratulate you on your appointment as Leader of the Opposition. I see
some of our learners here. I am not going to ask why you are not in school.
This is part of your education - understanding our democratic process.
[Laughter.] I’ll probably ask about the teachers, but not the learners.

With regard to the issue raised by the hon Komphela, it’s quite sad that
this matter is being raised on Children’s Day, where we speak about the
rights of children. We are trying to create a society that is nonracial,
nonsexist and democratic. The fact of the matter is that where principals
in schools try to exclude participation of learners in sport, which is
meant to provide social cohesion, tolerance and respect, it says something
about the mentality and the disposition of those leaders in those schools.

The Department of Education will take the necessary steps to investigate
immediately what is going on there. We cannot accept a situation where our
learners are excluded from participation or excluded from institutions of
learning on the basis of their race. [Applause.]

This year celebrates or commemorates certain important events amongst
others the passing away of Chief Luthuli, our first Nobel Peace Laureate.
We celebrate the birthday of O R Tambo. We also celebrate the passing away
of Steve Biko. All these leaders were committed to the creation of a
nonracial society. All these leaders fought for inclusion, for equity and
equality.

The fact that 13 years after attaining our democracy we have institutions
led by principals – as was conveyed – who tend to act or subvert this
attempt to create such a society is a matter of great concern to us.
Indeed, we want to assure the hon Komphela that we will do whatever is
necessary in this regard.

We would then also say that this is totally inconsistent with the manifesto
values that we have embedded in our curriculum.

I would also like to deal ... [Interjections.] There are several issues
that I would like to deal with. May I proceed to the next one, ma’am?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You may.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you so much, Chairperson. Regarding
the issue of safety and security, for those of you who heard the Minister,
the first statement she made was to convey her condolences to the victim of
the violence, the learner that was stabbed with the pair of scissors. It is
certainly unacceptable. We cannot have our schools being environments that
are not conducive to learning. They should be safe and caring environments.

We’ve identified 364 schools countrywide, which have an inclination towards
violence, and have mitigated that through various steps. First, through
infrastructure by providing fencing and better lighting, metal detectors
and security officers; and this is occurring countrywide. We have already,
hon member, held a colloquium on safety and security involving all the
MECs, all stakeholders and nongovernmental organisations.

A decision was taken with regard to three things. One is that
infrastructure is critical and the Department of Education, through its
MECs in the different provinces, is dealing with that. Two is that we
should emphasise the importance of tolerance and respect in terms of our
values and manifesto. Three, as you correctly pointed out, was that the
role and responsibility of communities was highlighted. Schools are a
microcosm of what occurs in society. Indeed, parents have the
responsibility to ensure that they embed and instil the right values in the
learners. It is not only the responsibility of educators. It is a shared
responsibility, and therefore, the social context of the learner in a
particular environment is critical.

Therefore, we are also saying to parents that they should form committees
of safety, liaise with community police forums so that we can ensure that
there is this collaboration. Indeed, there is collaboration between the SA
Police Service and the Department of Education.

With your permission, I will proceed to the next response then,
Chairperson, because I have several responses to issues that have been
raised.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Surty, may I just establish how
many other Ministers wish to respond, before I say yes?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: You may.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I have two. Is there another one? So
I recognise the hon Botha and the hon Madlala-Routledge. Is that in order?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: May I just do the final one to give my
colleagues an opportunity, Chairperson?

I would like to respond in particular to the hon Kota, who raised two
important issues, both deal with housing. The approach in terms of
establishing human settlements, which involves not only houses but places
of recreation and education and health, is that when we look at our
planning and our design, we are conscious of the fact that it is not only
about providing housing, but providing human settlements that contribute to
the dignity and upliftment of our communities.

The second issue is the Breaking New Ground initiative. What used to occur
in the past is that you would get a subsidy without adequate planning in
terms of infrastructure. What is happening in terms of this initiative here
is that the infrastructure will have to be provided by municipalities
through the municipal infrastructure grant. The subsidy would then be
utilised for the top structure of the houses and, in this way, it would
enable people to build houses that are more spacious and more affordable,
and certainly more dignified.

We would like to commend the director-general for this wonderful
announcement, and certainly associate with it fully. Thank you so much.
[Applause.]

                     DIRECTORSHIPS HELD BY BOARD MEMBERS
                            PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE
                  PROVISION OF DECENT SERVICES IN CAPE TOWN
               LACK OF TRANSFORMATION AT UMLALAZI MUNICIPALITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: I take this opportunity, Deputy
Chairperson, to congratulate you on being appointed as the parliamentary
Leader of the DA. Viva the women!

I’d just like to respond to the issue that was raised around the number of
directorships held by one person. The executive has taken a decision on the
matter, and it would be appreciated if the hon member who raised the issue
could furnish the Minister responsible with the information that the member
has. We would appreciate that.

Regarding the issue of the strike raised by the ACDP, the Minister
responsible – Minister Fraser-Moleketi – was here on Wednesday, addressed
this House, and explained exactly what the position was. If any member of
this House did not understand what the Minister was saying, or needs
further explanation of the issues around the Public Service strike, I would
suggest that that member contact the Minister again.

I am certain that the Minister for the Public Service and Administration
will be only too happy to assist. And, we have full confidence in educating
our members. I have full confidence – and we, as the executive, have full
confidence – in the Minister for the Public Service and Administration in
the way that she is handling the matter. Thank you.

With regard to the issues raised by hon member September, I just want to
remind the House that all of us adopted the Reconstruction and Development
Programme, which was crafted by the ANC. We all committed ourselves here –
government and Members of Parliament – to people-driven and people-centred
development. We would urge municipalities to consider that we should
actually be looking at our own people and trying to assist our people. So,
if we say we are a developmental state and we have committed ourselves to
people-centred and people-driven development, we should actually do that
and practise that.

The last thing, hon Deputy Chair ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You have 13 seconds.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Oh, really. Do I?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Ten now.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: The last thing is the issue that
was raised, I think by the hon Nxumalo. If that is the situation with
regard to having “indoda emhlophe” [the white man] for all these positions
– indoda emhlophe, indoda emhlope – let alone being the top management
being lily-white, there are also no women.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Deputy Minister, I have to stop
you there.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: How do we expect to carry out the
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you. I have to give the other
Minister an opportunity. I’m very sorry.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: So, please, we would urge those
municipalities ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Ma’am, I’m sorry but your time has
expired.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: ... to have a change of heart and
commit themselves to transformation. Thank you.

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Chair, on that very issue I would just like to raise
the point of order that the hon member who made the statement referred to
race all the time and not to service delivery. I submit that that was a
racist remark. [Interjections.] I want you to check the record, and please
make a ruling. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-B Botha): Thank you. [Interjections.] Hon
members, that is exactly what I was saying in connection with the
particular statement: that I was unable to hear what was being said,
because there were so many interruptions. So, if there is a point of order
to be had, I will have to refer to the Hansard. Thank you.

                     CLOSURE OF TRAUMA UNITS ON WEEKENDS
               LACK OF TRANSFORMATION AT UMLALAZI MUNICIPALITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you, hon Chairperson. I want to
firstly respond to the statement made by the hon member Seaton, and to
thank her very much for raising this issue. Indeed, as the Department of
Health, we are very concerned about the situation in many of our tertiary
hospitals, as you have identified the trauma unit and the ICU wards in the
Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital.

Other similar institutions around the country are experiencing very similar
problems. I am certain that when the Minister of Health addresses the House
on her Budget Vote, she will mention what we are doing to try to assist the
provinces in dealing with these matters.

As recently as last week, we had a meeting of the National Health Council.
This is the structure with the MECs and the Minister. We dealt with the
issue of the budget of the Department of Health. Fortunately, the Minister
of Finance has indicated that he wants to assist us deal especially with
the issue of the modernisation of our tertiary services. This includes both
the issue of the skills, which you have indicated are in short supply, and
the equipment. We think that through that programme we are going to begin
to address the very serious problems that you have indicated. So, we agree
with you; this does need to be addressed and to be addressed urgently. I am
sure the Minister will address this in her Budget Vote speech.

I would also like to respond to the statement made by the hon Nxumalo. I
had the opportunity myself to visit Eshowe last year, and I was shocked to
see that there had been no transformation in that municipality. The shock I
am expressing is based on the conditions I found in Eshowe: This is where
you find a whole big community of people sharing two toilets. This is just
not good for health; it’s not good for the dignity of our people.

I am therefore shocked that the mayor, when the people raised these issues,
said that the issues they were raising were fit only for the garbage bin. I
would really hope that the IFP will assist us in making sure that the
promises that they made in the local government elections are indeed
fulfilled to our people. We just cannot continue to have a situation in
which the delivery of services to our people is hampered by the fact that
they have a lily-white municipality. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, thank you. I’m sorry,
hon Padayachie, I did not see your hand to begin with, and the time for
Ministers’ responses has expired.

That concludes the business for the day, but before you go, hon members,
the Secretary to Parliament has asked me to remind you that you are invited
to lunch in the Old Assembly dining hall.

The House adjourned at 12:40.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

   (1)      Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
        Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. Referred to
        the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
        and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.
National Assembly

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs for consideration:

        (a) Report of the Auditor-General on a  performance  audit  of  the
           immigration process at the Department of Home Affairs – February
           2007 [RP 29-2007].

    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Sport and Recreation for consideration:

        (a) Strategic Plan for the Department of Sport and  Recreation  for
           2007 to 2011.


    (3)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

        (a) Government Notice No 355 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           29814 dated 20 April 2007: Withdrawal  of  declaration  of  land
           under the authority of a resolution of  the  National  Assembly:
           Vaalbos National Park, in terms of  the  National  Environmental
           Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).


        (b) Government Notice No 394 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           29862 dated 4 May: Amendment  to  the  list  of  Activities  and
           Competent Authorities Identified in terms of section  24(2)  and
           24D made in terms of the National Environmental Management  Act,
           1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

        (c) Government Notice No 395 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           29862 dated 4 May: Amendment  to  the  list  of  Activities  and
           Competent Authorities Identified in terms of section  24(2)  and
           24D made in terms of the National Environmental Management  Act,
           1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:

        (a) Government Notice No 392 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           29862 dated 4  May:  National  Environmental  Management  Second
           Amendment Bill, 2007: For further  regulation  of  environmental
           impact assessments, environmental authorizations and  incidental
           matters for comment.

        (b) Government Notice No 393 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           29862 dated 4 May 2007: National Environmental Management Impact
           Assessment Regulations, 2006: For written comments.


    (5)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration:


        (a) Strategic Plan  for  the  South  African  Revenue  Service  for
           2007/08 to 2009/10.

    (6)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report:


        (a)  Report of the Strategic Industrial Projects for April 2002  to
           March 2006.

    (7)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:


        (a)  Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the State  of
           the Public Service for 2007 [RP 12-2007].


    (8)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Safety and     Security for consideration:


        (a)  Strategic Plan  for  the  Independent  Complaints  Directorate
           (ICD) for 2007 to 2010.


    (9)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration:

        (a) Submission of  the  Financial  and  Fiscal  Commission  on  the
           Division of Revenue Bill for 2008-2009, tabled on 16 May 2007 in
           terms of section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal  Relations
           Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).

    (10)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
           Government Association  (SALGA)  for  2005-2006,  including  the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  for
           2005-2006 [RP 24-2007].

    (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Letter from the  Minister  of  Environmental  Affairs  and
           Tourism dated 15  May  2007  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National
           Assembly, in terms  of  section  51(2)  of  the  Public  Finance
           Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in
           the tabling of the Annual Financial Statements  for  the  Marine
           Living Resources Fund for 2006-2007.


TABLINGS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

   The following private member’s legislative proposal was submitted to  the
   Speaker  on 23 May 2007, in accordance with Rule 234:
   Legislative proposal to amend the Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Act  (K
   J Minnie).

   Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative  Proposals  and
   Special Petitions for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the Films and
    Publications Amendment Bill [B27 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 31 May 2007:

    The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the subject
    of the Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B27 – 2006] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging
    Mechanism as section 75 Bill, presents a redraft of the Bill [B27B
    -2006].

