---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 27 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-03-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

House Chairperson Mr T S Setona took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council I shall move:

    That the Council -


    (1)     expresses its concern and sympathy with the farming community in
        the Free State who have experienced severe loss and trauma as a
        result of the devastating fires that have destroyed vast tracts of
        grazing land, especially on top of the drought that they are
        suffering. This has brought enormous hardship to man and beast; and
    (2)     calls upon the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs to show
        her support for the agricultural sector by providing emergency
        support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon member. Your motion
will be printed in full on the next Order Paper.

Mnr C J VAN ROOYEN: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek by die
volgende sitting van die Raad sal voorstel:


    Dat die Raad —

      1) kennis neem dat AgriSA in hulle nuusbrief Nr. 02/2007 gedateer 13
         Februarie 2007 onder die opskrif “BEMOEDIGENDE GELUIDE OOR
         MISDAADBEKAMPING” President Mbeki se erns om misdaad meer
         doeltreffend te bekamp, soos tydens sy staatsrede op 9 Februarie
         aangekondig, verwelkom;


      2) verder daarop let dat AgriSA ook die President se bevestiging
         verwelkom dat die Regering sal toesien dat die strategieë oor hoe
         om misdaad te bekamp, behoorlik uitgevoer sal word, met inbegrip
         van –


        (a)      die uitbreiding van die polisiemag van 152 000 tot meer as
              180 000 lede binne die volgende drie jaar ...
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)
[Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I will move:

  That the Council -


  (1) notes that in their newsletter No 02/2007 dated 13 February 2007 under
        the heading “BEMOEDIGENDE GELUIDE OOR MISDAADBEKAMPING”, AgriSA
        welcomes President Mbeki’s determination to combat crime more
        effectively, as announced in his state of the nation address on 9
        February;


  (2) further notes that AgriSA also welcomes the President’s confirmation
        that the Government will see to it that the strategies on how to
        combat crime are properly implemented, including –

        (a) the expansion of the police force from 152 000 to more than 180
              000 members within the next three years ...]


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I regret your time has
expired. Your motion will be printed in full in the next Order Paper.

               CONVICTED SEX CRIMINAL APPOINTED TO LEGISLATURE

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I move on behalf of the DA and all concerned
citizens, but particularly on behalf of all women that have been sexually
harassed in one way or another:

  That this Council –


     1) notes with utter horror that the so-called sex pest, Mr Norman
        Mashabane, was last week appointed as a member of the Limpopo
        legislature;


     2) further notes that the said Mr Mashabane has been found guilty of
        no less than 22 counts of sexual harassment by the Department of
        Foreign Affairs and that all the counts of guilt have subsequently
        been ratified and confirmed by the High Court of South Africa;

     3) therefore calls on the Council and all the members to condemn this
        outrageous appointment, in line with our policy of protection and
        empowerment of women and in sympathy with all the mothers, sisters
        and daughters; and


     4) calls on the President of the country to nullify the appointment as
        a matter of urgency.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. We
have a very clear agreement and procedure on any motion without notice
which has political implications, like the motion without notice being
raised by the hon member. It relates to a member of a provincial
legislature who is so designated by a political party and no one can then
deny that this has political implications.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, that is quite correct but that agreement was
broken by the very same ANC the Chief Whip represents here, and I can quote
the example of Mr Mack.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, you are out of order.
Can you take your seat? I must make a ruling.

Hon members, I’ll have to be given the opportunity to go and refer to the
relevant agreement between the various political parties and its standing
in relation to the proceedings of the House. On the basis of those findings
I will then come back to this House and make a ruling on this matter. Is
that acceptable?  We then proceed to further motions without notice.

              DEATH OF FORMER PROTEAS CRICKET COACH BOB WOOLMER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council —


  (1) notes the tragic death of the Pakistan coach ...

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: I am sorry to interrupt my
hon friend, but is it parliamentary for a member to say that I steal votes?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): What is the member saying?

Mr A WATSON: The member said how can I object when I steal votes?
[Interjections.] You did say that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order, hon members! Hon Watson, as I
am sitting here it is my duty to protect the decorum of this House, and it
is equally my duty to protect any member of this House against any
unparliamentary gesture or conduct by any member. Owing to the fact that I
did not hear the hon member saying that, it is impossible - not just
difficult - to make a ruling on something that I have not heard. I do have
my staff here. It is unfortunate ... [Interjections.]

No, this is not a tribunal so I do not have to ask him. This is a sitting
of Parliament. Can we proceed hon members? Hon Robertson?

Mr E M SOGONI: Chair, I rise on a point of order.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): What’s your point of order, hon
Sogoni?

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, the point of order is this: Is it also
procedural for a member to interrupt another member when he is speaking, on
a matter that is not related to what the member is saying, because the
Rules are very clear about the occasions on which you can interrupt a
member who is speaking? I think Mr Watson was also out of order himself.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, can you take your seat.
Hon members, it is easy to say yes it is parliamentary or unparliamentary,
but based on the evidence before me, it is not. I have not heard that
member disrupting another and whatever, and I have made a ruling against
the hon Watson. So can we proceed?

              DEATH OF FORMER PROTEAS CRICKET COACH BOB WOOLMER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Thank you, Chair. Chairperson, on a second attempt, I
move without notice:

  That the Council -


  (1) notes the tragic death of the Pakistan coach, Bob Woolmer, who
        previously was coach of the Proteas; and


  (2) extends its condolences to his family and the cricket fraternity at
        large.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                         SOUTH AFRICAN AIRWAYS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, many things are changing,
I can see. [Laughter.] I think I’m making history; I’m probably the first
Minister to speak under the new parliamentary emblem because I think we
started earlier than the other House.

Chairperson, members of the Council, ladies and gentlemen in the gallery,
the South African Airways Bill marks significant progress in the process of
separating SAA from Transnet Ltd. The intention of the department is to
focus Transnet on the movement of freight by rail, through the ports and
within the petroleum pipelines.

SAA is a major enterprise in its own right and operates in an industry that
has markedly different conditions to those of the rail and port freight
systems. Accordingly, to ensure that there is full focus by the board and
management of these differing domains, it has been decided to remove SAA
from Transnet’s balance sheet and to move its shareholding to the
Department of Public Enterprises.

The draft Bill gives legal effect to the decision to separate SAA from
Transnet, which was set out in an agreement between Transnet, SAA and the
Minister for Public Enterprises, acting in my capacity as the
representative of government. As part of the conditions of that transaction
we are bringing this Bill before Parliament - both Houses.

The Bill is largely a simple enabling piece of legislation. The portfolio
committee raised the entirely valid point that if SAA was strategically so
important that it be brought before this Parliament, then surely any change
in its future status must also be important. And if this was the case, what
role would Parliament play? The precise matter that precipitated this
discussion was the provision that allowed for the conversion of SAA from a
private company, as it is now, to a public company.

The majority of state-owned enterprises, or SOEs, that are major public
entities under the Public Finance Management Act, such as Eskom and
Transnet, are also indeed public companies. This status of a public company
allows these entities to rely primarily on their balance sheets for
purposes of funding their respective operations and reduces the extent of
reliance on government guarantees. This is something we also wish to
encourage for SAA. The ability to fund off a balance sheet essentially
distinguishes state enterprises from government agencies and utility
companies.

However, this issue raised an even more basic issue relating to any change
of legal status of an SOE. It so happens within the Department of Public
Enterprises, DPE, and along with work in the Department of the Public
Service and Administration and the National Treasury that similar issues
were under recent consideration.

We support a process in which major changes in the future will allow for a
role for Parliament. The department is working on this body of legislation
that will deal with the overall strategic shareholder management of the
state-owned enterprises.

Accordingly, I’m happy to report that we are in agreement that this issue
will be dealt with more effectively in the proposed legislation which will
come before Parliament in the second half of this year.

A further departure from the enabling legislation of the other public
entities is the insertion of a preamble to contextualise and specify the
significance of SAA as a strategic asset to the state. This idea of a
statement of the strategic intent is another thing that will be embodied in
the shareholder management legislation.
This is something that was agreed upon with the portfolio committee - that
is the preamble - and is a precursor, as I say, to the overall approach to
the shareholder management of SOEs in the draft legislation.

The preamble gives the basic strategic reasons for retaining ownership with
the state in order that we retain strategic control of decision-making in
SAA and therefore helps us promote air links with our main business,
trading and tourism markets on the African continent and internationally.

As members may be aware, to contribute to the rapid growth of this
continent, we need a strong aviation platform. South Africa and the
continent are the third fastest growing markets in the global airline
industry. The continent cannot grow faster without a strong aviation
platform, and air transport is the only real form of transport on the
African continent, given the underdeveloped transport infrastructure, the
geographical landscape and the vast distances on our continent.

As we build up to the 2010 Fifa World Cup, it is important that South
Africa has an effective and large airlift capacity both within our borders
and to all the key destinations within Africa and the other continents.

SAA is a well-established airline with a very good reputation for safety
and service. The airline industry is a very challenging and highly
competitive industry. However, we are confident that we can stabilise and
then grow the airline.

It is not our objective to compete with the large global airlines. Our
objective is to provide an effective intercity network on the African
continent and to reach out to major cities in all continents so that we
become the preferred carrier to Africa and South Africa in particular.

Along with the regional carrier SA Express and the other flourishing
private airlines in South Africa, we believe that we can increasingly
improve the affordability and availability of air-passenger transport in
Africa.

It is also pleasing to note that true low-cost airlines are taking firm
root in South Africa and that there is healthy competition between them.
This is a very positive development for air travel and I’m sure that it
will spread more widely into the African continent as these African
economies grow.

In conclusion, I’d like to thank the chairperson of the select committee
and its members for the hard work and assistance they have provided the
department and me in getting the Bill processed at such short notice. My
thanks to the department and to SAA for all their hard work, which is much
appreciated. I recommend to this House that we approve this Bill. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, I stand before this
Chamber to make a revolutionary statement, revolutionary in that I see
possibilities for South African Airways that many people fail to see. While
some believe that SAA is a mere commercial entity and a financial burden, I
see it as a tool for change and progress.

There have been calls from those less committed to our country’s
developmental agenda for this asset to be disposed of. Chairperson, hon
members, it is our belief that selling SAA at this point in time will be a
fundamental flaw.

Government has a growth target of 8% by the year 2014. By 2014 we would
like to halve poverty and unemployment. Airfreight has a significant role
to play in facilitating economic expansion. The airline industry allows for
increased participation in the global market, thereby broadening the reach
and accessibility of imported and exported goods.

Airfreight improves efficiency in the supply chain by shortening delivery
time and making short cuts in red-tape bureaucracy possible. Many companies
consider international transport links to be an essential factor for
locating business, and air travel capacity is a key element for increasing
domestic investment. If we are to achieve our target growth rates then we
have to ensure that our airline is reliable, cost-effective and efficient.
And for now this can best be achieved if the airline is in state hands or,
in future, a public entity – who knows?

South Africa’s tourist potential is untapped. Tourism includes visits
during holidays, visiting of friends and families, meetings, conferences,
exhibitions and visiting for business purposes and retail shopping.

Labanye betfu siyaye sihambe nje sitsi sivakashela tihlobo tetfu, singanaki
kutsi natsi sesibavakashi ngekwetfu. [Some of us travel and think that we
are just visiting our relatives, without being aware that we are tourists
too.]

Tourism is a labour-intensive industry, which can go a long way to address
job creation, thus tackling poverty head-on, as well as small and micro
enterprise development. In many developing countries it is a major
contributor to the balance of payments and a significant source of foreign
exchange. Affordable, good-quality air transport is essential if we are to
fully exploit the opportunities offered by South Africa’s tourism industry.

Lastly, we are all committed to driving the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, Nepad. How are we going to facilitate
economic expansion on this continent? How are we going to ensure regional
economic integration? How on earth are we going to ensure that Africa
becomes a strategic player in the global economy without an effective air
transport system, especially given the fact that the last Nepad summit
decided to overhaul the Nepad Secretariat and formed the Nepad agency?

Currently, air transport in Africa is estimated to generate about 470 000
direct and indirect jobs, contributing over US$11,2 billion to the African
gross domestic product. Defining SAA as a national entity will strengthen
networks of current legacy airlines of Africa and make the continent a
serious contender in the era of globalisation.

So to all those who are calling for SAA to be privatised, I say, now is not
the time and I hope that time will never come. Of course SAA’s financial
performance is worrisome. But we note that SAA has tightened its
procurement and financial management systems and we believe that the
balance sheets will be strengthened as these systems come into effect.

We also recognise that the airline industry is a volatile one affected by
many exogenous factors, but we trust that SAA will incorporate these
elements into business planning.

SAA is positioning itself to be the leading African network operator and to
develop SAA Cargo as the operator of first choice in the sub-Saharan
region. Its acceptance as one of the 18 full members of the Star Alliance
demonstrates that the international community has a high level of
confidence in the airline’s management and service ability.

The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises therefore welcomes
the introduction of the South African Airways Bill. The Bill moves SAA off
the Transnet balance sheet, thereby allowing Transnet to concentrate on
freight logistics. We believe that having SAA as a stand-alone entity is a
positive step. It will now allow for the streamlining of responsibilities,
and tightening of management, and will enable the airline to focus on
strengthening its balance sheet. We believe that the department has taken a
bold step to resist the strong tides which threaten to sink SAA. The Bill
has our full support.

We also welcome the decision to involve Parliament in the overall
shareholder management legislative process, particularly the commitment to
ensure that Parliament be consulted when any changes are made to the
composition and structure of ownership of state- owned enterprises.

We would like to thank the department, the Minister and SAA in particular
for the thorough explanation of the process. The Select Committee on Labour
and Public Enterprises supports the Bill as it stands. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Me J F TERBLANCHE: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister Erwin, kollegas, op 26
Julie 2006 het die Kabinet dit goedgekeur dat die SAL van Transnet geskei
sal word as deel van Transnet se nuwe vierpunt-omkeerstrategie. Wat dit
effektief beteken, is dat die SAL oorgedra word vanaf Transnet na die
regering en dat dit gereguleer sal word soos alle staatsbeheerde openbare
ondernemings. In daardie stadium is daar ook besluit dat die SAL as
staatsbeheerde openbare onderneming direk aan die Minister moet rapporteer.

Ingevolge klousule 4 van die wetsontwerp mag die Minister van Openbare
Ondernemings die SAL omskakel in ’n publieke maatskappy nadat die
maatskappy oorgedra is aan die staat.

Dit blyk uit dokumente wat aan die komitee verskaf is, en die memorandum
oor die doel van die wetgewing, dat die rede vir die oordrag van die SAL
nie net gaan oor die beskerming van die SAL as een van die oudste
lugrederye ter wêreld nie, maar ook oor die onbestendigheid van die
lugredery-industrie.

Die vraag wat ek egter wil vra, is: Gaan dit nie eerder oor die finansiële
beskerming van ’n lugredery wat in die verlede al telkemale deur die
belastingbetaler gered moes word nie?

’n Verdere rede tot kommer is die inligting wat aan die lig gekom het nadat
die Nasionale Vergadering die wetsontwerp op 1 Maart 2007 goedgekeur het,
naamlik dat die uitvoerende hoof van die SAL volgens die Kantoor van die
Registrateur van Maatskappye en Intellektuele Eiendom, Cipro, ’n
direksielid van 38 instansies is. Die Parlement se Staande Komitee oor
Openbare Rekenings het verder bevind dat ’n ander direksielid 55
direkteurskappe beklee en dat die 11 direkteure van die SAL gesamentlik 220
direkteurskappe beklee.

Die kommentaar deur Prof Jakes Gerwel, Voorsitter van die SAL-direksie, dat
ernstige onreëlmatighede plaasgevind het en dat die gebrek aan korrekte
beheer, prosedures en stelsels by die SAL die ergste is wat hy nog by enige
instansie waarby hy al ooit betrokke was, teëgekom het, is verdere rede tot
kommer.

Ek sal graag van die Minister die versekering wil hê dat die probleme wat
tans by die SAL ervaar word indringende aandag sal geniet en dat die
belastingbetaler nie weer sal moet opdok vir verliese wat na verwagting
weer gely gaan word wanneer die huidige boekjaar op 31 Maart ten einde loop
nie.

Laastens, indien die SAL begin om meer Afrikaans te besig op sy vlugte in
stede van die oorwegende Engels en meer verbruikersvriendelike diens by
inweegtoonbanke te lewer, sal ek dit oorweeg om die nasionale lugredery
meer gereeld te ondersteun in stede van die lugredery wat ek tans gebruik,
waar ek altyd uitstekende diens kry. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister Erwin, colleagues, on 26
July 2006 the Cabinet approved SAA’s separation from Transnet as part of
Transnet’s new four-point turnaround strategy. This effectively means that
SAA will be transferred from Transnet to the government and that it will be
regulated like all state-owned public enterprises. At that stage it was
also decided that SAA, as a state-owned public enterprise, should report
directly to the Minister.

In terms of clause 4 of the Bill, the Minister for Public Enterprises may
convert SAA into a public company after the company has been transferred to
the state.

It is clear from the documents provided to the committee and the memorandum
on the objects of the legislation that the reason for transferring SAA not
only has to do with protecting SAA as one of the oldest airlines in the
world, but also with the volatility of the aviation industry.

However, the question that I would like to ask is: Is this not about the
financial protection of an airline that actually had to be rescued by the
taxpayer time and time again in the past?

Another reason for concern is the information that came to light after the
National Assembly approved the Bill on 1 March 2007, namely that, according
to the Companies and Intellectual Property Registration Office, Cipro, the
chief executive of SAA is a member of the board of directors of 38
organisations. Furthermore, Parliament’s Standing Committee on Public
Accounts found that another board member holds 55 directorships and that
the 11 directors of SAA collectively hold 220 directorships among them.

Another reason for concern is the comment by Prof Jakes Gerwel, Chairperson
of the Board of Directors of SAA, that serious irregularities had occurred
and that the lack of proper control, procedures and systems at SAA is the
worst that he has ever encountered in any organisation in which he has been
involved.

I would like to have the assurance from the Minister that the problems
currently experienced by SAA will receive urgent attention and that the
taxpayer will not have to cough up once again for the expected losses SAA
is again going to suffer when the current financial year ends on 31 March.

Finally, if SAA would start using Afrikaans more often during its flights
instead of using English predominantly, and have a more user-friendly
service at weigh-in counters, I would consider supporting the national
airline more often instead of the one that I am currently using, and from
which I always receive excellent service. [Applause.]]

Mr D G MKONO: Dumelang! [Greetings everybody!] [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Should I make a ruling first? I do
not have two speakers’ lists and this is not my mistake. I have one
speakers’ list and when I called the hon member to the podium, I was told
that I had an old speakers’ list. So my ruling is that this is not my
problem. The hon member is, of course, on the speakers’ list and I cannot
let him go back and then call another member. So we will proceed – this is
not my mistake. The Table staff will correct that. Thank you. You can
proceed, hon Mkono. Sorry about that.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I was under the impression that
we are using the speakers’ list appearing on our expensive technological
system.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): It has caused me trouble, hon Chief
Whip, you’ll remember. You are the one who was on my case when I preferred
to use the technological system, unaware that it had changed. As I was
reading the speakers’ list, members were fighting me about not being at a
certain number, etc. So I have decided that I will comply with this one
that is certified by the Table staff. That is the dilemma. Can we proceed?
Mr D G MKONO: I am caught by surprise, but the ruling is fine by me.

Chairperson, Minister and hon members of the NCOP, it is with a sense of
occasion that I speak as a member of the Select Committee on Labour and
Public Enterprises on the South African Airways Bill which, inter alia,
attempts to facilitate the transfer of SAA shares and interest from
Transnet to the state – which I am sure will go a long way in promoting
investor confidence, both in the domestic and international economy.

Having listened to the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Labour and
Public Enterprises on how she tabulated the objects and content of this
legislation, I will not repeat her.

Uyibeke yacaca gcaa okomva webhokhwe, Mama. [What you have said is crystal
clear, hon member.]

You see, because this gives SAA an opportunity to focus on its core
functions of passenger transport services and cargo transport services, air
charter services and other related services will be vital to South Africa’s
economic development and other developments.

The strategic importance of SAA in the region and on the continent also
requires that the airline be capable of fulfilling its core mandate.

This is a progressive piece of legislation that I am sure, if sustained and
extended, will enhance the gateway to the 2010 World Cup where the
enthusiasm of the people has to be mobilised; where unity of the people on
the continent has to be infused into our daily lives and practices,
inspired by our culture.

In conclusion, the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises
endorses this Bill and calls on all the members of this House to support
the Bill, because this Bill also explicitly states that this conversion
does not affect the terms and conditions of service of any employee of SAA.

Ngoko sicela libe linye. [Therefore we request that we speak with one
voice.]

Thank you, Chairperson.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson, I thought your ruling said
that you were using speakers’ list L2. I am not sure whether you have that
copy?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Chief Whip, I only have L2. I
was told the other one was wrong. When I called the hon Mkono, the
incorrect list was taken away from me by the officer in front of me. I only
have the one that he has given me.

Could the House please bear with me? In terms of this list, the one that I
am told is the correct one and that was given to me late, the hon Mkono was
the eighth speaker and was to speak before the hon Minister replied to the
debate. Hon Mabe is fourth. So ordinarily I wouldn’t want to cause
fundamental changes in the speakers’ list. The only omission was that, in
terms of this one, I was supposed to have called the hon Mabe, but I called
the hon Mkono. It is fitting and proper that I must call the hon Mabe. I am
sure that is understandable.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I wouldn’t like to delay the
proceedings of this august House, but I would like this matter to be dealt
with immediately after this plenary, since my office is the one responsible
for the final compilation of the speakers’ list. If it is in accordance
with the earlier speakers’ list you were referring to, then it would mean
that Ms Mabe should be the second last speaker before the Minister
responds. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Chief Whip, hon members, unless
I am guided otherwise, the speakers’ list I have in front of me, which I
opened the proceedings with, started with the hon Minister, followed by the
chairperson, followed by the hon Terblanche. As I called the hon Mkono,
there was a problem. I was told that it was the wrong list and I was given
this list. In terms of it, the hon Mabe is the fourth speaker. Okay?
[Interjections.] I think we can proceed. This is not a matter of life and
death, really.

Mrs E S MABE: House Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, special
delegates and special guests, since the democratic breakthrough in 1994,
the country has moved from being a country existing outside the
international community to one that has become an active participant in
global institutions and processes.

South Africa has taken its responsibilities as a global citizen seriously,
both globally and continentally. South Africa takes pride in SAA and has
made it a point that we live up to the standards that we set for ourselves
as a democratic country.

In his message in Sawubona magazine, the CEO of SAA, Mr Khaya Ngqula, said
that SAA “remains our number one focus as the leading airline on the
continent, and the only African airline to belong to the Star Alliance of
International Airlines. We take our role as aviation leaders seriously.”

Knowing the challenge that was faced by SAA, we believe that converting it
into a state-owned company will place it in an even better position to
market our country in all the places our flights frequent. This will also
allow us as a country to have proper oversight over something which is the
pride of our nation.

We as the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises foresee that
this is one move that will ensure the prosperity of SAA, and the benefits
will show. The country will shine during 2010 and beyond. Therefore, we
appreciate the move.

Our foreign policy is informed at the core by building a better world and a
better Africa. Our primary focus is the renewal of the African continent
and the strengthening of the building of developing countries through south-
to-south relations. SAA, the nation’s pride, is translating that policy
into reality by increasing people-to-people contact.

SAA has increased its presence on the African continent, and the countries
that have been added as destinations of late are Livingstone in Zambia,
Accra in Ghana, and Entebbe in Uganda, and there are other agreements which
SAA is entering into.

Looking at it, the national airline is a key instrument that showcases the
face of South Africa – its warmness, its receptiveness and its
responsiveness to the continent and the world. There is no other instrument
that shows its presence and footprint like SAA.

It is in that context that we in the ANC support the separation of SAA, the
nation’s pride, from the Transnet group. The state, as the sole
shareholder, will give undivided attention to the airline and will support
the nation’s pride as much as possible to ensure that people and goods are
transported to the various destinations on time. Efficiency of the airline
is critical in this pressured and highly competitive industry.

I want to conclude by saying that the executives should involve Parliament
at all times in the changes that take place in state-owned enterprises,
including SAA. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Minister and hon members, as SAA is not
core to Transnet’s freight business, the decision to separate it is the
correct one. I want to say that upfront.

However, what is needed for a rapidly developing economy that requires
reliable and extensive air transport capacity is expressed in the state’s
desire to promote air links. In terms of the state’s developmental
orientation, South African Airways is regarded as the national carrier and
a strategic asset that would enable the state to preserve its ability to
contribute to key domestic interregional and international air linkages.
The state intends to retain it as the national carrier.

However, the recapitalisation of South African Airways must be based on a
model which is sustainable and which takes into account the growth of a low-
cost airline sector which is likely to take away some market share from
SAA. The positioning of Mango in this regard is critical, and its precise
relationship with SAA in terms of finance arrangements must be sorted out.

However, the shareholders management Bill which will be dealt with later
this year is critical to speaking to government’s arrangements: Why does
the Department of Public Enterprises want to include developmental
objectives in an airline and what would be the implications thereof? One
interpretation might be that if an airline operates in a commercial
environment, it might be expected to fulfil developmental objectives at the
expense of commercial objectives. That would then have implications for the
viability of the balance sheet of the airline.

It is possible to assume that developmental objectives might have been
imposed on the airline and these would not be appropriate at this time. It
would be assumed that these objectives were imposed over and above the
defined economic objectives as stated in sentence one to the preamble.

It is clear that the state regards SAA as the national carrier and a
strategic asset, as it will assist the state with certain things and this
is the reason the state intended to retain it as the national carrier.

SAA finds itself in financial trouble once again and Minister Erwin is
committing government to refunding the airline, possibly with R4 billion,
arguing that it is vital for the state to keep control. Why? The airline
cannot serve the poor; at best it can provide some strategic role in
establishing businesses and tourism links, but SAA has done neither.

In fact, tourism officials cite it as a major obstacle to boosting the
tourism trade to South Africa as it opposes giving more routes to foreign
airlines. In launching its own heavily subsidised low-cost carrier, Mango,
in South Africa, it is starting a competitive market that is functioning
well and has boosted affordable air travel in South Africa. We, however, do
support the Bill, Minister. [Time expired.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister of Public Enterprises, hon
Chairperson of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, hon
members and our supporting staff, the debate on the South African Airways
Bill came at the right time as we are experiencing environmental turbulence
in the form of tornados and cyclones.

In times of uncertainty when roads and bridges are washed away, air
transport remains the only option to save people and the universe. My own
experience dates back to 1987 when we had to assist communities that had
experienced floods and cyclones. I ended up seeking to lease aeroplanes to
reach various places.

The proposal to have South African Airways removed from Transnet to be a
public enterprise as a public company is commended. The present scenario of
involvement in the whole of Africa necessitates urgent governmental
decisions in terms of having flights go to areas that need help. I take as
an example the trips we made during the DRC elections, where roads were in
terrible conditions.

As we prepare for 2010, strong air transport is a must, as is the
transportation of certain goods urgently, like fresh food, vegetables and
flowers. [Interjections.] Oh yes, I am coming to that. [Laughter.]

That is the gold of Africa - let’s just say that. Our South African Airways
has to be a stand-alone entity to make sure that we benefit quickly from it
without our getting entangled perhaps in long debates on the issue of
public ownership.

Other problems will be dealt with internally. The IFP supports the Bill. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: I greet the hon Chairperson and the hon Minister, all
protocol having been observed. It was about time, when the Minister for
Public Enterprises approved Transnet’s four-point turnaround strategy
during 2004. This strategy focuses on the core freight services. The
intention that SAA be a stand-alone state-owned enterprise and that it
report directly to the hon Minister are good intentions. Also, the
intention of the state to use SAA to promote its main business, trading and
tourism links within the African continent and internationally is
applauded.

We understand that this will contribute to a strong aviation platform to
assist in the development of the economic growth of the continent. This, we
trust, will have a stronger impact on Africa in that our neighbouring
brothers and sisters will be able to make a good living within their own
countries. If we can achieve that, then xenophobia in South Africa may
diminish.

However, the state will have to look at service improvement and security
with regard to luggage. We believe that there is insurance in that
employees will be granted a deal that is not less than what they are
getting now. Mango, in some ways, is giving good prices for making use of
their services and enabling the underprivileged to also know what it means
to fly in an aircraft, hence competition is promoted.

We trust that SAA, under the shareholdership of the state, will give all
South African citizens a happy flying experience. The ID is not against the
Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you
to all the hon members for their contributions and the support that was
given. Let me deal with a few specific issues that have come up, reply to
them and then also respond to some of the important issues that have been
raised by members in various ways.

Firstly, on the question of more Afrikaans, I am sure many languages could
be spoken, quite clearly. I don’t think that we should assign our loyalties
to an airline on the basis of any particular language. The cabin crew and
the pilots, if you have noticed, do try to vary their languages according
to what they can speak, but quite clearly we can’t just take another
language other than English, which is turning out to be global in the
airline industry, and promote that.

Our aim is to be friendly and approachable to all. I think that what we are
very proud of is that if you look at the cabin crew of SAA, it is extremely
diverse and very representative of South Africans, and on most flights you
would probably find virtually all South African languages spoken by
somebody other than the Minister who is sitting in the front.

Some other points have been raised. Let me deal specifically with the
suggestion that SAA is an obstacle to tourism. I think we must be
realistic. SAA is far and away the biggest carrier in and out of South
Africa and inside South Africa. In fact, this is one of the key reasons
that we have to consider in terms of keeping it as the staple airline.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister and hon members, can I,
without mentioning names, say that there is a tendency, and it is very
persistent, of members soliciting me to make a ruling when they
persistently haggle amongst each other even when the Minister is speaking.
Can I call for self-restraint on the part of those members, without
mentioning names? When they say wrong things to each other, they rise on a
point of order: “Protect me against this.” But when they talk and haggle
with each other, they don’t say, “Chairperson, now we are haggling; stop
the Minister so that we do the same.”

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you, Chairperson, for that
protection. Fortunately, having had much union experience I think it is
quite mild, but thank you for the protection. [Interjections.] But you
should keep quiet ... [Inaudible.] I don’t want to disagree with the
Chairperson; you should please keep quiet especially when I am talking.
[Laughter.]

The notion that SAA is an obstacle, as I have indicated, is not correct
because from the pure size of the carriage it is crucial to our tourism
industry. There are certain disputes with some airlines about the number of
slots we have and these are the things we would like to overcome. The
question can be turned the other way round and that’s a very important
point. That’s why, as I will explain later, the state is prepared to
capitalise the airline.

SAA is so significant in our market that there is absolutely no guarantee
that if it were to fail anyone could replace it. This is really something
you have to consider and I will come back to that in a moment. I think SAA
is absolutely central to not only air traffic in South Africa and most of
Africa, but also to tourism. It really is crucial.

Other members have raised important points and I will cover them very
quickly. I have just stated how important SAA is. I have said this before
and I am saying it again: SAA is a national asset. There are only a handful
of countries in the world that have an airline as large, as old and with a
reputation that SAA has. Now this is something that we can all justifiably
be proud of and it is a great credit to all those who have worked in SAA
over many years. It is a very important asset, particularly for South
Africa as it grows and particularly for us as we expand into the World Cup
period, and particularly for Africa.

This is not some kind of ideological position we have taken that must be in
state hands. We have just looked at the facts. Can we be certain that an
airline as big and as effective as SAA would replace it if we sold or
closed it? We can’t.

Also, those of you who have studied the airline industry - and if you were
looking at it now - will see that an exceptionally important agreement has
just been reached. If you have been watching, you would know that this is
between the European Union and the United States. This agreement will, if
implemented, although there is some doubt about this, completely change the
whole scenario for European airlines.

They can fly from different cities into the United States - United States
airlines can fly in. Now, if I am British Airways or Lufthansa or Air
France or United Airlines, which market do you think I am going to take
more seriously: South Africa or Europe-US? It is obvious. I have to take
Europe-US more seriously.

That is not because they don’t like us or anything like that. It is because
the competitive environment in the traffic between the US and Europe will
be so intense that no management or board of any airline operating in that
area can possibly avoid focusing their minds on it. So, as we try to expand
our air traffic, it may well be that everyone else says, “Look, South
Africa, we love you, but we haven’t got the resources to put in more
flights.”

I think we must not lose sight of this. This decision has been taken
carefully and a major agreement like that happening across Europe and the
US is exactly the kind of thing we foresaw leading to some difficult
situations. The question is, and it is a valid one: Should the state, with
taxpayers’ money, capitalise SAA? Now, that is something we had to think
hard about. It is a difficult situation.

The reality is that SAA has been under the wing, if you like, of Transnet,
a much bigger company. So its capital needs have been hidden. You can’t see
them, because they are on the Transnet balance sheet. What we saw was - and
it was a very difficult and unfortunate moment, and SAA was not the only
company that suffered from this – that we made massive losses on the hedge
books. Virtually every South African private company also lost money on
those hedge books. What we see is that we have had to make up for that
loss, but it didn’t add any new capital to SAA. So you’ve taken SAA out of
Transnet in a position where it’s pretty much flat- what’s called “its
gearing ratio” - the borrowing to equity is very high.

Those of you who are familiar with financial matters know that you can’t
have a gearing ratio that high. It makes you vulnerable to the fluctuations
in revenue; it makes it almost impossible for you to borrow further money.
So we will put some more capital into SAA to give it a reasonable chance to
move forward, but on the basis that it carry out certain key restructuring
actions. These are essentially to focus its attention, as someone quoted
the Chief Executive Officer, to be an African airline that reaches out
globally and has links with some of the key cities on every single
continent.

We will also be simplifying the structure. We will be bringing equity
partners into the cargo business and into the technical business. We are
taking steps to stabilise and strengthen SAA. We are now doing a thorough
analysis of all our costs, the efficiency operations and how we can change
those.

We have to capitalise SAA, but we are not doing it in a mindless way. We
are doing it on the basis that there are challenges and targets that they
have to meet in order to move forward. This is the way we intend moving
forward.

SAA cannot expect, as we have indicated, that we can always bail it out.
The challenge for us as the Department of Public Enterprises and SAA is to
make certain that we can turn this airline around for the reasons I
indicated at the beginning- it is a very important airline.

The impact on the South African economy - on our tourism markets - of any
failure in SAA will be very big indeed, and any sale into the private
sector is too uncertain as to what their long-term objectives will be. So
for the foreseeable future we intend to keep SAA in state hands and we
intend turning around its financial performance and its service and
operating performance, which I must say is good and will be improved. I
think those of you who have travelled the world are not going to find many
airlines where the service is as good as SAA. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall
first allow political parties an opportunity to make their declarations of
vote if they so wish. Is there any party that wants to make a declaration
of vote? No. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Those in
favour say “Aye”. Those against say “No”.

I think the ayes have it. The majority of members have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                         IMMIGRATION AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr O J TLHAGALE: Hon Chair and hon members of this House, the Minister of
Home Affairs the hon Mapisa-Nqakula introduced the Immigration Amendment
Bill, Bill 28 of 2006, as a section 75 Bill in the National Assembly. The
explanatory summary of the Bill was published in Government Gazette No
29169 on 31 August 2006. The Immigration Amendment Bill was referred to the
Select Committee on Social Services on 2 November 2006, and the department
formally briefed the committee on 27 February 2007.
The main objective of the Bill is to effect certain technical corrections
to the Immigration Act in order to amend and insert certain definitions.
The Bill substitutes the definition of “depart” or “departure” to make it
clear that a departure means exiting from the Republic of South Africa,
from a port of entry, to another country. It also provides for the
clarification of the revision of procedures and permits with regard to
admission to residence in and departure from the Republic.

The Bill also sets out to amend certain sections of the Act with generally
accepted drafting principles and to provide for certain transitional
matters.

With regard to the Bill’s objectives, it seeks to include cross-border and
transit permits provided for in section 24 of the Act as temporary
residence permits referred to in section 10 of the Act. Section 10 of the
Act requires a foreigner who is not a holder of a permanent residence
permit to enter the Republic only if he or she is in possession of a
temporary residence permit issued by the director–general.

The Bill further seeks to increase the period for which an intra-company
transfer work permit in section 19 of the Act may be issued. It further
seeks to provide for the issuing of an appropriate permit to the spouse or
dependent children accompanying the holder of a retired person permit. It
also provides for the withdrawal of a permanent residence permit if the
holder thereof has been convicted of an offence in terms of the Act.

The Bill also seeks to provide for certain technical corrections to the
Act. The Bill provides amendments to sections 10 to 23 which set out
stipulations pertaining to temporary residence. These sections currently
list the permits provided as temporary residence permits that may be issued
to a foreigner to the exclusion of the section 24 permits. Therefore the
amendments seek to include cross-border and transit permits as contained in
section 24 as temporary residence permits.

Section 11 of the Act currently provides that the holder of a visitor’s
permit may not conduct work unless authorised by the director-general in
the prescribed manner and subject to the prescribed requirements of the
conditions. The amending Bill thus seeks to restrict the application of
section 11(2) to conducting work in the Republic.

Currently, section 20 does not make provision for a holder of a retired
person permit to be accompanied by his or her spouse and dependent
children. The spouse and dependent children of a retired person permit
holder may currently only accompany the holder with a visitor’s permit
issued for a period of three months. This may be renewed upon application
for a further period of three months. Therefore, subsection 21(a) is
inserted to provide for the issuing of an appropriate permit to the spouse
and dependent children accompanying the holder of a retired person permit.

Section 28, dealing with the withdrawal of a permanent residence permit, is
amended in paragraph (a) in order to provide for the withdrawal of a
permanent residence permit by the director-general if the holder thereof
has been convicted of any offence in terms of this Act.

In conclusion, and on the basis of the aforementioned exposition of the
Bill, I propose that the honourable House support this amending Bill. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon member. I shall
now put the question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to.

In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties an
opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Those in favour say
“Aye”, and those against “No”. All the members voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]
Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

   SOUTH AFRICAN RED CROSS SOCIETY AND LEGAL PROTECTION OF CERTAIN EMBLEMS
                                    BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, regarding the background to the South  African
Red Cross Society and Legal Protection of Certain Emblems Bill, Bill  25  of
2006 ...

... iNingizimu Afrika ingenye yamanye amazwe  abamba  iqhaza  emihlanganweni
yase-Geneva mhla ka-12  Agasti  1949.  [...  South  Africa  is  one  of  the
countries that participated in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949.]

They are the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of  the
Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field,  the  first  convention;  the
Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the  Condition  of  Wounded,  Sick
and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea, the second  convention;  the
Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War,  the  third
convention;  and  the  Geneva  Convention  relative  to  the  Protection  of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, the fourth convention.

Iphinde  futhi  iNingizimu  Afrika  ibe  ngelinye  lamazwe   abamba   iqhaza
ngenkathi  kwakhiwa  imigomo  yokuziphatha  ebizwa  ngama-protocols.  [South
Africa is  furthermore  one  of  the  countries  that  participated  in  the
creation of the Code of Conduct called Protocols.]

These are the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions relating to  the
Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts,  which  is  Protocol
1;  and  the  Protocol  relating  to  the  Protection  of  Victims  of  Non-
International Armed Conflicts, which is Protocol 2.

Although states that are party  to  the  conventions  adopted  the  Protocol
relating to the Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem,  South  Africa
has not ratified it yet. Thus, in  terms  of  Protocol  3,  another  emblem,
which is the red crystal - was adopted in addition  to  the  three  existing
emblems. The Bill, however, recognises the two emblems  that  are  currently
in use.

The  conventions  and  protocols  are   commonly   referred   to   as   “the
conventions”.  These   conventions   emphasise   the   importance   of   the
International Committee of the Red Cross – the main body of  the  Red  Cross
Movement – as well as the importance of  national  Red  Cross  societies  in
relation to humanitarian activities in times of war as well as in  times  of
peace. The Red Cross and the Red Crescent  Movement  play  a  critical  role
during war and disasters by providing care for  victims  and  other  people,
without any partiality.

Maqondana  neNhlangano   Yesiphambano   Esibomvu,   kulo   Mthethosivivinywa
ebesiwenza, ingxenye yokuqala ibhekene  nokuxazulula  lawa  amagama  abhalwe
kuwona.  Ingxenye  yesibili  yona  ichaza  kabanzi  ukuthi  iyini  yona   le
Nhlangano  Yesiphambano  Esibomvu.   Kusukela   kwingxenye   yesibili   kuya
kwingxenye  yesithathu  kuvezwa  ukuthi  kungani   iNhlangano   Yesiphambano
Esibomvu ibalulekile lapha eNingizimu Afrika  kanye  nohlu  okufanele  ngabe
isebenza ngalo mayelana nesigatshana sesibili nesigatshana sesithathu.

Mayelana   nezimpawu   zama-emblem    ezichazwe    ngaphansi    kweNhlangano
Yesiphambano Esibomvu, olokuqala yilolu lwesiphambano  esibomvu,  olwesibili
kube yi-red crescent moon, olwesithathu kube yibhubesi  elibomvu  nelanga  –
kodwa ezingasasetshenziswa.

Isivumelwano sona  silawula  khona  ukuthi  izimpawu  ezikuloluhlu  kufanele
sizisebenzise   kanjani,   nokuthi   yiziphi   izimo    lapho    kungafanele
sizisebenzise  khona.  Kunemiyalelo  ebekiwe   ukuze   abantu   bangazitholi
bezisebenzisa lapho kungadingeki khona. (Translation of  isiZulu  paragraphs
follows.)

[With regard to the Red Cross Society in this Bill that we were  discussing,
Part One deals with the definitions of terms used in  this  Bill.  Part  Two
explains clearly what this Red Cross Society really is.  From  Part  Two  to
Part Three there  is  an  explanation  of  why  the  Red  Cross  Society  is
important to South Africa, and operational procedures are  listed  in  terms
of sub-sections two and three.

Regarding the emblems described under the Red Cross Society, the  first  one
is that of the Red Cross Society, the second one is the Red  Crescent  moon,
the third one is the Red Lion and Sun, which is no longer in use.

The convention controls the prescription regarding the use  of  emblems  and
also mentions certain instances in which they must not be  used.  There  are
conditions that are stipulated so that people can not find themselves  using
these emblems where they are not supposed to.]

Part Four of the Bill contains the general provisions relating to
delegations and assignments, regulations, and the effect on implementation
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Act, Act 27 of
2002. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! I shall now put the
question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with
Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties an opportunity to make their
declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Those in favour say
“Aye”, and those against “No”. All members voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

           FOODSTUFFS, COSMETICS AND DISINFECTANTS AMENDMENT BILL

              (Consideration of Report of Mediation Committee)

Order disposed of without debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! As there is no speakers’
list, I shall now put the question in respect of the Fourth Order. The
question is that the report of the Mediation Committee be agreed to. As
this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
House. Are all delegation heads present? [Interjections.]

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. There are none. We shall
now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical
order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the
Chairperson whether they vote in favour of, against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape? The Eastern Cape is absent. Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State is in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Gauteng supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Ke ya rena. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?
Mr A J L MOSEKI: North West re a dumela. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Eight provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

           FOODSTUFFS, COSMETICS AND DISINFECTANTS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Order disposed of without debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): As there is no speakers’ list, I
shall now put the question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. As
the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
House. Are all delegation heads present? [Interjections.]

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape? The Eastern Cape is absent. Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyaxhasa, Sihlalo. [We support, Chairperson.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Mr J M SIBIYA: Ha seketela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANGA: Mpumalanga supports.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Bokone-Bophirima e dumela. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Eight provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LABOUR AND PUBLIC
    ENTERPRISES - INSTRUMENT FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
                   INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION (ILO)

Mr J M SIBIYA: Comrade Chairperson, colleagues, comrades, ladies and
gentlemen, the select committee believes that the liberation of humanity
will come when and only when everybody is liberated and freed from want in
both spiritual and material terms.

The International Labour Organisation, the ILO, is understood by the select
committee to be one of the vehicles better poised to contribute greatly to
the struggle for that freedom; and more so because the ILO champions the
interests of the working class in the whole world.

The amendment of the outdated conventions and codes of practice enable any
organisation, the ILO included, to remain relevant to current situations
and circumstances and to be more effective in its undertakings.

The select committee has recommended that our government ratify the
amendment for the sole purpose of making the ILO responsive to the demands
of today in the labour situation. We believe it will enable the governments
in every country to remain on their toes in the pursuance of the observance
of and respect for workers’ interests at home, avoiding the possibility of
a conflict flaring up unnecessarily.

Let me quote one of the sons of the soil of Africa, a pan-African, a
diplomat and the former Secretary-General of the United Nations, and that
is Boutros Boutros-Ghali of Egypt. While addressing the UN Decolonisation
Committee, he said in part that war was planned in the mind and that the
best strategy to fight it was to fight it while it was still being planned
and not allow the guns to roar.

So the ratification of the amendment will contribute towards the reality
and meaning of the statement I referred to, made by the former Secretary-
General of the UN.

We believe our country is one of those that are highly committed to human
rights, not because of history but because of its performance, as everybody
can see. Let me give one example. When a meeting of the ILO was called in
Geneva, which our current Minister of Labour Membathisi Mdladlana attended,
I was personally very impressed that his was the only report that included
a programme that was going to see to it that every facility in this country
was made accessible to all South Africans including our disabled brothers
and sisters. As a result the ILO also adopted that programme. That was a
brilliant move.

The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises supports the Bill and
urges this House to do so unreservedly so that we can see the fruits
thereof. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the House. Are all delegation heads
present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chairperson whether
they vote in favour of, against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?
Absent. Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyahambisana nayo mphathi sihlalo, siyayixhasa. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Mr J M SIBIYA: Ri khou tendelana nayo. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Ha yi seketela. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Re tsamaya mmogo. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr A J L MOSEKI: North West re dumelelana le yona. [North West is in
agreement.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Eight provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Before I proceed, hon members, my
understanding is that there are duty Whips deployed to deal in particular
with the attendance of members in this House, and these Whips are the hon Z
C Ntuli, the hon H F Matlanyane and the hon J F Terblanche. Could you make
sure that the members from all provinces are present, particularly the
delegation heads? Thank you very much.

   CONSIDERTATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
    AFFAIRS - AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA, THE REPUBLIC OF
  MOZAMBIQUE, THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE ON
           THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LIMPOPO WATERCOURSE COMMISSION

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, hon members, the Southern African
Development Community revised protocol on shared watercourses, signed in
August 2000, has the objectives of fostering closer co-operation,
sustainable and co-ordinated management, the protection and utilisation of
shared watercourses, and the advancement of the SADC agenda of regional
integration and poverty alleviation entered into in 2003. The protocol
further calls for the need to establish basin institutions such as water
basin commissions, joint water commissions and sharing agreements.

Within this framework, South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Mozambique have
entered into an agreement for the establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse
Commission. The objectives of the commission include the following: to
advise the parties and to provide them with recommendations on the usage of
the water of the Limpopo River; to co-ordinate development of water
infrastructure and major investments such as dams; to promote regional co-
operation and the strengthening of relationships among the four countries;
to act as an instrument to facilitate the sharing of benefits amongst these
four countries; and to promote stakeholder participation in decision-
making.

The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs therefore recommends
that the Council, in terms of section 231 of the Constitution, approve this
agreement. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the House. Are all delegation heads
present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Eastern Cape? The Eastern Cape is absent. Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Sihambisana nayo. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Mr J M SIBIYA: Re a dumela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: A dumela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr A J L MOSEKI: North West e a dumela. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 22 MARCH 2007
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs  on
   the  International  Agreement  between  the  Republic  of  Botswana,  the
   Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of  Zimbabwe  and  the  Republic  of
   South Africa for the establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse Commission,
   dated 06 March 2007:


    The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
    considered the request for approval by Parliament of the International
    Agreement between the Republic of Botswana, the Republic of Mozambique,
    the Republic of Zimbabwe and the Republic of South Africa for the
    establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse Commission, referred to it,
    recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
    Constitution, approve the said Agreement.



   Report to be considered.

                            FRIDAY, 23 MARCH 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
     The Speaker and the Chairperson, on 22 March 2007, called a Joint
     Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces,
     as follows:

                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT

     The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
     of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of
     Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
     Parliament for Tuesday, 27 March 2007 at 12:00 in order to present the
     new emblem of Parliament to the Joint Sitting.


    _______________________                  ________________________
    B MBETE, MP                              M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                           CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Finance Bill [B5–
    2007] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 20 March 2007:

     The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
     Finance Bill [B5– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77), referred to it,
     reports that it has agreed to the Bill.



                            MONDAY, 26 MARCH 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister of Housing


         (a)     Housing Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill [B 6
             - 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 29521 of 21 January 2007.]
             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Housing of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Communications

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for  2007  to
      2010.


2. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for 2007 to
      2008.

                           TUESDAY, 27 MARCH 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
    (a)     The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
        National Council of Provinces, as co-chairpersons of the Joint
        Rules Committee, present the First Report of the Joint Rules
        Committee for 2007, dated 5 March 2007, as follows:

               FIRST REPORT OF THE JOINT RULES COMMITTEE, 2007

The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, as co-Chairpersons, present the First Report of the
Joint Rules Committee,
dated 5 March2007, as follows:

On 18 November 2004, the Joint Rules Committee (JRC) adopted the Governance
Model of Parliament, subject to the adjustment of details as identified at
that meeting.

At an earlier JRC meeting on 21 September 2004, it had been resolved that
the Presiding Officers and the Secretariat would reconsider and refine
proposals before the Committee in regard to the Model, paying particular
attention to four issues, one of which was the role of the Chief Whips’
Forum and the Quarterly Consultative Forum.

The other three issues related to the relationship between the Directing
Authority (referred to as the Parliamentary Oversight Authority) and the
JRC, representivity on the Directing Authority and the participation of the
Secretary to Parliament in the Directing Authority.  These issues were
subsequently resolved.

The remaining issue that needed consideration was therefore the
relationship between the Chief Whips’ forum and the Quarterly Consultative
forum.  This issue was considered and resolved by the JRC at a meeting on
21 June 2006.

Once the Model has been approved by the House, a range of rule changes will
be required.  The Joint Subcommittee on Review of the Joint Rules will then
be required to draft appropriate rule amendments.

B Mbete, MP                                        MJ Mahlangu, MP
Speaker of the National Assembly                         Chairperson of the
NCOP
Report to be considered.

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T070327E – insert 2 – PAGES 500-510

2.    The Minister in The Presidency
    (a)     The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and
        its Optional Protocol, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

    (b)     Explanatory memorandum to the Convention on the Rights of
        Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol.


        Referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of
        Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons
        for consideration and report.


National Council of Provinces
1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Written statement submitted in terms of section 106(3) of the
        Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000):
        Mbombela Local Municipality by the Mpumalanga MEC for Local
        Government and Housing.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Division of Revenue
     Bill [B 3 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 27 March 2007:


        The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
        the Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec
        76), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as
        a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on
    Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill [B 20B – 2006] (National Assembly
     – sec 76), dated 27 March 2007:

        The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
        considered the subject of the Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill
        [B 20B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and
        classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill,
        reports the Bill with amendments [B 20C – 2006].

