---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 October 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-10-17
---

WEDNESDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mnr A C NEL: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis van die volgende voorstel:

   Dat die Huis ’n debat voer oor die voorgestelde klassifisering van
   grondeienaarskap volgens ras, soos vervat in die Gutto-verslag oor
   grondeienaarskap deur buitelanders.

Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A C NEL: Chairperson, I hereby give notice of the following motion:

   That the House debates the proposed classification of land ownership
   according to race, as contained in the Gutto report on land ownership by
   foreigners.

Thank you.]

                         SOUTH AFRICAN EXPRESS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Declarations of vote:

Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Chairperson, South African Express was established in
1994 as a regional feeder airline to SA Airways. Some of Transnet’s
subsidiaries and business divisions that are strategic to the objectives of
government have been transferred to become stand-alone entities, as was the
case with SAA.

Needless to say, whereas SAA is still struggling to survive independently,
South African Express can be considered to be a successful, profitable
regional airline.
In 2004, the Minister for Public Enterprises approved Transnet’s four-point
turnaround strategy to focus on core freight services, namely the provision
of rail, ports and pipelines, which take Transnet completely out of the
aviation sector.

On 8 April 2007, Cabinet approved the separation of South African Express
from Transnet to be represented by the Minister for Public Enterprises as a
state-owned enterprise.

Siende dat Sax reeds op ’n winsbasis funksioneer, is die vraag hoekom dit
nie geprivatiseer kan word nie. Die regering is van mening dat dit nie
moontlik is dat ’n private lugredery aan die streeks- en binnelandse
kleinmarkbehoeftes sal voorsien nie en dat hierdie mark dus weer afgeskeep
sal word.

Sax opereer tans na sewe streekbestemmings en 11 plaaslike bestemmings met
ongeveer 120 vlugte per dag. Tans het Sax net op sekere roetes mededinging
met ander lugrederye. Die DA maak beswaar dat Sax as ’n skedule 3(b) in
plaas van ’n skedule 2 van die Openbare Finansiële Bestuurswet
geklassifiseer word, net soos in die geval met Infraco, en sal ek dit by
die volgende debat bespreek.

Die DA wil dit ook duidelik stel dat Sax nie ’n tweede SAL moet word wat
kort-kort bakhand staan vir geld nie en wat vir oorlewing van die
belastingbetaler sal bedel nie. Indien dit nie meer aan die vereistes van
openbare onderneming voldoen nie en in ’n finansiële krisis ontaard in die
toekoms, moet dit gelikwideer word. Indien Sax suksesvol finansieel
funksioneer en ter wille van effektiewe bestuur, moet dit geprivatiseer
word ter wille van groter mededinging in die openbare mark. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In view of the fact that Sax, South African Express, is already operating
profitably, the question is why it cannot be privatised. The government is
of the opinion that it is not possible for a private airline to meet
regional and domestic small market needs and that this market will
therefore be neglected again.

Currently, Sax is flying to seven regional destinations and 11 local
destinations, with approximately 120 flights daily. At present Sax only has
competition with other airlines on certain routes. The DA objects to Sax
being classified under schedule 3(b) instead of schedule 2 of the Public
Finance Management Act, as is the case with Infraco, and I will discuss
this in the next debate.

The DA also wants to make it clear that Sax should not become a second SAA
that regularly has to beg for more money and that will need money from the
taxpayer in order to survive. If it no longer complies with the
requirements of a public enterprise and turns into a financial crisis in
the future, it should be liquidated. If Sax is financially successful, and
for the sake of effective management, it should be privatised in the
interest of greater competitiveness on the open market. I thank you.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Mr Chairperson, comrades, friends, this is so predictable
and even boring. We’ve addressed this issue, really. This detains the House
unduly. However, essentially, on the issue of privatisation, it’s not the
answer to everything. SA Airways itself was privatised and a portion of it
was sold to Swissair. Let us learn from that experience.

Secondly, if you look at the role of this airline, it’s addressing the
needs, substantially, of sectors of the airline industry not catered for by
the private sector. Only a state-owned airline can do that, not just in
this country but in many other countries in the world.

Thirdly, look at the issue of a broader developmental state. The role of
state airlines in that regard has to be taken into consideration.

Fourthly, yes, we have repeatedly said to the management, including the CEO
of SA Express that they cannot expect to come back to the National Treasury
every time they have difficulties. Indeed, in our report to Parliament, we
have said that they will not be rescued by the national fiscus all the
time.

Finally, yes, there is the possibility of the private sector playing a role
but privatisation is not the only answer. There are many ways in which the
private sector can indeed get involved. Yes, if it comes to it that this
airline is a drain on the resources of the country and if it precludes us
from providing housing and electricity – we are clear that an airline is
not a basic need in the way water, food and clothing are - then we will
consider privatisation. It’s not a principle.

However, let’s not be so dark and pessimistic. Dr Van Dyk says, on the one
hand, that this SA Express is being managed very well. On the other hand,
he’s insisting that it’s going to be a failure. What is this if it is not
the typical doom and gloom of the DA?

On scheduling, we did not decide on this lightly. We’ll discuss it in the
forthcoming debate. Both sides presented their cases – those who argued for
Schedule 2 and those who favoured Schedule 3(b). We even said to the
researcher: Present a balanced argument, which Eric Boskati did - and thank
you very much, if he’s here.

Indeed the department itself gave us a very itemised presentation of the
advantages and disadvantaged of both sides – Schedule 2 and schedule 3(b).
Finally, we said that instead of voting on the Bill in the last week of the
last quarter, we should defer the matter to give the committee, the various
parties and the executive more time to decide which Schedule is more
appropriate.
In fact, Dr Manie van Dyk and his party came up with nothing except to
bleat: Schedule 2! Schedule 2! Schedule 2! Where’s the argument? Even on
privatisation ... [Time expired.]

Bill read a second time.


                           BROADBAND INFRACO BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Hon Chairperson, members of the
National Assembly and the people in the gallery, I’m very pleased to be
able to introduce the debate on the Broadband Infraco Bill in the National
Assembly.

In the modern industrial economy, the existence of high speed, high
capacity telecommunications infrastructure is a major driver of economic
growth and more accessible socioeconomic services such as health and
education. In fact, there is little doubt that this is a strategic
necessity for contemporary growth and development.

It is this understanding that led the government to decide to obtain a key
fibre optic national network, developed originally by Transnet and Eskom,
and put it in state hands. This will allow for a strategic investment
programme to take place according to a clear timetable and with a clear
intent to modernise our broadband infrastructure and lower the cost to the
economy of such capacity.

This will be achieved not through some form of subsidy but by a long-term
strategic investment by the state, where our pay-back periods are longer
and the rate of return required, determined by a number of economic
calculations rather than profit maximisation, is the prime determinant.

If these objectives of high speed, high capacity and internationally
competitive telecommunications pricings are met in the medium to long-term,
the state can then reconsider the need to retain total or partial ownership
of such infrastructure.

The background to the decision to retain the long-range fibre optic assets
of Eskom and Transnet in state hands spans some years and takes place after
many complex negotiations. I think the difficulties that this presented in
the processes related to consultation, licensing and scheduling in terms of
the Public Finance Management Act are fairly commented on in the portfolio
committee report on the Broadband Infraco Bill.

There is no doubt that everything could have been smoother. However, this
is rather an unusual situation not fully envisaged in our legislation which
is relatively youthful in implementation. Accordingly, I would like to
thank the portfolio committee for the long hours and intense work they put
into the processing of the Bill.

The fact that the Portfolio Committees on Communications and Finance were
consulted on many matters and, in the case of Communications, participated
actively, was additional testimony to both the complexity of the policy
issues that arose and the amount of work this relatively short Bill
entailed.

I would like to thank the former chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Communications for the support he gave the DPE, the Department of Public
Enterprises, and the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises.

Let me deal very briefly – I’m sure members of the committee will do so in
some detail - with the key issues that have arisen in the inputs to the
portfolio committee hearings.

Broadband Infraco is a precise intervention in our telecommunications
sector. Whilst South Africa’s telecommunications industry is well
established with world-class companies, it is characterised by a limited
number of incumbents who hold significant market power, and the size of our
economy is likely to make this a relatively permanent feature of this
economy.

This means that simply licensing additional players does not significantly
alter the market structure, and global market forces may lead to an
underinvestment in large-scale national infrastructure within such a
compact market as ours. Accordingly, leaving such critical investment
purely to market forces was too risky, given our urgent need for greater
and more internationally competitive broadband capacity.

However, we are confident that the new Electronic Communications Act and
licensing conditions now in progress will lead to active private sector
development in the multiplicity of value-added services that utilise
broadband.

It is important to note that Broadband Infraco will not enter these areas
in competition with the private sector. It seeks to ensure long-range
broadband capacity that will liberate such value-added services from the
constraints of capacity and cost.

To this end, it will focus on intercity, national networks and undersea
cables. In the latter case we will work with other players to ensure that a
timely and large capacity broadband connection to the world is available.
By making long-distance connectivity available to the private sector on a
cost-plus basis, Infraco will commoditise long-distance infrastructure and
will bring the South African telecommunications market in line with others
worldwide.

There is general agreement that Broadband Infraco should be licensed as
soon as is practical. Indeed, this is important if we are to achieve our
objectives. Following the debate on possible options, I am certain that we
should follow the processes preferred by the Department of Communications
and Icasa.

From the side of the Department of Public Enterprises, we will work
actively with the Department of Communications and Icasa to facilitate
progress in this regard since, at the end of the day, the real strategic
objective is to transform South Africa’s telecommunications sector into a
highly competitive player in the interests of our economy and society.

Other strategic projects such as the SKA, the Square Kilometre Array,
Sanren, the SA National Research Network and the university network, will
be almost impossible to achieve without the capacity we need - and of
course we will need a great deal of capacity for 2010 in the form of
broadband.

Let me say that many submissions made in the portfolio committee raised
what I believe were legitimate interests, but I think that at the end of
the day there was very clear consensus that this intervention was useful
and was an important strategic intervention.

The issue of the scheduling of the Public Finance Management Act for
Broadband Infraco did bring to light many different viewpoints and I value
the process adopted by the portfolio committee to inform themselves on the
issues and indeed to come to some clear views on their part.
However, as the portfolio committee indicates in its report, the executive
had to give the lead on the matter. This matter has now been resolved
through a consultation process in the executive and Broadband Infraco will
be a Schedule 2 entity with specific reporting and monitoring requirements.


The completion of this legislative process will allow for the establishment
of a company that we believe is set to revolutionise the ICT sector and
move us one step closer to making more affordable broadband access a
reality.

I would like to thank the leadership of Neotel, Violesh Sanchar Nigam
Limited, VSNL and the Tata Group for their farsightedness and support for
South Africa’s long-term strategic interests in telecommunications. In
doing this, they have often been prepared to accommodate us rather than
insist on immediate commercial requirements. Such an approach is highly
valued and we have undertaken to continue to work together to meet these
strategic needs.

I have a very high regard for the work of the Portfolio Committee on Public
Enterprises. The debates in the hearings on the Bill have been rigorous and
engaging and the DPE has learnt and benefited from the vigilance and full
commitment to this process on the part of the committee members.

All the stakeholders I have talked to have expressed their respect for the
committee and the process. Accordingly, I would like to express my thanks
and admiration to the portfolio committee for a job well done and for
putting up with some of the unusual circumstances I referred to earlier.

In particular, I would like to express a special word of thanks to the
outgoing portfolio committee chairperson, Yunus Carrim. We will indeed miss
you but we know that you will add value wherever you’ll be. I know that I
will still turn to you for advice from time to time, not only on political
matters.

I would like to welcome hon Fatima Chohan-Khota as the new chairperson, and
she is rapidly informing herself on the intricacies of this new challenge.
The manner in which these two experienced comrades have handled the
changeover has been excellent. I’m sure that this very strong portfolio
committee will continue to go from strength to strength as we deal with the
interesting and important challenges ahead in Asgisa. With the support of
the portfolio committee, I commend this Bill to the House. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr Y WANG: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, members and the public, I’ve
promised that I would deliver this speech in English. IT has always been my
passion. So today I just want to convince you why this Broadband Infraco
Bill is important by outlining the problems and challenges in our
telecommunications industry.

The monopoly of infrastructure by Telkom has been there for years. It’s an
example of privatisation gone wrong. Privatisation has made Telkom very
efficient at exploiting our public in terms of its pricing and services.
This has been confirmed by many studies and reports.

For example, while we are getting excited about getting more ADSL, in Japan
and China one already gets fibre optic cables directly to one’s home. While
we worry about our monthly data capturing in South Africa, for many years,
we have been joined by foreigners enjoying unlimited data transfer. These
are exactly some of the reasons why state intervention through Infraco is
important; it’s exactly to correct this market failure.

Infraco also provides for capital investment at the expense of the public
good, while improving and modernising our infrastructure. Now Infraco can
act as a competition enabler to level the playing field to provide
competitive broadband access both on cost and capacity. It will be a growth
enabler for our economy and will particularly assist in youth development.
South African youths are both fortunate and unfortunate. They are fortunate
in being able to join the global market with advanced technology. At the
same time, they are unfortunate not to have the cheap resources available
as well as access to information and knowledge, despite the available
technology.

Now, Infraco will enable a true information highway for our youth as
knowledge workers. Imagine Thapelo, from a rural town in Mpumalanga,
accessing our national archive through broadband, or delivering design
projects for contract work in Beijing via high-resolution video streaming.

This knowledge empowerment is what we have yet to realise. Currently,
Thapelo is limited to the local library with its limited resources and
limited archives. Should he attempt to make telephonic contact with his
clients in Beijing, they probably would not be able to understand him
because Thapelo would try to minimise the cost of the international call by
speaking 10 times faster than usual.

So, hon members, we ask you to support this Bill and mark our first step
towards a healthier telecommunications industry in South African.

Lastly, on behalf of the committee, I would like to thank our former
chairperson, the hon Yunus Carrim, for the leadership and guidance he
provided during the processing of this particular Bill. Thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, Transnet and Eskom’s telecommunication assets,
which were originally promised to second fixed-line operator Neotel, have
been transferred to Infraco. Infraco will now, under contract, sell
bandwidth wholesale to Neotel, which in turn will make capacity available
to other telecommunications players who were formerly dependent on Telkom.

The government wrote the Electronic Communications Act specifically to
deregulate the industry. Now, however, the state is becoming more involved
at all levels of the industry. The Minister needs to tell Parliament why
Infraco will now be 100% state-owned when, according to the way it was
presented to your own Cabinet, it would only be 72% state-owned. Was this a
further attempt to crowd out private sector investment?

Proposed changes to the Electronic Communications Act will give the
government the power to create a second Telkom monopoly, with consequences
that are potentially catastrophic. Why does the state want to own broadband
infrastructure communication facilities? Infraco now also wants to lay a
cable along the east coast of Africa as well as two other cables along the
west coast of Africa. This can be done by the private sector.

Secondly, the state also wants to take up 50% ownership of the two cables,
SEACOM and EASSY, that are to be laid along the east coast of Africa. These
two cables were already initiated by the private sector in 2000. The
private sector has long been denied opportunities in this market because of
red tape, rules, regulations and policies that are hostile to private
investment in this sector.

New entrants to the telecommunications market have to wait up to three
years for licences from Icasa. To expedite the licensing of Infraco,
though, the state initiated an amendment to the Electronic Communications
Act.

The Minister must inform Parliament about the following: Has Infraco paid
Eskom for the infrastructure it acquired from the state power utility?
Secondly, what has happened to the R627 million of taxpayers’ money that
was awarded to Infraco for the 2006-07 financial year, and why has
Parliament not been informed of this yet?

Hon Carrim, please listen for a change. The Minister, and you as well, must
also explain to Parliament why, in terms of the Public Finance Management
Act, Infraco is being listed as a Schedule 2 instead of a Schedule 3(b)
entity. Being listed as a Schedule 3(b) entity means that Treasury does not
have to be consulted should Infraco want to obtain finance on the open
market.

Furthermore, it also means that no Minister will have any control over how
much private finance Infraco may obtain. As we have seen, the result is
often that when public enterprises get into financial trouble, they come to
the taxpayer for help.

A Schedule 2 listing will also allow Infraco to determine the salaries it
pays to its management and board members. In other words, we may soon read
of yet another public entity that pays its management and board members
huge, so-called “performance bonuses” and “payment packages”. Furthermore,
Treasury must have a say in the agreement between Infraco and Neotel.

In accordance with the Municipal Systems Act, municipalities are forced to
make available, for public comment, agreements entered into with private
service providers. Why does there have to be a difference between the first
and third tiers of government?

Finally, Parliament has the right to force the executive – in this case,
the Minister – to make public the details of the agreement between his
department and Neotel. This will allow Parliament to decide whether it is
in the best interest of the public and whether it is a worthy manner in
which to spend public funds.

The DA supports the Bill. Thank you.

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, Minister and colleagues, the 21st century is
the speed competition era and if we South Africans are not able to speed up
our activities to compete with other countries then we will be out of the
race. Schedule 2 of the Public Finance Management Act will swiftly and
flexibly give Infraco access to financial support. This is very important
for today’s business entities.

Broadband costs in South Africa are extremely high. The IFP expects that
Infraco, with the government’s backing, will be the platform to support all
industries across the board in our country to compete internationally
through lower broadband costs.

The IFP further hopes that Infraco will be successful and be an example of
how state-owned enterprises, with the proper support from government, can
contribute to other industries to compete on the world stage. The IFP
supports the Bill.

I would like to use my ten seconds to quote what Madiba once said: ‘our
common humanity is more important than our differences’. On behalf of my
party, I would like to thank the former chairperson, hon Yunus Carrim. I
thank him for his sterling work in the Portfolio Committee on Public
Enterprises, not forgetting his jokes and embarrassing me in a polite way.
We know you will do justice to Justice. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the aim of this Bill is to expand the
availability and affordability of access to electronic communications. The
ACDP welcomes this expansion to the people, particularly in underdeveloped
and underserviced areas of our nation, and we are pleased to note that this
will also increase the affordability of these services.

Whilst we appreciate the concerns of certain people in the private sector,
in view of the urgent need for low-cost broadband access, the ACDP will
support this Bill.

May I also wish the hon Chohan-Khota well as she leaves to chair the
Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises. We will miss your gracious
chairing of the Portfolio Committee on Justice but we welcome her
successor, Mr Yunus Carrim, who is obviously not as good-looking as her but
we do welcome him. Thank you very much. [Laughter.]

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Sihlalo, malunga lahloniphekile, Ndvuna kanye netivakashi
tetfu ... [Chairperson, hon members, Minister and our guests ...]

... indeed across the political spectrum we all are in agreement that the
cost of telecommunication services in our country is too high. The
President has said many times that we need to do something about these
costs as they become a hindrance to our economic development.

We therefore welcome the initiative and the intervention by the Department
of Public Enterprises to ensure that you come in, intervene and act where
the market has failed to do so. In my understanding, you don’t crowd out
the private sector where they are failing to do what they are supposed to
do. We, therefore, as a portfolio committee, are fully behind and in
support of that intervention.

We have received a number of submissions during the public hearings. Some
of those were from the Department of Communications and also from the
Independent Communications Authority of South Africa. We have tried to
address their concerns.

One of the concerns which was raised by Icasa was the manner in which the
Bill suggested that Infraco should be licensed. We acceded, as a portfolio
committee, after considering quite a number of factors, that indeed Infraco
should be licensed through the normal processes of the Electronic
Communications Act.

However, we noted that this process would take time and this might delay
the intervention which the state requires. We then said that we must exempt
Infraco and deal with the amendments to the Electronic Communications Act
to ensure that the licensing of Infraco is done in a speedy way rather than
following the normal processes.

As a committee, we thought that both the Ministry of Communications and the
Ministry of Public Enterprises need to ensure that they come up with policy
directives to ensure that we don’t have a duplication of functions between
Sentech and Infraco. We think that is going to assist so that we don’t
duplicate state resources because, indeed, they might take a decision in
terms of business interests where they decide to use broadband or to follow
the other line and so on.

On behalf of the committee, I would like to wish the outgoing chairperson
well. We thank you for your leadership and stewardship. Indeed, for the
first time in the committee I was given a chance to co-chair a public
hearing and that was a wonderful experience. [Applause.] As the ANC we
support the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, as a new democracy trying to rejuvenate,
mobilise and enhance its economy, we need to open pathways of opportunity
for our people. However, as poverty tends to be our greatest challenge and
the growth of small and medium enterprises is slow, the state has to
constantly come up with ways to overcome the challenges and push us forward
as a competitive global entity rich in potential as a country for
investment.

However, one avenue that we cannot slow down is the fast advancement of
technological development. Broadband has become a common means for the
operation of businesses but it is well known that Telkom’s exorbitant
charges impede growth.
We believe that broadband is a major advancement for the operation of
business and a necessity in this era. With respect to our determination to
advance our economy we are supportive of this Bill that serves to make
broadband more accessible and legally operative.

We believe that many remain ignorant of broadband facilities and that
education on broadband would really facilitate effective and efficient
business running. The MF supports the Infraco Bill.

To hon Carrim, thank you very much for being in the chair and we wish you
well, sir. Thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, broadband infrastructure that creates seamless
connectivity and especially affordable and speedy Internet access is a much-
needed resource in a modern South African society and the FD commends the
Minister on the introduction of this Bill.

One of the aims of this Bill is to make broadband services available to
underdeveloped areas and to do so, the state intends to acquire broadband
Infraco and its electronic communications network to provide this service.

South Africa’s fixed-line and cellular costs are among the highest in the
world and Telkom and the cellular network companies do not offer
competitive pricing infrastructure that increases meaningful public access
to a wide range of communication services. Although millions may own a cell
phone, they interact with one another mainly through the short message
service which can hardly pass as an affordable communication service.

The government identified a gap for affordable broadband services and will,
through Infraco, attain a huge stake in the electronic communications
network services. Private enterprises should be more robust when it comes
to competing in their market of choice. They should create an environment
that makes it nonviable for the state to interfere in market processes but
as this Bill proves, the role of government has necessitated a speedier
response to an increased demand for cost-saving communication services.

We will support this Bill as a transitional strategy of the state towards
achieving access and affordability for the benefit of all the citizens of
this country and in light of the fact that we are still a developing nation
with specific challenges.

Finally, the FD would like to wish the outgoing chairperson, Mr Carrim,
well in his future endeavours and we want to commend him on his hard work
while he was the chairperson of this committee. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr Y I CARRIM: Chairperson, friends, whatever reservations we express in
our report about aspects of the processing of this Bill by the department,
we must be utterly clear: The committee welcomes the formation of Broadband
Infraco and congratulates the Minister and the department on this novel and
far-sighted intervention in the telecommunications sector.

The Minister has just presented a clear, lucid case for Infraco – though I
must say that it fell on deaf ears when it comes to Manie van Dyk, but the
Minister will speak for himself. It would certainly help if what the
Minister said was communicated to the widest possible range of stakeholders
so that the role of Infraco would be better understood and its considerable
potential appreciated.

The committee’s report on the Bill is carried in today’s ATCs - if it is
not, it will be in tomorrow’s ATCs - and previous speakers have already
dealt with some of the issues. I will just focus on a few aspects.

Obviously, finding the right balance between the role of the state and the
market in economic growth and development is never easy and, of course,
this relationship between market and state changes over time. Through our
deliberations on this Bill, two key issues emerged.

Firstly, as far as possible, we should keep open in the Bills that we adopt
in Parliament the option of the state being involved in key sectors of the
economy, even if that option is not to be exercised at the time the Bill is
finalised. For example, with hindsight – I notice the Chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Communications and the Deputy Minister in the House
- it is clear to us, at least, that the Electronic Communications Act of
2005 has a lacuna. It did not consider the possibility that a new state-
owned entity might be created in the telecommunications sector.

Secondly, regarding SOEs that serve the national interest, we believe, as a
committee, that they are entitled to rights over and above those granted to
private sector role-players in the same industry. And this can be provided
for in a way that is consistent with a mixed economy. It is certainly a
characteristic of social democratic societies and it can be done without
driving the private sector away. In fact, properly managed, the private
sector can also benefit from state involvement.

In the submissions we received from private sector role-players on this
Bill we didn’t get a sense of this vision. We felt that most of these role-
players felt unduly threatened by Infraco and we think the Ministry and the
department might, at an appropriate stage, want to respond further to this
even if what has emerged is much greater consensus, as he rightly said a
moment ago, in respect of the role that Infraco could play. We know that
much work has been done in this regard, but perhaps a bit more might be
necessary.

In respect of the department’s processing of the Bill before it was brought
to Parliament, our report refers to certain inadequacies. But we accept
there were certain unique circumstances that applied to this particular
Bill. We are aware, too, that the department put in a lot of work and the
comments in our report are not directed at any particular individual or
indeed ultimately at the Department of Public Enterprises.

Let me refer to the salient part in our report which reads:

   Our experience of this Bill raises a more general issue that
   parliamentary committees have referred to every now and again. The need
   for the executive ...

The executive generally, mind you –


   ... to consult effectively ...

Where am I? I am lost!


   ... to consult effectively with relevant stakeholders before a Bill is
   brought to Parliament ...

[Interjections.] I am only human - unlike the DA! [Interjections.] The
report goes on to say:

   What, after all, is the point of the executive gazetting Bills for public
   comment? It cannot just be a nominal process. Effective and widespread
   consultation can certainly contribute to improving the quality of a Bill
   and creating greater support for it even before it reaches Parliament.
   This will serve to ease the burden on committees which simply do not have
   the technical resources available that the executive has.

I would like, as I reluctantly leave this committee, to express my
sincerest appreciation to all those who co-operated so helpfully with me
and made it such a pleasure to chair this committee. Mostly, I want to
thank the lively, engaging activistic ANC study group of this committee
which found, I think, the right balance between taking our work seriously
and also having a sense of fun.

In particular, I want to thank Comrade Ncumisa Kondlo, the senior chief
whip of our study group, and Comrade Peter Hendrickse, the senior
backbencher, as we teasingly refer to them, but all the members of the
study group really.

I also express appreciation to members of the opposition parties for their
constructive contribution, particularly Martin Stephens, Pierre Rabie and
Eugenia Chang - and in the case of the latter, for holding her ground but
seeking, in her unique way, friendships across the political and
ideological divides.

I express appreciation to our committee secretary, Vhonani Ramaano, not
just for his commitment but for his very pleasant manner as well, and to
our two researchers including Eric Boskati.
I also want to thank Minister Alec Erwin. Of course, he’s a tough Minister
in his own way but he is also very accessible and amenable. It may be an
odd thing for the chairperson of a portfolio committee that takes its
oversight role seriously to say but it’s true.

The Minister has, with his considerable understanding and experience of the
economy, played a unique educational role for many of us in the committee
and we express our sincere appreciation for this. He has commended the
committee, but the committee has been able to be effective partly because
he takes us so seriously and I thank him for that.

As I’ve said before, you are a very young and exciting department, lead by
Portia Molefe, and I think it has enormous potential and will cope with the
many tasks that it has.

I also want to acknowledge the parliamentary liaison officer, Reneva
Fourie, and thank her – she is quite the best in her job that I’ve dealt
with until now. She’s not just efficient but easy to work with.

I also wish the new chairperson of the portfolio committee, Fatima Chohan-
Khota, all the best in her new role.

Finally, I want to stress that this Infraco project is too big and too
important not to succeed. As a portfolio committee, we very much want it to
work. The committee will monitor developments closely and offer whatever
support it can, consistent with its oversight role. But for Infraco to
succeed, all role-players have to play their full part and co-operate
effectively. We urge that they do so. We will certainly play our full part.

In conclusion, I appreciate the many words of appreciation by members who
have never actually come to the committee, but I do appreciate it
nevertheless. What I want to say to the members, and I want to urge this
House to understand, is: I am not dying, I am not moving. They ask: “Where
are you going?” I say: “Just down the road.” So, actually, I will very much
be part of this House and very much a part of another committee but I will
certainly be here and I will speak as long as I normally do. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you very much, Chairperson and
the hon Yunus Carrim. Let me just briefly deal with some of the specific
issues that have been raised. The hon Van Dyk asked about the change in
shareholding. This was brought about by some very specific aspects of the
agreements between VSNL and its other shareholders and we were obliged to
change our approach to that. However, it would be the intention for us to
seek the same component of shareholding in another form as we move forward.

Secondly, with regard to cables, what the hon Van Dyk said about our being
involved in cables all over the place is not correct. The specific
proposals are the following: We would take responsibility to lead the
process for a west coast cable. This would be a very large capacity cable
and quite certainly bigger than the private sector itself would be prepared
to invest in.

The reasons for this are as I indicated. We need a very large capacity for
the Square Kilometre Array project and we are increasing our capacity for
science and research in this country, which is, as the hon Chris Wang said,
very important. So this is the kind of investment that is very unlikely to
be made by the private sector.

On the east coast, the Minister of Communications has made it clear that we
don’t have principle objections to private sector participation but the
precise role the state plays in those processes is very important and in
line with the rest of the world. These are always strategic assets in which
the state plays a role.
Let me just say that the comments made about the Public Finance Management
Act - hon Van Dyk, you do know better - are absolutely wrong. Just read the
Public Finance Management Act. The Act is very clear on what is required of
a Schedule 2 project. It has to put forward a business plan and a borrowing
plan to the Treasury. Section 54 of the Act requires you to take certain
actions. I will give you a lesson one day, because you are clearly
abysmally ignorant about this matter.

On the question of Infraco and Sentech, the two departments are very clear
on the role these two institutions will play. Hon Kholwane, I think it is
correct. Maybe we will clarify that more in public but definitely these are
complementary processes. They are in no way competing. And the point you
made, that you don’t want to get drift across these two areas, is an
important point as it is also important that Infraco itself should not
drift into the value-added services that are the domain of the private
sector.

Hon Green indicates that we do need to explain the position on Infraco. We
will continue to do that and I think our experience has been that as we
have interacted with the major players and explained to them exactly what
Infraco has been doing, there is a great deal of support for it. It is the
kind of intervention that I think is, as you have indicated, the classic
realm of public good type intervention and infrastructure.

But, as I indicated in my opening address, if our objectives are fully met
in the foreseeable future, at some point, obviously, we have no particular
requirement that this would automatically always stay in public hands but
the objectives of getting affordable price-competitive broadband must be
met and retained at all costs.

I thank members for their support and despite some of the critical remarks,
I am very pleased indeed that all parties have supported this Bill. I think
it is an important step forward for telecommunications in South Africa. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

Business suspended at 14:45 and resumed at 15:03.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  CLUSTER 1

MINISTERS:

 Condition of South African members of the African Union peacekeeping force
      in Darfur with regard to injuries, deaths and equipment to defend
                                 themselves

357.  Mr V B Ndlovu (IFP) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (1)   Whether any South African members of the African Union
            peacekeeping force deployed in Darfur, Sudan, have been (a)
            injured or (b) killed in the line of duty in the past year; if
            so,

      (2)   whether any of the injuries or deaths were related to combat
            operations; if so, what are the relevant details;

         3) whether South African forces deployed in Darfur are properly
            equipped to defend themselves against attack; if not, why not;
            if so, what are the relevant details?

                  NO2351E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: You see, what happened is that this man
took my seat and therefore disorganised me. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Is that the correct response, hon
Deputy Minister?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: What is the number of the question?
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): It is number 357 and was asked by
the hon V B Ndlovu.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: That is the right question. Mr Chairperson,
you must make rules that hon members should not take other people’s seats.

The answer to the first question by Mr Ndlovu is: No. The answer to the
second question is also no and the answer to the third question is yes. The
SA National Defence Force contingent has been provided with the following
weaponry and equipment in addition to their R4 assault rifles and 9mm
pistols.

Unfortunately, hon Ndlovu, we will not give details because it is not in
the interest of our security to give those details, especially since we are
talking about people who are in a war situation.

We have Mamba MK3 mine-resistant armoured personnel carriers, 7,62mm light
machine guns, 60mm patrol mortars, 60mm conventional mortars for base
protection, 40mm MGL grenade launchers and RPG7 rocket-propelled grenade
launchers. Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you very much for the answer,
Deputy Minister, and for saying that nobody was killed and injured. I just
want to carry on and ask my follow-up question. They are really at war and
they are trying to keep the peace. Do they have to enforce it? If so, what
should they do? That is my first question. The second question concerns
their welfare. Is their welfare looked after properly, including that of
their families they left behind?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Mr Chairperson, the welfare of soldiers
deployed either inside or outside the country is looked after through
methods and systems that ensure that they are properly looked after. In
fact, when you deploy soldiers, you don’t just deploy fighting soldiers but
there is also what is called the support staff which includes
psychologists, engineers, doctors, etc. So, when you deploy soldiers, you
also provide them with support mechanisms. Of course, you cannot visit
their families every day but they are kept informed through mechanisms that
are put in place to help them communicate with their families. Thank you.

Mr F BHENGU: Thank you, Chairperson. Could you, sir, with the information
at your disposal, share with this House as to how soon the force of the
United Nations is likely to be deployed to reinforce the African mission in
Sudan in an attempt to stabilise and normalise the unabated war environment
in that country?

We are concerned that further delays will result in further attacks,
ambushes and unnecessary suffering which will cost more human life, ...

... ukuba ungandiphendula, Tshangisa. [... could you please answer me,
Tshangisa.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Thank
you very much, Mr Bhengu. Whilst we share your concern, it needs to be
pointed out that what is needed in Darfur is a political solution. The
problem is that as soon as the fighting stops, a peace agreement has to be
put in place for the United Nations force to have any effect.

So, the most important thing in Darfur at the moment is to make sure that
there is a peaceful political solution. We can send the military force to
Darfur if the need arises but it is important that there is a political
solution. For that to happen, all parties involved must talk to each other,
because military force does not solve problems, especially political
problems. I thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Minister, I think there is a problem here. If you
say, hon Minister, that a political solution has not been reached in
Darfur, are you saying that you have sent our people there to enforce peace
but there is no political agreement? Are we not putting ourselves in danger
by trying to solve the problem with guns instead of negotiations? I think
that is the problem now.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Mr Ndlovu, what I’m saying is that there
are attempts by the African Union and the United Nations to solve the
problem politically. In fact, the forces that are deployed there are
deployed for peacekeeping purposes, not for peace enforcement.

What I’m trying to say is that what is more important than military
deployments is a political solution which the people of Darfur,
unfortunately, must be able to understand.

If the people who are in conflict do not recognise the importance of a
political solution, there would still be fighting because the United
Nations and the AU can only facilitate a temporary solution, which is what
has been happening in Darfur. That is the reason I’m saying we must, as
South Africans, Africans and the whole world, impress upon the people of
Darfur that the solution to their problems can only be achieved by talking
amongst themselves – a political solution.

    Vacancy rate in Human Resources Unit of department, and plans to fill
                                  vacancies

348.  Mr L T Landers (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      (a) What is the current vacancy rate in the Human Resources Unit of
      her department and (b) what plans are under way to address vacancies
      in the various components of her department, including in court
      services?                                          NO2338E

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, there
are 200 funded posts in the Human Resources Unit of the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development. The vacancy rate is 12%.

In answering the second part of the question, let me make the statement
that the existence of vacancies in government departments is a challenge
that government is rigorously addressing. In part the problem relates to
the very process for filling a vacant post, which takes a long time. The
Department of the Public Service and Administration is assisting
departments in this regard.

Before I speak about the strategies we are employing to deal with this
vacancy challenge, hon members, let me provide you with statistics on the
post establishment in my department. There are 16 174 approved posts and of
these, 13 654 posts are filled. The vacancy rate in my department is 12%.
We have advertised 1 013 posts and we will soon be advertising the
remaining 913.

For our part, we have identified particular weaknesses in our system which
we are addressing. In our current strategy to deal with the issue of vacant
posts, we have done away with the cumbersome structure of business units.
Our department was divided into business units. We have reverted to the
ordinary form of having subdirectorates.

We have capacitated our HR unit and, as a result, we are seeing
improvements in filling posts - whereas in the past we would take six
months, we now take three months. We have also decentralised the
recruitment process to the regional offices. Initially recruitment was
conducted by the HR unit located at the national office and, of course, we
have sought specialist advice so as to find an innovative way of dealing
with the challenges of filling vacant posts. Thank you.

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, we welcome the progress announced by the hon
Minister. Arising from her response and given the relatively large vacancy
rate, particularly in the prosecutorial component, which impacts on the
efficiency rates of our courts; given the large increases of R4,7 billion
to R8,9 billion announced in the department’s budget last year; and finally
given that the largest part of this increase goes towards increasing
personnel capacity and providing services, will the hon Minister give this
House the assurance that the department will provide Parliament with clear
progress reports on the objectives and goals attained in increasing
personnel capacity within the department?

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, yes,
indeed, I do give that assurance. In fact, plans are under way. The
National Prosecuting Authority itself gave a report to the extended
executive committee, in which they gave us their initial plans for
attending to the problem of filling vacancies. We will do so. We will
submit reports as required by the portfolio committee.
Mr L K JOUBERT: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, you did not specifically
refer to the position in the NPA. According to their annual report the
vacancy for advocates is 33,2%, for interpreters 75%, and for prosecutors
22,1%. This has an adverse effect on the administration of justice, as can
be seen from the lower conviction rates. In special courts, it has
decreased from 70% to 65%.

My question is: To solve a problem, one has to know why it exists. What is
being done to find out why we have these vacancies? You mentioned in your
whole department 12% but in the NPA it is up to 75% in certain cases. Thank
you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, there
are structural problems in the sense that it took them some time to get a
chief financial officer but, as I say, we do have a CFO now and, in fact,
there are plans on the table. Unfortunately, hon member, I do not have the
plans here as I speak to you but I do promise that I will make them
available to the House.

    Compensation of Reserve Force members deployed during Operation BATA

366.  Mr P J Groenewald (FF Plus) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (1)   Whether any members of the Reserve Force who were deployed from
            1 June 2007 to 5 July 2007 during Operation BATA have received
            compensation; if not, (a) why not and (b) when does he envisage
            their receiving compensation; if so, (i) how many members were
            compensated and (ii) when;

      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         NO2363E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, the reply is: No. Four reserve
force members will be compensated as soon as the payment schedule order has
been corrected. This process is currently under way. This problem arose
because the respective units providing the forces did not process the
payment schedule in time. Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ek wil vir die agb Adjunkminister vra wat
gaan dan aan in die weermag? Daar word van mense verwag om diens te doen
tydens ’n noodsituasie. Daar is bevelvoerders wat agtuur die aand mense
opgeroep het om sesuur die oggend noodsaaklike dienste te gaan verrig,
veral in hospitale.

Natuurlik is die probleem dat die agb Minister-hulle die kommando’s
afgestel het, want dan sou hy meer mense gehad het, maar die feit van die
saak is dié mense het alles opgeoffer. Hulle lewer ’n diens en nou wil u
vir my kom sê u vat vier maande om die dokumentasie reg te kry sodat die
mense hulle salarisse kan ontvang.

Ek wil ’n voorstel maak dat die agb Adjunkminister en die Minister nie
hulle salarisse kry voordat hierdie lede nie hulle salarisse gekry het nie,
want baie van daardie lede ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I want to ask the hon Deputy Minister what
is happening in the army. It is expected of people to perform services
during an emergency. There are commanding officers who have called people
up at eight o’clock in the evening to instruct them to perform essential
services at six o’clock the next morning, especially at hospitals.

Of course, the problem is that the hon Minister and his colleagues did away
with the commando system, otherwise he would have had more people, but the
fact of the matter is that these people have sacrificed everything. They
have rendered a service and now you are telling me that you need four
months in order to prepare the documentation so that these people can
receive their salaries.

I want to suggest that the hon Deputy Minister and the Minister not receive
their salaries until these members have received theirs because many of
these members ...]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, what is your question?

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Die opvolg is: Wat gaan die agb Adjunkminister doen om
hierdie proses baie vinnig te bespoedig en te verseker dat die mense hulle
geld kry? Hulle het waardevolle diens vir Suid-Afrika gelewer. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: The follow-up question is: What is the hon Deputy
Minister going to do to greatly expedite this process and ensure that these
people get their salaries? They have rendered a valuable service for South
Africa.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, as I’ve said, the process is
under way. We are doing everything to ensure that those people are paid.
Unfortunately, we are running a government and departments that have
processes to be followed. I cannot wake up one morning because some people
must be paid and say, ``okay take money from the petty cash and pay them’’.
We don’t operate like that. There must be documents. We are going to pay
them and we are following the necessary procedures. But seeing that Mr
Groenewald is so concerned, can we ask him if we can take his salary this
month and then we will refund him? Thank you.

Mr S B NTULI: Chairperson, we in the ANC welcome the department’s
initiatives, particularly that of recognising the role played by the
reserve force within the SANDF. We also wish to recommend that the Ministry
should actually continue with this kind of initiative, because it not only
promotes the event but also promotes the role that the reserve force is
playing within the SANDF.

Would the Ministery consider continuing with activities of this nature to
ensure that it also educates the public on the role that the reserves are
playing in this country and actually invites the public - those with
military skills - to enlist with the reserve force? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, the Defence Force is
structured in such a way that we have the regular force, which must be a
certain number. We also have the reserve force as part of the whole Defence
Force. I agree with the last speaker that it is important that we must
ensure that the reserve force is not only kept in place but is maintained.

The reserve force is playing a very important role. Just to educate Mr
Groenewald, some of them were even deployed outside the country. That is
the role played by the reserve force and we paid them. It is unfortunate
that you just make a big issue about one small administrative mishap.

The reserve force is a very important component of the Defence Force and we
may want to ensure that the reserve force is not only maintained but
increases in size. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy Minister, administrative
bungling is not needed in any department. You cannot call people to do a
job and not pay them because by doing that, you are saying the department
is not run professionally. How are you going to correct that perception?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Well, like I’ve said, Baba Ndlovu, we are
now in the process of rectifying and correcting that mistake. But I can
assure you that we have learnt something. In future deployments, we will
ensure that such a thing does not happen again.

You must also realise that we are a very big department and that sometimes
we act under terrible pressures. But I assure you that we have set up
mechanism to ensure that a mistake of this nature is not repeated. Thank
you.

 Decrease in confiscation of cannabis and increase in that of methaqualone,
          and the impact of this on the SAPS strategy against drugs

354.  Mr S Mahote (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (1)   To what can the decrease in the confiscation of cannabis and the
            increase in the confiscation of methaqualone in the financial
            year 2006-07 be attributed;

      (2)   whether this impacts on the SA Police Service’s strategy against
            drugs; if not, why not; if so, how?          NO2347E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, the reply is as follows:
The decrease in the confiscation of cannabis can be attributed to the
successes achieved by the cannabis eradication programme of the SA Police
Service which is targeting the cannabis crop in South Africa. For the 2006-
07 financial year, an estimated 2 991 hectares of illicit cannabis
plantations were destroyed, thus preventing an estimated 2 094 tons of
cannabis from reaching the local and foreign drug markets.

The increase in the quantity of Methaqualome confiscated can be attributed
to successful police work including the confiscation, during May 2006, of
over 2,5 tons of Mandrax tablets smuggled into South Africa. This
consignment was found hidden inside wooden doors in a container that was
imported from China.

With regard to the second part of the question, the strategy followed by
the SAPS is mainly directed towards reducing the supply of illicit drugs to
the drug market and it can therefore be expected that the volume of
cannabis found and destroyed will increase and large quantities of other
drugs will be intercepted at ports of entry. Thank you.

Mr S MAHOTE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, the SA Police Service
must be congratulated on the success it has had in reducing the supply of
drugs on our streets. Does it involve other departments in the social
aspect of drug abusers so as to reduce the demand for illicit drugs? And
what does this involvement entail?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much for your comment,
hon member. On the matter of drugs and the distribution of illicit drugs in
our country, there is what is defined as the Drugs Master Plan. That master
plan is the product of collaboration between a number of departments but
the lead department is the Department of Social Development.

The Drugs Master Plan therefore looks at various aspects which relate to
drugs including a project to win, particularly young people, away from the
abuse of drugs. In consequence of the collaboration, therefore, we have
been able to do a very good work with respect to issues that relate to the
abuse of drugs. Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, drugs, such as Tik
and Sugars, are part of a plague destroying families. Parents are
prostituting their 10-year old daughters to feed their habit. These drugs
are killing addicts across the length and breadth of this country. And
there is a move towards more sophisticated drugs such as Mandrax, to which
you have referred earlier on - smuggled from China – which means there is a
need for more and more sophisticated techniques on the part of our SAPS.

However, it is incredibly difficult for the police to raid a known illegal
drug manufacturer’s property as they must be in possession of a sworn
affidavit before such a raid is permitted, and the person who swears such
an affidavit that drugs are held or manufactured in a certain house is then
in fear of his or her life.

Minister, what steps are you taking to ease this situation in dealing with
the Department of Justice, to make it easier for our police in their
strategic moves in this regard rather than wasting their time and ours on
such frivolous moves as arresting the Mayor of Cape Town during a legal
march against drugs?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The matter of preventing the abuse of
drugs as well as alcohol is a matter that all of us ought to be involved
in, including the Mayor of Cape Town. That issue has to do with the fact
that the police, most of the time, will be reactive in terms of those
issues. But when we work together, it is possible for us to deal with that
matter. It is at home where we live, where some of our children are using
these drugs, that we must start.

The issue of collaboration between the various departments is one that we
always discuss and there is a good relationship between Cabinet and the
departments, including a relationship between the Ministry for Safety and
Security and the Ministry of Justice precisely to deal with those matters.

Where there are specific issues, as the hon member has mentioned, of
particular areas where there are people who have information about drug
smuggling and the sale of drugs, particularly to our young people, we would
appreciate it if such information was placed in the hands of the law-
enforcement agencies of the country because this is a matter that we must
deal with and deal with effectively so that we save our people from drug
abuse. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to thank the hon
Minister for the answer. I would like to raise a supplementary question
which will link up with the Department of Justice. Let me say, for example,
there is a house where drugs are produced but the owner of the house does
not live in the house, he lives somewhere else or even in Australia for
that matter. What would you do in a case like this?

Secondly, let’s say that one of the investigators or one of the people who
are leading the investigation of the case goes back to the drug lord and
divulges to him the name of the person who reported the case. What do you
do in such a case because that is how we are going to fight this thing if
we want to close the loopholes?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Hon Ndlovu, we must be told and be
given information about members of the SA Police Service or any other law
enforcement agencies in the country who will act in the way that you are
describing because what that means is that a police officer who is
investigating or has been given information about wrongdoing and then goes
and divulges that information to the very people they need to investigate
is committing an offence. We need to get that information so that we can
deal with people of that nature because they are acting in a criminal way
and therefore can be legitimately defined as criminals. We want to deal
with those people but let us get the information first so that we can deal
with them.

In the past there was a law which said that if you where driving a vehicle
in which, for instance, the police found any type of contraband material,
including drugs, that vehicle would be confiscated by the state and
therefore forfeited to the state because it was a vehicle which was used in
the commission of a crime. I am under the impression that there is still
something like that on our Statute Book. Of course, at the appropriate time
the Minister for Justice will respond to this.

It was on that understanding that I argued publicly, for instance, that the
house in Jeppestown, Johannesburg, where the police were in a shooting
confrontation with criminals, should be forfeited to the state, but I was
advised that it was not as straightforward a matter as that. In other
words, to my mind it was straightforward, there was criminal activity there
and therefore the property should be confiscated. I was advised that it was
not as simple as that. Thank you.
Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ek wil vir die agb Minister vra ... ek sien
die Minister wil net sy gehoorstukkie regkry. Kan die agb Minister my hoor?
Tolk hulle darem?  Ek wil vir die agb Minister vra of hy dink dit is goed
as sy Nasionale Kommissaris, mnr Jackie Selebi, se beste vriend, “finish en
klaar”, ’n sogenaamde “drug lord” is? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I want to ask the Minister ... I see that
the Minister is fixing his headpiece. Can you hear me, Minister? Are they
interpreting? I want to ask the hon Minister whether he thinks it is
appropriate that his National Commissioner, Mr Jackie Selebi’s best friend,
“a finish and klaar”, is a so-called ``drug lord’’?]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, I don’t know where that question
fits in in terms of what we are dealing with. I am not prepared to answer
it.

             Establishment of dedicated remand detention branch

349.  Bishop L J Tolo (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      Whether, with reference to his department’s strategic plan for 2007-08
      to 2011-12, his department will establish a dedicated remand detention
      branch with a dedicated budget programme, a regional head and
      appropriate remand detainee facilities with dedicated personnel in
      each region in the 2007-08 financial year; if not, why not; if so,
      what progress is being made in this regard?
                                        NO2339E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, the response to Bishop
Tolo’s question is: A chief directorate on remand detention systems has
been established to do further work on the need for establishing a remand
detention centre.

The justice, crime prevention and security cluster and the management of
awaiting-trial detainees’ project team was established with the Department
of Correctional Services as the lead department to develop proposals with
regard to the scope of the project. Work has been done in line with the
strategic plan for 2007-08 to 2011-12. Draft guidelines for minimum
infrastructure have been developed. There has been consultation with the
Justice Crime Prevention and Security, JCPS, departments and we are in the
approval process of the department.

Appropriate remand detention facilities will be established in line with
the minimum facilities requirements. Regions have identified one
correctional centre per region as a dedicated remand detention facility.

The department has appointed a research team to assist with the job
refinement process which in fact means the alignment of the organisational
structure with the functions of the department. This process has not been
finalised but it is scheduled to be concluded before the end of the current
financial year.

The creation of a branch for remand detention and regional head are
dependant on the outcome of the process of alignment. The costing of a
remand detention system, the development of the activity structure and the
budget programme proposals have not been finalised by the project team.
Proposals in terms of the programme structure of the department are an
agenda item in discussions with the National Treasury which has taken
cognisance of the importance of finalising the budgetary requirements of
the remand detention project. Thank you.

Bishop L J TOLO: Chairperson, I thank the Comrade Minister for his
response. Comrade Minister, what are the benefits of establishing a
separate branch for awaiting-trial detainees? Secondly, what will the
responsibility be of the other criminal justice departments such as the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development with regard to
awaiting-trial detainees? Thanks very much.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, as we have said here
this team which is led by the Department of Correctional Services has other
departments of the JCPS and all of them are included in that and are
working together because, remember, the awaiting-trial detainees are not
only the responsibility of the Department of Correctional Services. They
are also the responsibility of Justice as well as the SAPS. Together we
have to look after awaiting-trial detainees.

One of the benefits of a separation of branches is to make sure that we
have a dedicated budget for that, which will probably be a budget that
includes the other departments in assisting us with this. I must say that I
was quite happy when I picked up that the Justice Portfolio Committee would
be visiting our awaiting-trial detention facility in Pollsmoor, because it
is very important that they look into that together with our Correctional
Services Portfolio Committee and work together in trying to resolve this
problem. Thank you.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Hon Minister, the average, daily awaiting-trial
detainees’ population remains at approximately 50 000. This pushes up the
already overcrowded or overcrowding ratios in all our correctional centres
and distracts the department from its core business of correcting offending
behaviour and rehabilitating offenders.

In the latest annual report the department refers to the management of the
remand detention project. Minister, with due respect, there has been talk
of this for ages. What new, mitigating action can the Minister report in
this regard and has he given serious consideration to actually privatising
this function - a practice that is being followed in many other countries?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I will start with the
last one. As regards thinking about and considering privatising it, we
haven’t spoken about that yet. We haven’t thought about it because we are
in it together with other departments. So, I cannot make that decision
alone as a department. We need other departments also to come together.
Maybe that project team - the Management of Awaiting-Trial Detainee Project
Team that we have put together – will come up with those kinds of
recommendations.

You are quite correct. We have seen, in other countries, how they are run
and how they have been privatised. It does take a lot from us. The
population of awaiting-trial detainees is really too much and the time it
takes is quite long. But with the involvement of the Portfolio Committee on
Justice together with that on Correctional Services and that on the SAPS,
it will help us a lot when we try to move the backlogs of those who have
been in detention for a long time.

Correctly, it is not our core business. Our core business is to correct and
rehabilitate and it is difficult with awaiting-trial detainees because they
are here today and out tomorrow and sometimes they go through spells of
bail applications and it takes so much from us. But I can assure you that
the team that is handling this matter is very good and we are cracking the
whip to get this done.

I would like to see pilot projects actually taking off in one of the big
centres like Pollsmoor, Johannesburg Prison being the second one and,
thirdly, one probably which is very overcrowded is Umtata. Something will
be done in those three centres and once they work then I will know that we
are on the right track. Thank you.

              Minister’s stance on suspension of certain person

351.  Ms D Kohler-Barnard (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether he will suspend a certain person (name furnished) in view of
      his (a) overall performance, (b) the high crime rate and (c)
      relationship with a person with questionable reputation (name
      furnished); if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                                    NO2341E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, there is a process that
is used to asses the performance of senior managers in the Public Service.
There has never been a rating of the said person from that process that has
been so negative as to warrant suspension. When the person concerned
assumed office in 1999, crime levels were much higher than they are now.
The downward trend attests to the person’s guidance to the police service.

Lastly, there is a legal process that has started and is designed to look
at issues such as the current question. I will not pre-empt that process by
comments that will prejudge the matter in one way or another. Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Minister, we have seen the President move with great
speed in the suspension of Advocate Pikoli on very flimsy, specious
grounds, yet here we have Commissioner Selebi not being suspended. The
question relates not to the cloud of suspicion hanging over the
commissioner but to his competence in relation to the job. This country is
suffering and ordinary citizens don’t have your bodyguards or the
bodyguards used by Members of Cabinet. They are being robbed, raped and
murdered at unprecedented levels. You cannot deny that.

The question is, seeing that the commissioner has failed in his overall
performance; has failed in his attempt to bring crime down; has failed in
the eyes of the public in that he has friends in very low places, will you
suspend him or not, and if you won’t, why on earth not, and if you can’t,
have you asked the President to do so?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Chair, I’m sure the hon member
did not hear my response to these questions. I’m going to repeat myself.
There is a process that is used to assess the performance of senior
managers in the Public Service. There has never been a rating of the said
person from that process that has been so negative as to warrant
suspension. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Please. Order! Give the
Minister a chance.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: When the person concerned assumed
office in 1999, crime levels were much higher than they are now. The
downward trend attests to the person’s guidance to the police service.
There is a legal process that has started, designed to look at issues such
as the current question. I will not pre-empt the process by comments that
will prejudge the matter in one way or another.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ek verstaan dat die Minister sê daar is ’n
proses aan die gang, maar daar was ook ‘n bepaalde proses in die geval van
die voormalige hoof van die Nasionale Intelligensie Agentskap, mnr Billy
Masetla. Hy is aangestel deur die President maar die agb Minister van
Intelligensie, mnr Ronnie Kasrils, het nie geskroom om hom te skors toe
daar ’n ondersoek teen hom was nie. Nou kom die agb Minister van Veiligheid
en Sekuriteit en hy sê in die geval van kommissaris Jackie Selebi is daar
’n ander proses. Dit is dieselfde proses.

Nou wil ek vir die agb Minister vra, dink hy nie dit is dubbele standaarde
wat toegepas word nie, want in mnr Billy Masetla se geval is hy geskors,
maar kommissaris Jackie Selebi kan maar aangaan? Dit is tog seker immers
dubbele standaarde? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I understand that the Minister says that
there is a process under way but there was also a specific process in the
case of the former head of the National Intelligence Agency, Mr Billy
Masetla. He was appointed by the President but the hon Minister of
Intelligence, Mr Ronnie Kasrils, did not hesitate to suspend him when an
investigation was launched against him. Now the hon Minister of Safety and
Security says that in the case of Commissioner Jackie Selebi, there is a
different process. It is the same process.

Now, I want to ask the hon Minister whether he does not think double
standards are being applied because in Mr Billy Masetla’s case, he was
suspended, but Commissioner Jackie Selebi can blithely carry on? Surely
these are double standards?]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I don’t know whether the Minister
got the whole question?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I did.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): You did? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, it’s easy for you to be cynical
about these things but not with me because I have a responsibility arising
from the functions that I have been given as part of government. You can be
cynical because you want to be cynical. The fact of the matter is - I am
saying - there is a process that is in place. You cannot talk to me about
double standards, because I have not been guilty of any double standards.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Please.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: There is a process that I respect,
which is unfolding and that process will deal with these matters. If you
want me to try to concoct a different answer to this, I am sorry to say I
won’t do it.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Minister. There are two things that I want to ask
the Minister. Firstly, it is about politics and perceptions. How would you
feel if the investigators find that the National Commissioner is supposed
to be arrested, as he is the first cop in this country and we rely on him
to have a plan for arresting criminals? How would you feel if he is
arrested tomorrow?

Secondly ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (M B Skosana): Hon member, you can’t have two
questions in one supplementary question.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: If anyone, from the President right
down to members of the Public Service, is guilty of a crime and there is
evidence of this, that person must be arrested and charged.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Minister, please explain to this House why you feel
that the decision of whether or not to do the honourable thing and step
down while various investigations are taking place should be left to
Commissioner Selebi himself? Surely, the fact that you have not personally
taken this decision, or at least advised the President to do so, further
encourages the nation to believe that he is being protected for political
reasons while the Pikolis of the country simply are not. Please explain
yourself.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I don’t know why she is directing that
question at me. I really don’t know but let me just say to you hon member,
I personally am not going to be involved ... [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on a point of order: I
would like to appeal to the other side that this is not a free-for-all
discussion. You should really respect the Minister and ask him relevant
questions but you are just making it a free for all. Please respect
yourself. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): That wasn’t a point of order, sir,
but I’ll let you through as an elderly person.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Hon member, I am not going to become
involved in an inquisition. I am saying and I’ll continue to say this that
there is a process in place and that process is designed to do all these
things that you are talking about. You want me to become involved in a
situation where, in fact, we would be opening the floodgates if we do that.


Someone comes and accuses you of one thing or the other and what you are
now introducing into South Africa is that when there is an allegation
against you, you must immediately step down from whatever your position is.
I am not going to support anything like that because there are so many
allegations that are being made about so many people. And if we were to say
that anyone against whom there is an allegation needs to stop the work they
are doing, South Africa would grind to a halt.

  Key findings and recommendations emerging from review of criminal justice
                                   system

356.  Mr C V Burgess (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      Whether the review of the criminal justice system by the task team
      consisting of representatives of the government and the business
      sector has been concluded; if not, why not; if so, (a) what are the
      key findings and recommendations and (b) when will they be actioned?
                                                         NO2350E

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Chair, I
wish to indicate to the hon member that there is the criminal justice
review process by the state and there is also a parallel process which is
very interesting. Government and big business have established working
groups which include an anti-crime initiative consisting of the anti-crime
leadership forum which has four working groups. The working group on the
review of the criminal justice system is one of them.

The analysis and recommendations which arise from the review undertaken by
the working group are the product of extensive and focused consultations
including onsite visits with many and varied relevant stakeholders across
the criminal justice system. A report of government and big business’s
working group with recommendations on certain governance structures of the
Cabinet’s justice, crime prevention and security cluster was presented to
the interministerial committee in August and October.

The interministerial committee has considered the report and made
recommendations to the justice, crime prevention and security Cabinet
committee. We are hoping that in time, after Cabinet has considered this
report, we will bring something to Parliament. Let me say that there is a
simultaneous process relating to the review of the criminal justice system
which is taking place and that it is intersectorial and interdepartmental.
From our side, as Justice, the key driver is the director-general. This
process deals with ongoing research and various interventions to improve
the efficiency of the criminal justice system. That process has not been
concluded.

It is necessary for the House to be informed that various short-term
solutions were identified during both processes. It is within this context
that the justice, crime prevention and security cluster continues to co-
operate to find the best ways to deal with the challenge of crime
prevention. I thank you.

Mr C V BURGESS: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, I thank you for your
response. We shall await your report. However, in respect of the
simultaneous process, this review being conducted by your director-general,
I refer to the digital recording system known as the Direct Communication
Radio Services, the DCRS, which has been installed in over 2 000 courts.
Does the Minister intend to extend this to more courts? And how has the
DCRS assisted service delivery of the department?

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, all
courts in South Africa now have the digital recording system. I must say
that we are pleased to indicate that it is actually working very well. It
enhances fairness and eliminates human error. I must say that there is a
good reaction to having these systems in place, from the magistrates and
the prosecutors.

 Quarterly briefings for public and media on readiness of SA Police Service
                        for 2010 World Cup Tournament

358.  Mr V B Ndlovu (IFP) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether he will conduct quarterly briefings for the public and media
      on the state of the SA Police Service’s readiness for the 2010 Soccer
      World Cup tournament; if not, why not; if so, when will the first
      briefing take place?                               NO2352E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you. No, the security plan for
the 2010 Fifa World Cup forms part of a comprehensive plan covering various
areas such as accommodation, transport, health, tourism, stadiums,
infrastructure and events. Regular briefings are held by government and the
local organising committee on progress concerning the plan, including the
security plan.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you very much, sir. Minister, does the plan include
Interpol and the structures that are supposed to deal with those people who
are coming into the country? I am asking this question because there will
be different languages and different people that will be coming into the
country. Are we ready with all the languages and the involvement of
Interpol?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: There is a broad plan that was
adopted. In fact, if you were to go and read the bid book from when we were
still trying to secure the tournament for South Africa, you would see some
of the things that were suggested regarding protection of that tournament
and, of course, also the people who would be coming to South Africa.

We are working together with a number of international policing agencies.
You should remember that this tournament is not actually a South African
tournament but that we are simply hosting it. It is a Fifa World Cup.
Therefore, even from the point of view of Fifa, there are arrangements that
are in place.

With regard to the southern portion of our continent, we have what is
called the Southern African Regional Police Chiefs Organisation, and that
organisation, which is a SADC instrument, has also been meeting, where
issues relating to the security of the 2010 World Cup are being discussed.
So, we are comfortable in the knowledge that everything is being done to
address issues that relate to safety and security during that period.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, in the run-up,
surely the briefings should include the latest crime statistics, quarterly
or even more regularly, so that visitors planning to attend the 2010 event
will know what to expect when they land on our shores? If you disagree with
this, what possible explanation do you have for excising the most relevant
piece of information possible from such public briefings?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Hon member, earlier on in the life of
our democracy, we hosted the Rugby World Cup the finals of which are going
to be played in France on Saturday, this time around. During that time in
1995, we were able to host that tournament and we were able to provide
protection for that tournament and as a consequence of that, we were asked
again to host another world cup tournament when, in 2003, we hosted the
Cricket World Cup.

Apart from that, in 1996, again - this was earlier on in the life of our
democracy - we were asked to host the African Cup of Nations. Again, we
provided very good protection for that tournament.

Now, between 1995 and 2003, crime levels were higher than the situation is
today, but we were able not only to give good protection to those events
but, in fact, we protected the World Summit on Sustainable Development in
2002. The United Nations, coming as they did from Seattle – do you remember
the problems of Seattle, Genoa and Melbourne – to South Africa, found that
whereas in Seattle, Genoa and Melbourne there were big problems, in South
Africa we were able to provide significant and effective protection. The
United Nations asked us to assist in training people for the purposes of
that kind of protection.

I want to say to you that we are not going to do anything new, except that
this time around we are going to be assisted by the various nations of the
world to protect 2010. To go around raising statistics of this, that and
the other is not part of that plan. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ek wil vir die agb Minister iets vra.
Nasionale kommissaris Jackie Selebi het vroeër vanjaar by ’n
portefeuljekomitee van Veiligheid en Sekuritiet gesê hy weet nie of hy die
mense sal moet arresteer as hulle in die openbaar drink of hul skuldig maak
aan prostitusie tydens die 2010-Wêreldbekerreeks nie. Nou vra ek vir die
agb Minister, wat sê u, agb Minister, gaan die mense gearresteer word as
hulle in die openbaar drink en as hulle hul skuldig maak aan prostitusie
tydens die 2010-Wêreldbekerreeks? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)
[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I want to ask the hon Minister: His
National Commissioner, Commissioner Jackie Selebi, said earlier this year,
at a meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, that he did
not know whether he should arrest people if they drink in public or make
themselves guilty of prostitution during the 2010 World Cup tournament. Now
I want to ask the hon Minister: What do you say, hon Minister? Are the
people going to be arrested if they drink in public or make themselves
guilty of prostitution during the 2010 World Cup tournament?]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. Hon member,
anybody who breaks the law will be arrested. [Applause.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Thank you very much. Minister, at the beginning of the year,
as hon Groenewald indicated, the police made their presentation to the
portfolio committee on their preparedness for 2010. Among the issues raised
was the issue of training. My question is: What measures are being put in
place to train a larger number of SA Police Service members in crowd
control with a view to the 2010 World Cup? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. Training
generally for members of the SA Police Service is an ongoing project. This
one that relates to larger numbers of people who are going to be deployed
is also receiving attention. Mind you, we are not only dealing with the
police; there is another category of people we are helping to bring up
because, at the venues where the matches will be played, you will have two
types of deployments. The police will work on the outer perimeter of those
stadia while inside it will be security companies that take charge. This is
in terms of the normal rules of Fifa.

That is what we are going to do but, this time around - we did not do this
in the previous tournaments, for instance - we are also going to be
training those security guards that will be responsible for protection
inside the stadiums. So the issue of training is
uppermost in our programme for the preparations for 2010.

          Progress made in implementation of Safe Schools Programme

355.  Mr M S Moatshe (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      What progress has been made with the implementation of the Safe
      Schools Programme as part of the crime prevention initiatives of the
      SA Police Service?                                            NO2348E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The Safe Schools Programme is an
initiative of and is led by the national and provincial departments of
education. The SA Police Service plays a supporting role to the departments
and school communities to ensure school safety.

Progress in respect of the implementation of the state school’s programme
as a crime prevention initiative includes the following: Firstly, the
identification by the national Department of Education of 584 schools in
all provinces that needed particular support with regard to safety;
secondly, visits to each province, focusing on one school per province,
were conducted in co-operation with the SAPS to engage provincial education
departments to identify specific needs and inform national planning and
budgeting; thirdly, a draft strategic plan on safe schools, including the
signpost for safer schools and to address violence in schools, has been
compiled in consultation with the Department of Education. The strategic
plan is going to be rolled out to all the provinces soon.

The programme facilitates trust among the SAPS, learners and the school
community. Consequently, the learners have found it easier to report child
abuse cases. The SAPS works with the Department of Social Development and
the Department of Education on the national Substance Abuse Prevention
Programme called Ke Moja which specifically focuses on children, the youth
and schools.

On 4 August 2007 a sports event against drugs was held in Mamelodi. Schools
from Mamelodi, Mamelodi East, Eersterus and Silverton participated. A drug
expert addressed the children on the dangers of drugs. A reduction in crime
was noted in areas where the programme was implemented. Thank you.

Mr M S MOATSHE: Chairperson, I want to thank the Minister for his
comprehensive response. In the past few months we have seen disturbing
incidents of violence at schools among learners. In the most severe
instances learners were killed. Will the Safe Schools Programme be able to
address these instances, and if so, how?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes, that project is going to ensure
that there is safety in our schools. I want to repeat a call that I have
made on several occasions, here in Parliament, that it is not always just
sending the law-enforcement agencies into situations that would help in the
end but it is when all of us, including the communities and those who are
in those schools, participate in that project because we require
information to be able to do the things we want to do.

Secondly, some of the characteristics of the project mean that now and
again the law-enforcement agencies ought to enter the school premises,
among other things, to do searches and so on. There has to be an
understanding, therefore, and fortunately Parliament has passed a law that
relates to this, that they be allowed to do that work because in the end it
is going to help to reduce some of the crime that is happening in our
schools.

Mnr R J KING: Voorsitter, Minister, ek dink dit is baie meer dieperliggend
as waar dispute tussen leerders op die skoolgronde tradisioneel met ’n
vuisgeveg, of in die geval van jong meisies, deur mekaar in die hare te
vlieg, besleg is. Dit is ’n aaklige nuwe tendens om van gevaarlike wapens –
messe of selfs vuurwapens, gebruik te maak om verskille te besleg.

Ons het dit gesien in die dood van verskeie leerlinge die afgelope ruk. Wat
kan u as Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit vandag sê om die vrese in
ouerharte te besweer dat ons kinders nou ook nie eens meer op die
skoolgronde veilig is nie, asseblief? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr R J KING: Chairperson, Minister, I think it is much more deep-rooted
than playground disputes between learners being settled with traditional
fisticuffs or, in the case of young girls, with catfights. It is a dreadful
new tendency to settle differences through the use of dangerous weapons –
knives or even guns.

Recently we have seen this resulting in the deaths of various learners.
Please, what can you, as Minister of Safety and Security, say today that
will allay the fears in the hearts of parents that our children are now not
even safe at school?]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, hon member. Indeed, what
you say is true. These are some of the things that do happen.
The school environment is a microcosm of our life in South Africa and the
reason we have a situation where this kind of criminal behaviour happens in
our schools has to do with the broader society and the things that happen
within this broader society. Again my appeal is that, indeed, the law-
enforcement agencies will do their work but it would be even better if we
were able to mobilise the communities.

Parents who have children in these various schools should work together
with the law-enforcement agencies in order for us to at least, have an
early-warning signal. The early-warning signal will be of two kinds.
Firstly, some of those children, as I have indicated in my initial
response, will tell us if there are problems in their homes. They will tell
us about problems in the environments where they live and in the schools
where they are, when they have confidence that their parents are
participating in a programme like the Safer Schools Programme.

I would like to make a call to the members that we should all be preaching
the same thing over and over again and involve our people right through the
country in measures that are designed to reduce the levels of crime in
South Africa because it is only when we have that kind of response which
will be a national response to the scourge of crime that, in the end, we
will succeed.

 Application by certain person to attend MK Veterans Association conference
                              at Luthuli House

359.  Mr J Selfe (DA) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (1)   Whether a certain person (name furnished) applied for permission
            to attend the recent MK Veterans Association three-day national
            conference held at Luthuli House; if not, why not; if so,

      (2)   whether any conditions were attached to the said person leaving
            the Cape Town Magisterial District in this regard; if not, why
            not; if so, what conditions;

      (3)   whether the said person was required to report to anyone; if
            not, why not; if so, to whom;

      (4)   whether the said person did indeed report to the relevant
            person; if not, why not;
      (5)   whether any other parolees attended this conference; if so, who
            are they?                                               NO2354E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, the response to the
first part of the question is yes. A certain person recently applied to
attend the recent MK Veterans Association’s three-day national conference
which was held at Luthuli House.  Secondly, yes, his application was
approved on condition that he reports back to the head of community
corrections in Cape Town on an agreed date.

The response to the third part of the question is no. He was invited to
attend the MK Veterans Association conference which was in Johannesburg.
The fourth part of the question is not applicable and with regard to the
fifth part, I am not aware of any other parolees attending this conference.
Thank you.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, obviously this question refers once
again to Mr Tony Yengeni. I have noted your responses, Minister. While it
is an accepted fact that parolees who travel outside the magisterial
district to which they are confined will have some restrictive conditions
including the need to report to designated officials, I see you have said
no to whether the said person was required to report to anyone. I don’t
know why he wasn’t required to report to anyone.

However, will the hon Minister be willing to furnish evidence of compliance
on the part of the affected parolee concerning this matter? Will he do so
to Parliament through the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services?
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, as I said in one of the
responses, after approval there was a condition that he reports back to the
head of community corrections in Cape Town. I have said that, hon Shah. In
terms of compliance, all parolees have to comply with their regulations. If
they don’t, a report will be furnished to the Minister and only he has the
power to say: Within 72 hours, haul that parolee back to prison. I haven’t
had to do that to anybody at the present moment.

  Key results of study HIV and AIDS, and steps to incorporate them into HIV
                      and AIDS programmes and services

350.  Ms W Ngwenya (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (1)   Whether the HIV and AIDS prevalence study has been completed; if
            not, why not; if so,

      (2)   whether the results are available; if not, (a) why not and (b)
            when will they be available; if so, what are the key results of
            the study;
        3) what steps have been taken to incorporate the results of the
           study to ensure improved access to comprehensive HIV and AIDS
           programmes and services within his department?

      NO2340E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, enkosi kuMaNgwenya
ngombuzo [I would like to thank MaNgwenya for the question].

Firstly, the HIV and syphilis prevalence study was completed in February
2007 and the final report was provided to the department in May 2007.
Secondly, the results have not been made available because the department
had to ensure that the results were valid, reliable and in accordance with
national and international standards before any announcements could be made
on them. The service provider, assisted by external experts, was requested
to present the results to top management in the department.

The department is in the process of preparing for the announcement of the
results and it is envisaged that this will happen as part of the
departmental build-up to the national World Aids Day event which will be
addressed by the Deputy Minister of Correctional Services. It will be held
on 30 November 2007.

Furthermore, the HIV and syphilis prevalence study was undertaken to inform
the strategies and policies of the department. The department will
therefore review its current policies and procedures, based on the results
of the HIV and syphilis prevalence study, to improve access to
comprehensive HIV and Aids programmes and services.

I must mention in the same breath that this morning one of our centres was
accredited as an ARV centre and that is Brandvlei correctional centre in
the Western Cape - you can reach it by going up the mountain. The Deputy
Minister hosted that ceremony and did the accrediting of Brandvlei this
morning.

The department has already commenced with the process to align its
framework for comprehensive HIV/Aids programmes and services to the
National Strategic Plan for HIV/Aids and Sexually Transmitted Infections
for 2007-11. The first draft of the framework was presented at the meeting
of the SA National Aids Council. We were represented by the Deputy Minister
in the meeting of the council in September 2007 and that draft framework
was received positively by members of Sanac. Thank you.

Nksz W NGWENYA: Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. Ngqongqoshe Wezokuhlunyeleliswa
Kwezimilo, yiziphi izinqinamba ohlangabezana nazo eMnyangweni
Wezokuhlunyeleliswa Kwezimilo mayelana nokunikeza usizo olwanele
eziboshweni ezinegciwane lengculaza? Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Ms W NGWENYA: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister of Correctional
Services, what obstacles do you come across within the Department of
Correctional Services in connection with the delivery of substantial
services to prisoners who are living with HIV? Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you again for that question,
MaNgwenya. We are doing everything that we can to make sure that we look
after those ...

... abaneNtsholongwane kaGawulayo nabasezintolongweni zethu. Olu phando
lwenziweyo lwenzelwe ukuba sikwazi ukubanika uncedo kangangoko sinako.
Yiloo nto sisebenzisana kakhulu neSebe lezeMpilo. Siyalibulela kakhulu eli
sebe ngokusebenzisana nathi. Lilo elinika imvume yokukhupha amachiza
adodobalisa ulwamvila lukaGawulayo, ii-ARV kumaziko ethu, kwaye ikwakula
maziko apho kufumaneka khona isondlo.

Kanti ke, MaNgwenya, xa bebonwe ngoogqirha kwaqatshelwa ukuba amajoni
omzimba aloo mntu okanye i-CD4 count ngesilungu, sele yehle kakhulu,
sinento ekuthiwa kukukhululwa kwamabanjwa ngezizathu zempilo enkenenkene,
ekuthiwa yi-medical parole ngamakhumsha, eyenziwa ngoogqirha ababini
nabathathu, abathi baxilonge bejonga ukuba loo mntu ukufanele kusini na
ukuba agoduswe ngenxa yokuba ubomi bakhe bukwimeko embi. Eso sicelo sibuya
size kuMphathiswa, ibe nguye otyikityayo. Sithetha nje, ukhona omnye okule
meko oza kukhululwa agoduke aye kunyangelwa ekhaya ngezizathu zempilo ukuze
abantu bangaswelekeli entolongweni zingekho izizalwane zabo. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... who are infected with HIV/Aids in our correctional service centres.
This enquiry was made in order to support them as much as possible. It is
for that reason that we are working closely with the Department of Health.
We express our gratitude to the department for working with us. This is the
department which accredited our centres to provide ARVs which suppress
HIV/Aids. Support grants are also provided in these centres.

However, MaNgwenya, when their doctors test them and discover that their
CD4 counts are very low, we have what is known as medical parole, performed
by two or three doctors. They test whether the person deserves to be
released due to the state of his or her health. The request is then handed
over to the Minister for his signature. There is an inmate, as we speak,
who is in this condition and is going to be released for health reasons and
be treated at home so that people do not die in correctional centres away
from their relatives.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson and Minister, there is an undisputedly higher
incidence of HIV/Aids in all correctional centres than within the average
general population. As a result, it’s much easier to roll out a
comprehensive HIV/Aids programme to a so-called “captive audience” than to
the population at large and yet despite this conducive situation, only a
handful of correctional centres are accredited to administer
antiretrovirals. How many correctional centres are accredited to date, and
when do you anticipate that all correctional centres, countrywide, will be
fully accredited?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, hon member, for
that question. There are quite a number of correctional centres that have
been accredited and it’s growing. If you were listening to my earlier
response in isiXhosa - mhlawumbi khange undive [maybe you did not
understand me] - I stated that we are working very closely with the
Department of Health to make sure that we accredit centres. Surely, we are
not going to be able to accredit all centres - all 243 of them in the
country - but we will begin with the big ones, which is what we are doing
at the present moment.

Again, I, firstly, take my hat off to the Department of Health because the
process of accrediting a centre is a long one but we are getting there.

Secondly, we are rolling out the programme, as I mentioned that we are
members of Sanac and therefore we have to be in line with government policy
in what we are doing in the centres. We are marching at the same pace as
government in terms of government policy and not in front of or behind it.

Regarding the statement where you say there is undisputedly a higher
incidence of HIV/Aids infection in all correctional centres, I am not sure
how many centres you have visited. However, I, who go to these centres, do
not have those statistics and that is the reason we carried out this
prevalence survey so that it gives us exactly the numbers that we want.

Remember, it is not easy to do that kind of survey and get the results that
you think you will get. So I am not sure about your undisputed statistics
and I would like to see you visit a centre with me so that we can then talk
about that as we walk down the passages of our prisons.

  Action taken against Accounting Officer, Director-General and members of
       audit committee in light of qualified audit by Auditor-General

360.  Moulana M R Sayedali-Shah (DA) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the qualified audit given to his department
            by the Auditor-General for the 2006-07 financial year (details
            furnished), any action has been taken against (a) the Accounting
            Officer, (b) the Director-General (name furnished) and (c) the
            members of the audit committee of his department (names
            furnished); if not, why not; if so, what action;
      (2)   whether, with reference to his reply to Question 988 on 7
            September 2006, any action had been taken against members of his
            department in respect of the qualified audit report for the 2004-
            05 financial year; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
            details?                               NO2355E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, the reply to question
number one is that specific action has not been taken to replace the
director-general or what we call the Secretary for Defence in the
Department of Defence and members of the audit committee. Replacing the
director-general or the Secretary for Defence and audit committee members
may not resolve all the qualifications that the department faces between
audit cycles. What would probably happen if we were to take the advice of
the Auditor-General is that we might have to replace almost everybody every
financial year.

Given the fact that the root causes of the qualifications relate to the
constraints and challenges which require medium and long-term solutions, a
structured approach to deal with these qualifications has been put in
place. The accounting officer of the department, who is the Secretary for
Defence, has committed himself to the project called Operation Clean Audit.
He will hold all divisional chiefs and service chiefs to account on those
areas where the department has received negative audit findings through the
accountability management committee meetings of which he would be the
chairperson.
The answer to question number two is that no disciplinary action has been
taken against any member of the Department of Defence regarding the
qualifications contained in the 2004-05 audit report, as the three
qualifications relate to ineffective internal control systems. The managers
of the Department of Defence who are responsible for the internal control
systems that had caused the three audit qualifications were called in by
the accounting officer to account on this matter at the monthly AMC
meetings. They were instructed to submit detailed action plans with target
dates to effectively address the adverse findings.

These action plans and target dates are closely monitored by him and
discussed at the AMC meetings by the audit committee on a quarterly basis.
These are, however, complex issues that require systems enhancements,
policy and procedural changes as well as structural changes. They will not
be solved within one financial year but, rather, over a number of years. I
thank you.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy Minister, in
order to explain the discrepancies and the lack of financial accounting in
the Department of Defence, the members continue to hide behind the fact
that your department inherited an outdated financial management system
which, admittedly, may have had a direct effect on the ability of the
Department of Defence to address some of the system’s related
qualifications or emphasis of the matter by the Auditor-General.

However, hon Deputy Minister, not everything can be blamed on or attributed
to the old system. The Auditor-General has also indicated that many of the
problems that are related to the Auditor-General’s qualified report are
direct consequences of noncompliance with the established internal
accounting policies and procedures including lack of internal control,
checks and balances.

Moreover, the asset registers that should accompany claims for expenditure
are not maintained. For example, a total of          R463,4 million for
travel and subsistence claims was submitted without relevant supporting
documents. An amount of R170 million in salary increases was not disclosed
as well as another R959 000 for fruitless and wasteful expenditure which
has been noted. Honestly, this is unacceptable and inexcusable. Action is
certainly required.

You said that no action was taken against any member. So these issues are
going to recur. You will see them in all annual reports - they will come
again and again. People must be held accountable, Minister. That is what is
expected of you, sir. What do you intend doing to bring those who are
responsible to book? They must be held accountable. This can’t go on. Thank
you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chair, as I said, we are in the
process of establishing internal control systems because that is our
problem. I agree with you but I am not sure whether it would help us to
fire people if we have no proper internal control systems and we are
rectifying that. If we are going to fire people, who are we going to fire
and who are we going to leave behind? If there are no proper internal
control systems - and we have rectified this - then we might as well fire
everybody. [Interjections.]

Your question is in fact linked to the next question but I am saying this
again that we have established internal control systems to address the
problems that we are facing as a department. It is a fact that we have
inherited a bad system but I also agree with you when you say that we could
have done this earlier. Thank you.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Deputy Minister, maybe you should answer the next question
in another language so that the interpreters may give a different
interpretation so that the DA can understand. I think we need to
congratulate the department, firstly, for putting project Operation Clean
Audit into place; and secondly, for the internal control systems that they
have initiated amongst the commanders and the chiefs in the department.

Mr Chairperson, the Department of Defence informed the Portfolio Committee
on Defence of the steps that have been put in place to address the
shortcomings identified by the Auditor-General only yesterday. They did not
only do that but they also informed the portfolio committee on the steps
they have put in place regarding the shortcomings that the audit committee
of the department has identified in the annual report. More than that, the
Department of Defence will also interact with Scopa regarding the annual
report, and more specifically regarding the shortcomings identified by the
Auditor-General.

My question is: Do you agree that we should allow the parliamentary process
regarding the Auditor-General’s qualifications to be completed? If that
process is then complete, will Parliament come with recommendations to this
House as well as to the Department of Defence on what steps should be
taken? That is a parliamentary and a democratic process that should be
allowed and it should not be in the manner that the DA is proposing. Thank
you.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Like he
says, that is the extensive report that we gave to the committee. That is
exactly what we are trying to do and are going to do – to allow this whole
process – the interaction with Scopa and the interaction with the portfolio
committee. On the basis of the recommendations that will come, we will
definitely make sure that all problems that exist, in terms of accounting
in the department, will be rectified.

We are honest with you about the problems that we have with accounting in
our department. We would be lying to you if we were to say that tomorrow we
are just going to spin a coin and the problems will be solved. The problems
need a systematic approach and that is exactly what we are doing.

Mr E W TRENT: Chairperson, I hear what the hon Deputy Minister is saying. I
have been here for almost four years now, serving on Scopa, and the Defence
Force has performed poorly in all of that time. There have been resolutions
of Scopa - the hon Koornhof said that we must let the process go forward.
My question is: Why have you not reacted earlier to the recommendations of
Scopa - which are actually recommendations of this House and are adopted by
it? Can you tell us what sort of timeframes we can expect before you
finally get to a point where we can get a clean report? It is of no use
saying that it is a process. There has to be an end to the process at some
stage or other.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, what I was saying was
that there is a process that we have started together - that is with the
portfolio committee and Scopa. That process will definitely have
timeframes. It is not advisable for me to just come and stand here and say
that this is the time that it will take for the process to be completed.

I must also say that it is not correct to say that we have done nothing.
There have been corrective measures taken. One of the key things which was
not happening before was that there was a process where all chiefs of
services were involved but they were not accounting to the Chief of the
National Defence Force. They all now account to the Chief of the National
Defence Force and he in turn works with the committee. So, there are some
steps that have already been taken. But I assure you that, like you are
saying, you will be part of the committee. You will come with the
timeframes and we will make sure that those timeframes are met. Thank you.

  Steps taken to determine who was responsible for unverifiable travel and
                             subsistence claims

362.  Adv H C Schmidt (DA) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (1)   Whether, in light of his department having received a qualified
            audit report from the Auditor-General for the 2006-07 financial
            year, the amount of R463,4 million for unverifiable travel and
            subsistence claims includes the trip taken by the Deputy
            President, Ms Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, to the United Kingdom at
            the end of 2006; if not, in what section of his department’s
            annual report is the expenditure for this trip reported;

      (2)   whether his department has taken any steps to determine who was
            responsible for these claims; if not, why not; if so, (a) what
            steps and (b) who was responsible;

      (3)   whether any action has been taken against those responsible; if
            not, why not; if so, what action? NO2358E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, no! The Department of
Defence only paid for the aircraft to transport the Deputy President on the
trip in question. A Subsistence and Travel allowance is issued by the
President. Whenever we issue or give an aircraft to members of the
Executive or to the Presidency, we only provide them with the aircraft. We
don’t pay their Subsistence and Travel allowance and we don’t pay for any
other additional expenses.

The answer to paragraph 2 is no. The R463,4 million is not a case of human
error but of two financial systems in the Department of Defence that are
not integrated. As a result, the Auditor-General cannot trace the
transactions back to the source documents. The answer to paragraph 3 is
that the Department of Defence is currently in the process of finding a
solution to the problem by combining the information of the two systems in
an information management centre. As a result, the Department of Defence
has developed plans to implement the integrated financial management system
which should be in line with the National Treasury’s expectations. I thank
you.

Mnr R J KING: Voorsitter, Adjunkminister, die snelle optrede teenoor die
Adjunkminister van Gesondheid, agb Nozizwe Madlala-Routledge, ten einde
ongemagtigde uitgawes ten opsigte van reiskostes te verhaal, staan in
skerpe kontras met u en u departement se reaksie ten opsigte van die
ondersoeke en optredes in die geval van die Adjunkpresident en ander
gevalle, soos gereflekteer in die Ouditeur-generaal se verslag. Wat is die
redes hiervoor? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr R J KING: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, the rapid response towards the
Deputy Minister of Health, the hon Nozizwe Madlala-Routledge, in order to
recoup unauthorised travelling expenses is in shrill contrast with you and
your department’s reaction with respect to the investigations and behaviour
in the case of the Deputy President and other cases as reflected in the
Auditor-General’s report. What are the reasons for this?]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Well, the hon member is asking me about my
feelings. If I were to talk about my feelings I might talk the whole day.
But I did not come here to talk about my feelings. I came here to account
to Parliament and to answer questions that are relevant. What I have said
is that the trip of the Deputy President was authorised, that’s number one.


Number two is that we only provided the Deputy President with an aircraft.
As to the Subsistence and Travel allowance costs and others, they are not
incurred by the Department of Defence; they are incurred by the Presidency
as with any other Executive member. If we provide an Executive member with
an aircraft, we do not provide for other costs. The costs are taken care of
by the department concerned.

If we give an aircraft to the Minister of Safety and Security to go to
Burundi, we only provide the Minister with the aircraft, pilots and flight
attendants, and the rest of the costs in terms of the Subsistence and
Travel allowance are paid by the department. Thank you very much.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, Minister can you assure the House that all air
travel expenses by members of the Department of Defence, members of the
Executive and whoever else might use air travel by the department will be
properly accounted for in future financial statements of the department?
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you very much, Ms Van Wyk.
Definitely! The reason why we are engaged in this integrated system is to
make sure that we account for every amount of money that is voted by this
Parliament. It is the responsibility of any department and we cannot be an
exception. We commit ourselves that any money spent by the department will
be accounted for. I thank you.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, in spite of the promises by the
Deputy Minister that this and that will happen, the fact of the matter is
that we understand that you have had this old financial accounting system.
Now you have this new project that you are talking about, the new
Integrated Financial Management, the IFM system, which is soon to be
implemented. I don’t know what the delay is but hopefully that will resolve
the problem.
However, what would explain the fact that you don’t even keep proper asset
registers? I am repeating this again because you made a promise in response
to the hon member that this would not happen again but you have made these
promises before and this matter is still left unresolved. There is no
change, so why should we believe that things will improve?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, we are in the process
of restructuring our asset management and that report is already being
tabled in the defence staff council. It is going to be tabled in the
Portfolio Committee on Defence so that it can be finalised. I am saying
that’s what we are doing, but unfortunately, I cannot make you, Mr Shah,
believe me.

If you don’t want to believe me, I can only tell you what is happening and
plead with you that ... [Interjections.] I don’t want to convince you but
the only reason why I’m pleading with you is that, Mr Shah, surely, come
the end of the financial year, you will have an opportunity to check
whether what I am saying is true or not.

So, let’s not engage ourselves in whether you believe me or not because
that is not the issue. You will have a chance. Once we have finalised the
project we will surely come here to Parliament and, in any case, even if we
don’t, after the financial year we will be bound to come and account to
Parliament and you will be able to check whether what we are saying is true
or not. So let’s leave it at that. Thank you very much.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Chairperson, Deputy Minister, I just wanted to find
out; I think you said that the Auditor-General couldn’t trace a person to
verify which person is responsible. What does that mean? Does it mean that
the department doesn’t know or the Auditor-General doesn’t know and
therefore there is nobody who will be disciplined at the end of the day,
because if you are saying that, that is a problem because somebody has to
be responsible at the end of the day and that somebody has to be fired. If
the Auditor-General and the department can’t identify that person, then
what will happen?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, I think Mr Ndlovu
misunderstood or probably he didn’t understand me. What I said was not that
persons could not be traced. I was referring to the source documents which
are very important for any decision-making. It is the source documents
which could not be traced – not the individuals, but the source documents.

And I have given the reason why that situation has arisen where we were
using two systems in an information management centre and that is exactly
where the problem is and this is what we have resolved by creating one
financial management system. Thank you.

    Minister’s stance on warrant issued and action to be taken against a
                               certain person

352.  Ms D Kohler-Barnard (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:


      (1)   Whether he was informed of a warrant that was issued for the
            arrest of a certain person (name furnished); if not, why not; if
            so, what are the charges stipulated in the warrant;

      (2)   whether the said person will be suspended from all public duties
            until the matter is resolved; if not, why not; if so, what are
            the relevant details;
      (3)   whether he (a) has received any briefing from the President
            regarding this matter and (b) will reveal the circumstances
            surrounding the issue of the warrant for the arrest of the said
            person; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                              NO2342E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I was not informed of
such a warrant. No arrangement is in place yet that I should be informed of
such matters. Therefore, I do not know which charges are reflected in the
warrant. The person will not be suspended. I’ve already said that. The
President briefed me. The circumstances relating to the warrant are unknown
to me. Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, I would like to know
if you really believe that anyone in this country would be likely to have
any incriminating documentation still lying about as hard copy or on
computer after the existence of a warrant or warrants that were leaked to
the press and made public; some cancelled, some not; followed then by some
sort of investigation launched by the ANC into the matter.

In your opinion, if the ANC decides, at some future date, that an inquiry
into Jackie Selebi is necessary, has the ANC not already done enough to
ensure that such an inquiry would turn up absolutely nothing, as the entire
country has been informed of every move of the NPA’s investigation, not the
least of whom is the man who was to be investigated himself. Has this
investigation not effectively been irredeemably compromised?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Chair, I am going to supply the
hon member with the contact details of the Secretary-General of the ANC so
that she can raise that question with him. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, order, please! Order!

Seeing that there are no other supplementary questions, we ...

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Minister, if you still have that position here in the
House and not the secretary-general, the President stated publicly that he
had not “seen the warrant or warrants”. You said, that you are in the
dark... - it seems you might still be – ... about this issue.

I find it incredible to believe that the Minister of Safety and Security is
in the dark about what’s going on regarding his own employee. Well, I’d
like to know if today you have seen the warrant or warrants, how many you
have seen – I mean looked at and examined – and if you indeed were the
person behind the move to quash those warrants, to wipe them out, and if it
wasn’t you, kindly tell this House who it was. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Order, please! Give the
Minister a chance to respond.

The  MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, I don’t know what she wants me
to say but I seem to be understanding her to be asking if I’d seen the
warrants and I’ve given a response that I had not seen the warrants because
it is not my job to go around the courts of this land looking for warrants.
That’s not my job. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, order, please! I think the
hon member should take up the Minister’s promise that he will supply you
with some information.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Thank you, I would be obliged but I would like another
follow-up. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Ndlovu, can ... I’ll come to
you, ma’am. [Interjections.] Order, order, order, Mr Bloem!
[Interjections.] Order, please, order! Can we give the other hon members a
chance to have their say, please!

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you, Minister.

Bengicela nje ukubuza kumhlonishwa ukuthi ngabe uke wambuza yini
uKhomishane ukuthi le nto okukhulunywa ngayo iyiqiniso noma cha? [I would
just like to ask the hon Minister if he has ever enquired from the
commissioner whether the matter in question is true or not?]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Of course I have. I’ve asked him if he
was guilty of any crime and he has said no, he was not. [Interjections.]
Unfortunately nobody has brought me evidence to show that indeed he was
guilty of any crime. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, order, please! Order, order,
order! I think we should have order here. If you want to ask questions, we
should have order here.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Minister, I don’t think I’ve ever been quite so
shocked to be in this House and ... [Interjections.] Perhaps you could ask
your members to be quiet so you can hear. ... to hear from a Minister that
he is totally ignorant about what is going on in his own Ministry.

For you to suggest that you are a judge and jury and that you have the
right to declare to the land, “Oh well, I asked him,” is worse than the
President saying: “Trust me.” I’m sorry, I don’t listen to men saying trust
me and I haven’t done so since I was 13 years old!

Now, Minister, I would like you to come clean to this House and tell us
what on earth is going on within your Ministry. This man is not suspended.
You suspend the Pikolis of the country but you do not suspend the man ...
[Interjections.] ... with the biggest cloud hanging over him of any person
in this entire country. He has confessed to having friends none of us
should have. He is in a position ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): What is your question, hon member?

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: I’m asking him to come clean and tell this House why
he is misleading the House. It is absolutely outrageous!

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, for starters, Deputy
Chairperson, you will have to take a decision on the allegation she is
making that I’m misleading the House. [Interjections.] That’s the first
thing that you need to determine.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, please, order! Minister, we
shall give a ruling on this tomorrow.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. The rest of the
questions she has been putting on the table ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, please! Order!
[Interjections.] Order, please!

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: The questions that the hon member –
I’m sorry, hon member – that she has been putting on the table are nothing
but an attempt on her part to use this platform to vilify all of us from
the President right down the line. She has not asked a question. What
question am I going to answer? She has not asked a question.

All that she wanted to do was to use the issue to criticise all of us who
are in government. And, Chairperson, if that is her style, if that is what
makes her happy, I say thank you very much; continue to derive happiness
from what you’ve raised. [Interjections.] She has not asked a question.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, order, please! Order! I
think, hon members, we ask questions of Ministers because we want to
solicit information. I don’t think it is appropriate to behave the way we
are doing now. It looks as if we’re not soliciting information but are in
fact adopting a confrontational stance. Please, seeing that there are no
other supplementary questions, the following question is Question No 353 by
the hon ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairman, I had pressed my button to
ask a further supplementary question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Davidson, I think we’ve had
four supplementary questions, which is the maximum.
   Position regarding National Prosecuting Authority obtaining warrant of
                          arrest for certain person

353.  Dr J T Delport (DA) asked the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
      Development:

      (1)   Whether the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) has obtained a
            warrant for the arrest of a certain person (name furnished); if
            not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
            relevant details;

      (2)   whether she will make a statement on the matter?   NO2344E

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
I see that the hon member who asked the question is not in the House.
Deputy Chairperson, I am unable to speak on this matter as it may be the
subject of an inquiry.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, Minister. We then move
to Question 361. I call on the hon Joubert.

Mr L K JOUBERT: Chairperson, Madam Minister, Dr Delport has had an
operation and that is why he is not here. I am standing in for him.
Minister, the way that I understand it, is that a warrant of arrest is
issued by a court on application and that application has to be supported
by prima facie evidence. We take it that in this particular case, because
the person concerned is such a senior person, the commissioner of police,
the court would not be likely to issue a warrant of arrest.

It has been reported that the warrant was eventually withdrawn or
cancelled. The question is: If it is such an important document, why was it
not immediately executed? Secondly, if it was withdrawn, what were the
reasons for its withdrawal or cancellation? Thirdly, I would like you to
respond as to whether you personally had anything to do this whole process?

Mr D V BLOEM: This is a point of order, Chairperson. The Minister has
clearly said that this point is the subject of an investigation. The
Minister has said that. That member still continues to put a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, that is not a point of
order.

Mr D V BLOEM: No, you must rule on that, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, please take your seat.

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, on a point of order: May I just ask if it is
parliamentary for the hon Bloem to make signs like this across his neck to
members of this House. Ask him to withdraw, thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, I don’t know about
signs like that. I know that in Zulu when you say that, it means you love
the person. [Laughter.] Does the Minister insist on not answering the
question?

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Yes, absolutely, I
insist. I would like to plead that we respect the law. You see, at some
point, this very same matter or related matter will come to Parliament and
we have to uphold the law. [Interjections.] Please stop shouting at me,
Madam. Patience. What is wrong? Honestly, the hon member there is quite
something. I mean, she just goes on screaming. I am saying that I am not
going to respond.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, Minister. I don’t see
any point in us continuing.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairperson, could I address you on
that, please?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Can I just rule on this, please?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Before you rule on it, Mr Chairperson, I
would actually like to address you on it. I think the hon Minister is
conflating two things. One is the whole question of Adv Pikoli and there is
an investigation going on. Quite rightly, that investigation will lead to a
report before this House and this House will then have to take a decision.

This question is not about Adv Pikoli. We have just heard from the hon
Minister of Safety and Security that he has spoken to the commissioner and
has satisfied himself that the man is innocent. Now I want to ask the hon
the Minister: What investigation is there into Mr Selebi? The hon Minister
has said there is no such investigation. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, order! Please, I want to
appeal to members that if the Minister insists that it is sub judice ...
[Interjections.] Order, please! But then I also say that we will give a
ruling on this matter. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): The Minister is raising a point of
order.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, on a point of order: You
can look it up in Hansard; I did not say that I had satisfied myself that
the national commissioner Jackie Selebi is innocent. I did not say that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): We will, Minister, also look at the
Hansard and see what the Minister actually said. I want us to move on now.
We move on to Question 361 by the hon Shah to the Minister of Defence.

 Steps taken to determine those responsible for prepayments and advancements
                          totalling R176,5 million
361.  Moulana M R Sayedali-Shah (DA) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (1)   Whether, in light of his department having received a qualified
            audit report from the Auditor-General for the 2006-07 financial
            year (details furnished), he or his department has taken any
            steps to determine who was responsible for the prepayments and
            advancements amounting to R176,5 million; if not, why not; if
            so, what steps;

      (2)   whether any action has been taken against those responsible; if
            not, why not; if so, what action? NO2356E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: The reply is as follows: All the advances
for the amount of R176,5 million are only captured after the documentation
has been received and correctly checked. These advances then become valid
transactions that are reflected on our financial management system.

With regard to question two, the answer is no. The problem is that we have
two financial systems. I’ve been saying this to Shah but I’m going to
repeat until he understands me. Of course, my job, even in the church, is
to preach every day, even if I‘ve preached the previous week. The two
systems are not integrated and as a result the auditor is unable to trace
transactions back to the source documents - I’ve already said that, Shah.

The Department of Defence is currently in the process of finding a solution
to the problem by combining the information of the two systems into an
Information Management Centre. As a result, the Department of Defence has
developed plans to implement the integrated financial management system in
line with the National Treasury’s expectations. Of course, like I said,
when answering Question 360, the question is similar but it has just been
put in a different language. That’s the same question I answered in
Question 360.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, just as the hon Deputy Minister
said that he has to repeat it again and again, I am also going to repeat it
again and again. The challenges in financial services are caused by the
delay in the implementation of the National Treasury’s financial management
improvement programme and the integrated financial management system
without which the Department of Defence will not be able to achieve an
unqualified financial statement.

That is a fact, Minister, and we agree on it. The problems raised by the
Auditor-General were reported in the 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 annual
reports, which means they are recurring. I can understand that the old
system did not allow for proper reporting. Don’t blame everything on the
old finance system, you are not taking action on noncompliance in terms of
the department’s own internal procedure. The question is: No action is
being taken against people who do not comply with the Public Finance
Management Act, the PFMA. It is the job of the Minister and the Deputy
Minister to ensure compliance internally.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Hon member that was not a question. Deputy Minister,
it is your choice.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Mr Shah, once the systems are in place and
there is no compliance, I can assure you that we will definitely take
action. I have said that and I must repeat that: We will definitely take
action for any noncompliance once the systems are in place and this is what
we are doing. We even had a meeting with the Auditor-General to help us to
move forward. It is not a matter that we are just ignoring. We cannot do so
because that will be irresponsible. We are talking here about the
taxpayer’s money; we are doing something about it. Give us a chance. Once
we’ve put the systems in place and there is no compliance, we will
definitely act.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Can I ask the hon Deputy Minister to assure the hon Shah,
not the House, that yesterday the department informed the portfolio
committee that both the department, as well as the National Treasury, are
working on a plan to put the information systems of the department in
place. It will not be this year but it will be phased in to satisfy the
requirements of both the National Treasury and the department to correct
this. There is no quick fix for this one but the problem is being addressed
by the two departments in order to correct the situation.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Mr Koornhof, in fact this is what I’ve been
trying to say and this is what I’m saying. But what I will do, I will find
time tomorrow to have coffee with Mr Shah - or tea - because I know he is
not the type of person who understands quickly. So, you need to take time
and I’m going to repeat what I’ve been saying to him here over tea and once
we have drank the first cup, I will repeat what I’ve said and we will order
another cup of tea and I’ll repeat it until he understands.

Mr Shah is a very important person. He is a representative and he is here
because he has been voted in to represent people in Parliament. So, I
cannot ignore him because he takes time to understand. All that I need to
do to save time, Deputy Chairperson, is to ask for special time with Mr
Shah. I will either meet him somewhere or I’ll invite him to my office;
I’ll make sure that there are two pots of coffee and two pots of tea so
that I can repeat myself until he understands. Thank you.

Mr T J LOUW: I want to repeat what I have said to the hon Deputy Minister.
For years now you’ve had bad audits. Every year the Auditor-General issues
you with management letters explaining to you what the problems are. Why
has it taken you three years to identify the problems so that you are only
now taking action? That’s my question.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, the hon member is mistaken
when he thinks that it is only Mr Shah who thinks like that in this
country. There are many people like Shah in the country - even in the
department. Just as I will be explaining so many times to Shah, there are
also people in the department whom we are sorting out. They do not listen,
like Mr Shah, and that is why we are setting up a system so that we can act
against them. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The House adjourned at 17:06.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

      1) The Minister for Public Enterprises


          a) Molaokakanywa wa Broadband Infraco [M  26  –  2007]  (National
             Assembly– sec 75).

         This is the official  translation  into  Sepedi  of  the  Broadband
         Infraco Bill [B 26 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly

The Speaker

    (a)     Report  of  the  Public  Service  Commission   (PSC)   on   the
         investigation into the Management of Public Servants  in  Terms  of
         Prevailing Provisions who are elected as Municipal  Councillors  in
         the Limpopo and Western Cape Provinces – August 2007 [RP 152-2007].

