---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 16 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-03-16
---

FRIDAY, 16 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at the Saul Tsotetsi Recreation and Sports Centre,
Emfuleni, Sedibeng district, Gauteng, at 09:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

MODULASETULO WA NCOP: Tšie-lala! Re kgopela gore re kwaneng, re se ke ra
dira lešata ka gore tulo ya NCOP bjale e thomile gomme lena bjaloka
setšhaba, le tlile go theetša. Re tla kgopela batlhankedi ba NCOP go hlahla
bao ba sa tsenago gore ba ye kua moragorago gomme ba itulele fase molepo
gobane re tlile go nea Motlatša-Presidente sebaka sa gore a bolele le lena.
Ke bona ba bangwe ba sa ntše ba tsena. Ba šiilwe ke nako. Ka madimabe re ka
se kgone go letela batho ka moka gore ba fihle ka gore nako ya rena lehono
ke ye kopana, ga e swane le nako ya beke ka moka ge re be re le fa.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We request your cooperation please. We
must not make a noise because the sitting of the NCOP has begun and you, as
the community, have come to listen. We will request the ushers of the NCOP
to lead those who are still coming in. Let them take the back seats and
relax. We are going to give a platform to the Deputy President so that she
speaks to you. I can see others are still coming in. They are late.
Unfortunately we cannot wait for everybody to arrive because our time is
short today; it is not like the whole week when we were here.]

Hon members, it gives me great pleasure to welcome all of you to this
plenary of the National Council of Provinces in Sebokeng, Gauteng’s
Emfuleni local municipality. I will now call upon the Deputy President of
the country, hon Mrs Pumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka to address the Council.
[Applause.]

  STRENGTHENING PARTICIPATORY GOVERNANCE AT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FOR EFFECTIVE
                      AND SUSTAINABLE SERVICE DELIVERY

                        (Deputy President’s Address)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr Mahlangu, Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, Mrs Hollander, the Secretary to National
Parliament, Mr Zingile Dingane, representatives of the different provinces,
Premiers and MECs who are here, representatives of local government,
mayors, councillors, hon members and fellow South Africans, it is both a
pleasure and a privilege for me to be here with you today, in this
endeavour to bring Parliament closer to the people. This is the fifth year
running since we started with this programme, and thanks go to the NCOP for
this innovative concept of Taking Parliament to the People and going around
the country to different provinces. Well done! [Applause.]

The choice of having a sitting at Sebokeng during the Human Rights Month is
also appropriate, as Sharpeville, a neighbour of Sebokeng, is where one of
the most atrocious violations of human rights in this country took place.
Sebokeng also has had its own challenges and human rights violations at the
height of our struggle, and we will always cherish the role that was played
by the people of Sebokeng.

We will never forget the major role that townships such as Sebokeng, Evaton
and Sharpeville played in the struggle for liberation, especially between
1984 and 1986. The people of these areas were at the forefront of the
uprising that shook the apartheid regime to its core. [Applause.]

Sithanda ke ukubulela kakhulu kubantu besi sithili ngenxaxheba abayithatha
ekuwiseni urhulumeni wengcinezelo. Izithonga zenu zavakala. [We are very
grateful to the people of this district for the role they have played in
overthrowing the apartheid regime. Your blows were felt.]
Yingakho nje namhlanje sikwazi ukuthi, silapha, sithi uhulumeni akeze lapha
kinina azokuthi: Siyabonga. [Ihlombe].[That is the reason we are able today
to say that the government should come to you and simply say thank you.
[Applause.]]

It was here that the community’s struggles against apartheid and
undemocratic institutions were waged, and thus the roots of future
democracy also have to be strengthened here. Since the democratic
breakthrough of 1994, which ushered in a democratic dispensation, we have
always insisted that we need to create a people-centred society and that we
have to engage in people-driven processes of change. It is for this reason
that we are here today.

Sithi kini, masijule ngengxoxo. [We are saying to you, let us deepen the
debate.]

We also are here because we want to strengthen participatory governance at
local level for effective and sustainable service delivery.

Hon members, you are aware that the NCOP has a unique position in our
constitutional system of governance. This derives from the fact that it is
the only institution within our system that straddles all three spheres of
our co-operative governance contract – the national, provincial and local
spheres.

The place that the NCOP holds is also crucial, because it has a unique role
in relation to strategic oversight. It has the responsibility and the
mandate to keep a constant watch on the processes that must integrate
legislative and executive decisions in all spheres of government, and
ensure the practical implementation of these decisions, especially to the
extent that they directly impact on the lives of our people at every level.
For instance, let us look at the ward committees. Ward committees are a
tool to ensure effective participatory governance.

The White Paper on Local Government defines developmental local governance
as a local government committed to working with citizens and groups within
the community to find long-term solutions to address our social, economic
and material needs and thus improve the quality of life of our people.

Kubalulekile ke, bahlali, ukuba kuqiniswe iikomiti zeewadi.  Bubalulekile
ubukho benu kwezi komiti. Ndithi ke kumalungu eBhunga laMaphondo leSizwe
kule Palamende ehloniphekileyo, mawabe nayo indlela yokuqinisa
nokusebenzisana neekomiti zeewadi ngoba ikomiti yewadi sisigqeba
sikarhulumente esisemthethweni ekusiso esikufutshane nabantu. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[It is, therefore, very important, community members, that ward committees
be strengthened. Your participation in these committees is very crucial. I
therefore say to members of the National Council of Provinces in this
august Parliament, they need to have a system of strengthening working
partnership with ward committees, because these committees are official
government structures closer to the people.]

Abantu abakhethwe umphakathi ukuthi baphathe amakomidi ezigceme, kufanele
lo msebenzi bawuphathe ngezandla eziqinile ngoba uma bewenza kahle lo
msebenzi bayokwazi ukudlulisela umbiko maqondana nezidingo zabantu
kuhulumeni walapha ekhaya. Uma uhulumeni wasekhaya ebona ukuthi inkinga
inkulu, naye ayidlulisele phezulu.

Ngifuna ukuthi-ke nokwakhiwa kwezinhlelo zama-IDPs lezo esisebenza ngazo
ekuboneni izindlela zokwakha nokuthuthukisa izindawo esihlala kuzo
zisebenza kahle kakhulu lapho kusuke kukhona amakhansela ezigceme khona.
Angithi siyazi sonke ukuthi ayini amakhansela ezigceme? Amakhansela
ezigceme kufanele ngabe akhona kuyo yonke indawo okuhlala kuyo abantu.
Akhona lapha eSebokeng? Abantu balapha bayaya emihlanganweni yawo?
[Ubuwelewele.] Uma ngabe amalungu omphakathi engayi emihlanganweni yawo
ngiyawacela ayikhuthalele le mihlangano ngoba ngalokho azokwazi ukusizana
nathi siwuhulumeni.

Ngicela nokuthi, siyi-NCOP, sikuqaphe ukusebenza kwalawa makomidi ezigceme.
Amakomidi ezigceme asesebenza lapha eNingizimu Afrika asekwazile
ukusabalala ngangokuthi abhekela izigceme ezinga-80% esinazo. Lezo zigceme
ezinga-20% ezingakabi nawo amakomidi nazo ziyalungiselelwa. Yintuthuko
enhle-ke leyo esesiyibonile.
Kubalulekile ukuthi kulo msebenzi sibandakanye imindeni, abazali,
nomphakathi ekulweleni izinto esizidingayo nokubhekana nalezo ezenzeka
lapho sihlala khona, ezifana nemizabalazo yokusebenzela ukuthi imfundo
nezikole zethu zisebenze kahle, ukuqeda ubugebengu, ukulwa negciwane
leSandulela Ngculazi neNgculazi, nokuzama ukuthi sandise ukuziphatha
kwabantu ngendlela efanele ezindaweni lapho sihlala khona. Zonke lezi zinto
zifuna ukuthi umndeni nomndeni uze ngaphambili. Ukulwa nokukhulelwa
kwezingane zamantombazane zisencane nakho kuyinto efuna abazali bebambisene
nohulumeni; ifuna abafundisi nezinhlangano zentsha emphakathini ukuthi nazo
zibe nalo iqhaza ezilibambayo.

Abazali-ke mabasize balungise umphakathi kanye nezingane zabo emindenini
lapho behlala khona ukuze, uma sibambisene, sikwazi ukunqoba zonke lezi
zinto ezenza umphakathi wethu ecekeleke phansi.

Lapho sikhuluma khona kakhulu ngodlame, ushilo uMongameli ngesikhathi evula
iPhalamende ukuthi sizokwandisa inani lamaphoyisa azosebenza ebantwini.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ward councillors should be elected by the community, they should perform
their duties efficiently because if they do that then they will be able to
submit a report to the local council regarding the needs of the people. If
the local council realises that the problem is quite big it should report
it to the higher authority.

I want also to indicate that the structures of IDPs, which we use to
identify programmes of constructing and developing our localities, work
even better where ward councillors are involved. Do we all know what ward
councillors are? Ward councillors should be present in all areas where
people live. Do you have ward councillors here in Sebokeng? Do you attend
their meetings? [Interjections.] If members of the community do not attend
ward committee meetings, I request them to attend these meetings because,
by so doing, they will be able to assist us as government.

I also request that we, as the NCOP, should monitor the work of these ward
committees. The ward committees here in South Africa have expanded in such
a way that they now cover 80% of the wards that we have. The remaining 20%
of the wards which do not have councillors are being considered. This is a
good development that we have seen.

It is also important to involve families, parents and communities in both
fighting for our needs and also facing up to the challenges in areas where
we live. Challenges like fighting for education, better performance in our
schools, combating crime, fighting HIV/Aids and also encouraging good
behaviour in areas where we live, all require each family to stand up and
be counted. Fighting against our young girls falling pregnant requires
parents to work together with the government. It also requires educators
and youth organisations to play a role.

Parents should promote discipline in communities, among their children and
within their families, because, if we work together, we will overcome the
bad things that destroy our communities.

In areas where violent crime is a problem - the President mentioned that
during his state of the nation address – more police will be deployed
there.]

Nakong eo Mopresidente wa rona a neng a bula Palamente o ile are: “rona
mmuso re tla le neha tjhelete ya hore le gone ho hira seponesa se sengata”.
Hona ho bolela hore moo batho ba rona ba leng teng ho tla ba le maponesa a
mangata. Bo-Station Commander le batho ba bang ba tshwereng seponeseng ba
tsebe ho sebetsa le setjhaba, hore setjhaba se tle se re tshepe
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[During the opening of Parliament our President said: “The government will
give you money in order for you to employ more policemen.” This means that
wherever there are people, there will be a heavy police presence. The
station commanders and other senior officials in the police department will
be able to work with the communities, so that the nation can begin to trust
us.]

Government will make the resources available, but, at the end of the day,
it is going to be the commitment of the individuals who are on the
frontlines, the bobby on the beat.
The communities must support the police, because ...

... amaphoyisa nawo ngabantu, angithi? Ayafuna ukuxhaswa kanti futhi uma
enze into enhle kuhle akhuthazwe.

Ngifuna-ke ukuthi ngike ngikhulume ngenye inkinga esinayo kakhulu yegciwane
leNgculazi. Niyazi ukuthi siyathanda ukulwa naleli gciwane, futhi siyazi
ukuthi asikwazi ukulinqoba uma singasebenzisani nomphakathi. Yingakho nje
sakhe isigungu lesi esisibiza ngokuthi i-SA National Aids Council, Sanac,
esisanda kuyigcoba ngokusemthethweni. Kulesi sigungu sizama ukuthi
sisebenze nomphakathi ukuze sikhuthaze ukufundisa ngeNgculazi. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... the police are also human beings, is it not so? The police do need
support and if they have done something good it is good to praise them.

I want to raise another problem we have regarding HIV/Aids. You all know
that we do like to fight this disease. We are also aware that we will not
conquer it if we do not work with the community. It was for this reason
that we established the body called the SA National Aids Council, or Sanac,
which was recently formally launched. Through this body we try to work with
the community in order to educate people about Aids.]

Regarding social mobilisation and education, especially about prevention
...

... ngicela ukubuza kumalungu nabantu bomphakathi ukuthi bangaki lapha,
futhi ngizocela baphakamise izandla, abake baziphe ithuba bachazele
abantwana ngaleli gciwane? Ngicela baphakamise izandla abake bathathe
ithuba lokucacisa ngaleli gciwane. [Ubuwelewele.] Nibaningi kangaka
ngempela? Siyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... I want to know from the hon members and the community at large how
many people here - and I want them to raise their hands - have afforded
themselves an opportunity to explain this disease to their children? I
request those who have explained this disease to raise their hands.
[Interjections.] Are you sure it is really all of you? Thank you.]

I am glad that there are so many people who are involved in public
education about HIV/Aids in this community. It means that Sanac, in this
community, will not have a hard time, but I would urge the municipality,
with our support, to invest in community education using the community.

As part of the Expanded Public Works Programme, government is now also
going to invest in community education and invest in home-based care so
that there are many people who can be recruited, trained and employed in
the community and who can then look after our people who are sick at home,
but they can also be responsible for education. [Applause.]

Yinhle le nto eyenziwa nguhulumeni, angithi? [Ubuwelewele.] [The government
is doing a right thing here, isn’t it? [Interjections.]]

We would also like to inform members and the community that government
wants to make sure that you tell people and advise them to go to clinics
...

... ukuze bathole imithi uma sebegula kakhulu.

Into ebalulekile engifuna amalungu ayazi ngegciwane ukuthi, uma ulwa nalo
igciwane - uma usunalo, futhi uma ngabe uphila ngokuzivocavoca ube udla
kahle, awuzukugula, uzohlala ukwazi ukusebenza futhi wenze yonke into
njengomuntu ophilile. Kodwa-ke ukugula kuhamba kuhambe kuze kufike. Uma
ngabe nokho uwuqinisa umzimba, uyakwazi ukuthi ulidudulele emuva igciwane,
lingangeni emzimbeni kakhulu lize likugulise, lithi noma likhona uphila
nalo kodwa ube ukwazi ukuphila impilo enomdlandla.

Singuhulumeni, siqeda ukumemezela ukuthi sizokhipha amabhiliyoni ayi-14
amarandi. Yimali-ke le edida ingqondo. [Ihlombe.] Le imali esizosebenzisana
ngayo nani malungu nabantu bomphakathi ekulweni negciwane; esizofundisa
ngayo abantu, sibaqeqeshe; esizoqala ngayo onompilo basemphakathini;
esizoqinisekisa ngayo ukuthi imitholampilo isebenza kahle; nezokwenza
sikwazi ukuhlinzeka nangemithi emitholampilo. Yonke le nto izosebenza uma
sibambisene nomphakathi. [Ihlombe.]

Ngifuna ukukhuluma ngentsha ekhona lapha. Into eyenza ukuthi igciwane
linqobeke kuwo wonke amazwe ukuzithiba ukuya ocancini kwabantu abasha,
besebancane. Uma ingenza leyo nto nje, igciwane sizolinqoba. [Ihlombe.]
Leyo nto ifuna ukuthi abazali bakhulume nabantwana babo, babafundise
abantwana, kubandakanywe nezikole ukufundisa ngobungozi obukhona. Sifuna
ukusho ukuthi, thina singabantu baseNingizimu Afrika, sinephupho lokubona
iNingizimu Afrika ne-Afrika engasenalo igciwane. Leyo nto ingenzeka uma
labo asebenegciwane bengakugwema ukulidlulisela kwabanye abantu, nokuthi
bangalinikezi umdlandla wokuthi liphinde libangene kabusha futhi.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... so that they can get medication when they are seriously ill.

One important thing that I want members and the community to know about
this disease is that, if you fight the disease when you have already
contracted it, if you exercise and eat healthy food, you will not get sick.
You will always be able to work and be like a normal person. However, the
illness will attack you after some time. If you keep your body busy you
will be able to neutralise it, preventing it from getting serious in your
body, which can make you sick. That can help you. Although you live with
it, it can help you to live a healthy life.

The government recently made an announcement that it will make available
R14 billion. This is a lot of money. [Applause.] Together with you, hon
members, and the members of the community, we will use this money to fight
the disease, educate our people and train them. We will start off with the
training of community caregivers, ensuring the proper functioning of our
clinics, which will help us to be able to supply medication to clinics. All
this will be a success if we work together with our community. [Applause.]

I want to talk to the youth that is present here. The only strategy which
has helped many countries in fighting HIV/Aids, is abstinence for the
youth. They are still young. If our youth can simply do that, we will
defeat HIV/Aids. [Applause.] This, however, requires both parents and
teachers to talk to children and educate them about the dangers of this
disease. We want to make an assertion that we, the people of South Africa,
have a dream to see South Africa and Africa free of HIV/Aids. That dream
can come true as long as those who are already infected do not spread the
disease and also do not give it a chance to infect them again.]

If one is already positive, one must live positively. People must not allow
themselves to be reinfected. What they have to do is not to infect other
people. In order to be able to do this, one must know one’s status. One
must tell one’s loved ones and then one must live positively.

Uma umuntu esenalo igciwane makaphile ngendlela enokuzinakekela. Kufuneka
angalingi alingenise kabusha kuyena uqobo igciwane futhi angalidluliseli
kwabanye! Ukuze akwazi ukwenza lokho, kufanele asazi isimo sakhe maqondana
negciwane bese azisa abaseduze naye nabayizihlobo zakhe, aphinde aphile
ngokuzinakekela. Ngakho-ke kufuneka angalidluliseli kwabanye igciwane. Uma
nje umuntu yena engalidlulisi, kusho ukuthi i-Afrika inalo ithuba
lokulinqoba leli gciwane. Okwesibili, labo abangakabi nalo igciwane
mabangalitholi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[If a person is already positive, he or she must live a healthy life. One
must never allow oneself to be reinfected or spread the disease to other
people. In order to do that, one must know one’s status regarding HIV/Aids
and should inform one’s family and relatives, and should also take care of
oneself. One should not spread the disease to others. If those who are
already positive do not spread HIV/Aids, it means Africa is in a position
to defeat HIV/Aids. Secondly, those who are negative should remain
negative.]

If you are negative, stay negative.

So, this is a personal agenda. This is what Sanac asks you to do on a
personal level. If one doesn’t come to community meetings, and doesn’t do
the many other things that we ask people to do, which may be difficult, one
must make this decision. A personal decision is one’s personal management
of the epidemic. One doesn’t need money to make this decision. One doesn’t
need a second person. One doesn’t need to be a member of anything. One just
needs to be a committed South African and African for the future of Africa.
It’s the most revolutionary decision you’ll ever take. [Applause.]

Regarding young women in particular, please, I appeal to them to stay away
from older men. [Applause.] Our studies show that the young women who are
most at risk are those who have relationships with older men.

Abantwana abaningi abangamantombazane abathola igciwane yilabo abahlekisana
nobaba abanezintshebe. [Ihlombe.] Ngithi kubantwana bamantombazane:
Bantwana bethu, siyanithanda. Siyabacela sithi mabangahehwa yilaba obaba
abathi bazobathengela amaselula. Bangaze bafele iselula? [Ubuwelewele.]
Bangaze bafele isikibha esibhalwe ukuthi sakhiwe yinkampani ethile noma
izicathulo? Phansi ngalabo’baba! [Ubuwelewele.]

Siyanicela futhi nabazali ukuthi, kulo lonke ikhaya, sifuna babambe iqhaza
ekulweni nokuhlukunyezwa kwezingane namakhosikazi, ngoba abantu abaningi
abahlukunyezwayo, njengabantwana nomama, bahlukunyezwa emakhaya ngabantu
ababaziyo, ngabantu ababathandayo nangabantu ababajwayele. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Most young girls who contract HIV/Aids are those who are in love with
bearded men. [Applause.] I say to young girls: You are our children. We
love you. We request our children not to be deceived by these old men who
promise to buy them cellphones. Should they die just for a mere cellphone?
[Interjections.] Should they die for a branded T-shirt or a pair of shoes
just because it was manufactured by a particular company? Away with these
old men, away! [Interjections.]

We request you as parents to play a role in the fight against violence
against children and women, because most victims of abuse, particularly
children and women, are abused in their families by people whom they know,
by their loved ones and their acquaintances.]

Most of the abuse, including violence, death and murder, is committed
between people who know one another. That is so in 81% of all cases. So,
women and children are victims at the hands of people they know, trust and
love. These things happen in the homes of people here.

Yini abantu abayenzayo ngalawo makhaya abo ahlukumezekayo? Siyabacela
abantu, beyimindeni, ukuthi babambe iqhaza. Ngifuna ukugcizelela ukuthi
imindeni asiyizwa kwezemfundo. [What is it that people are doing about the
abuse of their families? We request people as families to play a particular
role. I want to emphasise that we do not hear of any role played by
families in education.]

We do not hear anything from families and parents in education struggles.
We hear about schools performing badly from reporters. Where are the
parents in such a community? Why do we not receive a delegation of parents
to the inspector, to the department, to the province to say ...

... Ngqongqoshe wesifundazwe, awuze uzobona isikole salapha emphakathini
wangakithi? [... to the provincial minister, come and have a look at our
local school?]

Why must the mayor read about it in the newspaper?

Kusho ukuthi singabazali, singumphakathi, sesiyekelele. Ngiyabacela-ke
abazali, ngithi kubo: Buyani bazali. Ubandlululo sasingeke silunqobe ukuba
abazaali babehleli emakhaya belindele ukuthi indaba bayoyizwa ephepheni.
Zonke lezi zinto ezimbi, nabo abangazifuni, ezenzeka emphakathini,
sizozinqoba ngokuthi bona abazali babe ngabantu abababamba izintambo ukuze
benze kube ngcono. Kufuneka babe khona emabhodini aphethe izikole, benze
umehluko.

Ngicela ukuthi basebenzelane nabasebenzi bokuthuthukisa umphakathi.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)
[This means that parents and the community have given up. I request
parents, and I say to them: Parents, could you please come back and play
your role? We would have not defeated apartheid if parents were just
sitting down, not doing anything, hoping that they would read about it all
in the newspapers. All these bad things happening in our communities, which
parents themselves do not like, would be overcome only if parents play a
leading role in making things better. They should be part of school
governing bodies in order to make a difference.

I request parents to work together with the community development workers.]

These are the young people in the local communities who are there to help
the councillors to assist the community in solving the problems in the
quickest possible way.

Regarding our izimbizo, we appeal to members and the community to come and
attend izimbizo, in the same way that the community has come to attend this
event, because we need community members to be at the forefront of
interaction with us.

Maqondana nezemfundo, ngiyabacela abazali, ngiyawacela nawo makhansela
ukuthi ... [With regard to education, I request parents and councillors
...]

... to make sure that there is a skills plan in their community. What is
standing between a prosperous South Africa and a South Africa that will not
take full advantage of its economic role is the skills level.

South Africa has more than 10 million young people who are in danger of
never getting a job until they reach the age of 40 years, if they do not
take action. These are the people who make up the bulk of the second
economy, and these are the people we need to deal with immediately.

We in government have committed ourselves - uMongameli ushilo ngenkathi
evula iPhalamende [... the President mentioned this in his state of the
nation address ...] - to facilitate the entry of those young people into
the labour market. When we do that, we must know that we are collaborating
with the community in providing them with skills. We can do all the other
things in South Africa that are sophisticated, but if we do not deal with
these 10 million or more young people in the next two to three years, we
are sunk.


It is intensive skilling at a local level, intensive skilling at a
provincial level, and it is about the quality of public education. Without
quality in public education, good teachers who come to school and teach,
this nation will not take full advantage of an economy that is growing, and
we will not be able to share this growth.

Ngiyacela-ke. Size lapha ngoba sifuna ukukhumbuza umphakathi ngokubaluleka
kwawo. AMalungu ePhalamende lawa akhona lapha kuzothi uma esebuyele eKapa
ngithande ukuzwa umbiko azowethula maqondana nayo yonke le mihlangano
ebibanjwe lapha ukuze sikwazi ukubona ukuthi ezintweni umphakathi ozibalile
lapha, sizozithatha kanjani siye phambili.

Abanye bayazi ukuthi njengoba silapha sinomunye umhlangano omkhulu
wesigungu esiphezulu sikaKhongolose wethu. Kuzofuneka ukuthi nami-ke
ngibuye ngiye kovela nakulowo mhlangano. Sesicelile-ke ukuthi uNdunankulu
uBalindlela – intombi yale emaXhoseni, kube uyena ozophendula uma
sekuqediwe ngezinkulumo. Uyena-ke ozophothula maqondana nale nkulumo
engiyenza manje ukuze akhombise ukuthi besilalele futhi sizizwile izinto
ezishiwo amalungo omphakathi.

Siyabonga kakhulu kumaluingu omphakathi ngokuza kwawo ngobuningi bawo.
Siyabonga kuMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ngokuthi usihlelele ukuthi
sizelapha. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[That is my request. We came here because we wanted to remind the community
of its importance. I would love to see the report which the Members of
Parliament who are here today are going to present when they go back to
Cape Town regarding the issues raised by the community here, and see how we
can tackle them.

Some of you know that we who are here also have another meeting of the
National Executive Council of the ANC. I will have to go to that meeting,
as well. We have requested Premier Balindlela from the Eastern Cape to
respond once the discussions are finished. She is the one who is going to
wrap up to show that we were listening to the issues raised by the
community.

We are very thankful to the community for coming in their big numbers. We
also thank the NCOP for making arrangements for us to come here.
[Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Hon members,
I would request that you adhere to the speaking time as reflected on the
speakers’ list to ensure that the debate is concluded on time.

We will now proceed with the debate and I call upon the hon Chairperson of
the NCOP, hon Mahlangu, to open the debate. [Applause.]

USIHLALO WOMKHANDLU KAZWELONKE WEZIFUNDAZWE: Mangibonge kakhulu kwiPhini
likaSihlalo Womkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe, ngibonge kwiPhini
likaMongameli wezwe lonke, umama uMlambo-Ngcuka, ngibonge koNdunankulu
bezifundazwe zonke noSomlomo bonke abakhona – ikakhulukazi ubaba uMdakane
okunguye owenze ukuthi lolu hlelo luhambe kahle kangaka, futhi ngicela
ukuthi simbonge kakhulu ubaba uMdakane. [Ihlombe.] Mangibonge oNgqongqoshe
bezifundazwe bonke abakhona ngokwehlukana kwezifundazwe, abaholi bezenkolo,
abaholi bethu bendabuko abakhona, aMalungu ePhalamende onke kanye namalungu
ezishayamthetho zonke; ngibonge-ke nawo wonke umuntu okhona waseSedibeng
naseGauteng, abakade beziphethe kahle kakhulu isonto lonke bejulisa ingxoxo
ngokwedlulele, noma ngale ndlela ebesifuna ngayo. Ngiyanibonga nonke
namhlanje ekuseni. [Ihlombe.]

Okunye okubalulekile engizokuphinda futhi okushiwo yiPhini likaMongameli
wezwe nesithanda ukuthi kungene ezindlebeni zabantu, yilokhu okulandelayo.
Mangikwethembise, Phini likaMongameli, futhi bengishilo kwayizolo ukuthi,
emuva kwenyanga nje, kungakadluli sikhathi eside, ngizobuya lapha
ngizohlangana namakomiti amawodi, mina siqu sami kanye nekomiti lohulumeni
bezifundazwe nabasekhaya. [Ihlombe.] Ngizohlangana futhi nabasebenzi
bezokuthuthukisa umphakathi kanye nekomiti lohulumeni basekhaya.
Ngizothanda ukuthi uSodolobha uHlongwane kanye noSodolobha umama uTsotetsi
babe mdibi nami kulowo mhlangano ukuze sikwazi ukulungisa zonke lezi zinto
okufanele sizilungise, ngoba umsebenzi wethu awusikho ukulwa nabohulumeni
bethu kodwa ukusizana nabo.

Okubalulekile engithanda ukuba ngikuthinte, Phini likaMongameli, ukuthi
ngikhulumile ngoMmsombuluko nganithembisa nonke ukuthi umbiko uzobe
usulungile emuva kwezinsuku ezi-30. Zonke izinto enizikhulumile lapha ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, Deputy President of the country, Mrs Mlambo-Ngcuka,
all the Premiers of the provinces and all the Speakers present – especially
Mr Mdakane who is the one who made this programme a success, and I request
that we thank Mr Mdakane very much. [Applause.] The MECs from different
provinces present here, religious leaders, our traditional leaders present,
Members of Parliament and members of provincial legislatures present; thank
you to everybody present from Sedibeng and from Gauteng, who have behaved
so well for the whole week, deepening the debate the way we wanted it to
be. I greet you all this morning. [Applause.]

I wish to mention another thing which is very important – and I am going to
repeat it even though the Deputy President mentioned it, because we want
you to really understand it – and it is the following. Let me promise you,
Deputy President, that - as I also said yesterday – at least within a month
from now, the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration and I
will come back here to meet with the ward committees. [Applause.] I will
also meet with the community development workers and the local government
committee. I would like both Mayor Hlongwane and Mayor Mrs Tsotetsi to be
with me in that meeting so that we can rectify all the things that we are
supposed to rectify, because our duty is not to fight with the spheres of
government, but to work with them.

Another important issue which I would like to touch on, Madam Deputy
President, is what I said here on Monday. I promised all of you here that
the report will be ready after 30 days. Everything that you said here ...]

... di tla be di ngwadilwe ka mo gare ga pego yeo re tlogo tlago go
ngangišana ka ga yona kua Motse-Kapa. Motlatša-Presidente le dipremiya ka
moka ba tla be ba le gona ... [... will be written in the report which will
be debated in Cape Town. The Deputy President and all the premiers will be
there and ...]

... it will be all hands on deck. All departments must take up the issues
that affect them and deal with them at the same time. [Applause.]

Okunye-ke okubaluleke kakhulu engithanda ukungena kukho ngoba isikhathi
anginaso kahle, ukungena ngijule endabeni yemfundo. Ngiye ngathatha ithuba,
Phini likaMongameli, ngavakashela izikole, njengoba siye senze uma size
ezingeni lemiphakathi, ngoba phela asigcini ngokukhuluma lapha eNdlini
kodwa siphumela ngaphandle siye kobona ukuthi kwenzakalani. Ngivakashele
izikole ngathola ukuthi ezikoleni kusakhalwa ngokuthi izincwadi
azithunyelwa. AboMnyango Wezemfundo bekade bekhona. Ngibacelile ukuthi
baqinisekise ukuthi abachicileli bayaziletha izincwadi ezikoleni ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Another very important thing that I would like to speak about, because my
time is limited, and delve deeply into, is the issue of education. I took
the opportunity, Deputy President, of visiting schools, as we always do
when we bring Parliament to the people. We do not only talk in this House,
but we go out to see what is happening. The Department of Education was
also there. I have requested them to ensure that the publishers do bring
the books to the schools ...]

... within three weeks. So, they cannot complain that they cannot publish
that number. [Applause.]

Sesingene enyangeni kaMashi manje kodwa abashicileli abazigayile izincwadi
futhi abazithumelile, kanti uMnyango usubakhokhele imali. [We are already
in March now, but the publishers have either not printed or sent the books
to schools, whereas the department has already paid for them.]

That cannot be acceptable! [Applause.]

Okunye-ke esikutholile ezikoleni ukuthi kunale ndaba iPhini likaMongameli
ebelikhuluma ngayo. Ngithi: Hhayi bo! Masingenzi kanjalo bantu bakithi
abamnyama! Siyazibulala ngokwethu kanti futhi siyazikhandla. Uma sithumela
abantwana bethu ezikoleni, asibathumeli ukuthi babe ngamadoda nabafazi
kodwa sisuke sifuna bayofunda ukuze babe ngabaholi abaqotho kusasa, babe
ngabahlengikazi laba esithi bayashoda, babe ngothisha laba esithi
bayashoda. Abanye babo bayoba ngoMongameli ngoba thina siyahamba, abanye
babo babe ngoSihlalo balo Mkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe, njengoba siyibo
okwamanje. Abanye babo bayoba ngaMalungu ePhalamende. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The other thing that we discovered at schools is something which the
Deputy President spoke about, and I say: Stop it! Fellow Africans, let us
not do that! We are killing ourselves and we are straining ourselves. If we
send our children to schools, we do not give them licence to practise to be
men and women. Instead, we send them to school to learn so that they can
become honest future leaders, nurses and teachers, whom we always say we
are running short of. Some of these children are the future Presidents of
the country, Chairpersons of the NCOP, as I am right now, and we are moving
on. Some of them will even be Members of Parliament.]

A school is a learning institution, and not a sexual institution.
[Applause.]

Lokho-ke kufanele kuqedwe. IPhini likaMongameli liyibeke kalula lona, lithe
“abantu abanezintshebe”. Mina ngifuna ukuyibeka kanjena: Kunabantu ababizwa
ngokuthi ngo-sugar daddy. [Ubuwelewele.] Bona balayisha abantwana ngezimoto
zabo ekuseni babaphelezele ngenkathi beya ezikoleni. Bakhipha izimali
zokudla babanike ukuze bakwazi ukuthenga ukudla. Bayabathatha bahambe nabo
emuva kwehora lokudla, bangawenzi umsebenzi wesikole abawunikiwe ukuthi
bawenze ekhaya kodwa kuyiwe edolobheni kuyodliwa eKentucky, kuthengwe
namayunifomu.

Emuva kwesikhathi kube sekuvela umntwana. Uma kuqeda ukuvela umntwana, lowo
muntu uyabaleka angabe esaba ngu-sugar daddy. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[This thing should be stopped. The Deputy President put this very mildly
when she said “bearded men”. I want to put it this way: There are people
who are called sugar daddies. [Interjections.] They drive children in their
cars when they go to school in the morning. They give our children money
for lunch. After lunch they drive them around and these children end up not
doing their homework, because they are taken to town to eat meals in the
fast-food outlets like KFC. They even buy them school uniforms.

After some time the child gets pregnant. After pregnancy, that person runs
away and he is no longer a sugar daddy.]

The law says that any man who engages in a sexual activity with a child who
is under 16 years of age is committing an offence.

Amacala anjalo mawalethwe ngaphambili. [Cases of that nature should be
brought forward.]

It cannot be possible anymore that a child of 11 or 12 years of age gets
pregnant and gives birth. That cannot be possible anymore! We must stop
that from happening and we know where it begins. Let us bring back our
culture.

Enye yezinto ezikhulunyiwe kube ubugebengu umphakathi okhale ngabo kakhulu.
Uphendulile-ke izolo uNgqongqoshe uCachalia nePhini likaNgqongqoshe
Wezokuphepha Nokuvikeleka. Sizohlale sikhulumisana nabo. Kodwa ngithanda
ukubonga kakhulu umphathi wesiteshi uMotlala esizwile ukuthi uphethe kahle
isiteshi futhi usebenzisana kahle nesigungu esibhekele ukuphepha
emphakathini. Nayo-ke into esifuna ukuthi yenzeke ngoba ubugebengu ngeke
buphele ngaphandle kokuthi sibambisane sonke, singabafihli labo abenza
ubugebengu ezindlini zethu, sidle nabo ukudla zonke izinsuku kodwa sibe
sazi ukuthi ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[One of the many other things that were discussed here was crime, which the
community complained a lot about. Yesterday both MEC Cachalia and the
Deputy Minister of Safety and Security responded to your questions. We
shall be contacting them regularly. However, I would very much like to
thank the Station Commander Mr Motlala who, as we have heard, manages the
station very well and he works well with the Community Policing Forum. This
is the very thing that we want to see happening, because crime will never
stop unless we work hand in hand. We should never harbour criminals in our
houses and simply eat with them every day, knowing very well that ...]

... ba a senya. A re ba tlaleeng maphodiseng, ba swarwe. Ge maphodisa a sa
dire mošomo wa wona, go swana le ao a yago dipotong ka dikoloi tša mmušo, a
begeng le wona. [Legofsi.] Ga se maphodisa ka moka ao e lego gore a
senyegile, empa go na le a mangwe ao a dirago ka mokgwa woo. Ge le a bona
le a begeng go khomišinare wa tikologo goba wa profense goba le re
leletšeng le rena kua Motse-Kapa. Le tšee dinomoro tša dikoloi tšeo.
[Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[... they are dangerous. Let us report them to the police, so that they are
arrested. If the police are not doing their work, like those police
officers who use government cars when they go to shebeens, report them as
well. [Applause.] Not all the police officers are corrupt, but there are
some who are doing that. If you see them, report them to the local or the
provincial commissioner, or you can even call us in Cape Town. Take the
registration numbers of those cars. [Applause.]]

We have to deal with some of these things.

Taba ye nngwe ye bohlokwa yeo ke nyakago go e kgwatha ka pela ke ya gore re
na le moeno wa rena woo gape e lego maikemišetšo a tshepedišo ya rena, e
lego Batho Pele. Rena re le maloko a Palamente, re kgethilwe ke lena gore
re le emele kua Palamenteng. Ke rata go kgopela Makhanselara a rena, maloko
a Palamente le a diprofensi gore a šomišane le setšaba se. (Translation of
Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[The other significant issue that I would like to quickly highlight is that
we have our slogan that is the aim of our proceedings as well, which is
Batho Pele. We, the members of Parliament, were elected by you so that we
represent you in Parliament. I would like to make an appeal to our
councillors, members of Parliament and provincial representatives to work
with this nation.]

We are in Parliament because we have been elected by the community and
therefore we are accountable to you. We are not saying that we will address
all the things that you are demanding or in need of overnight, but we are
there to talk on your behalf.

Ngoba umphakathi ngeke ukwazi ukuzikhulumela kakhulu le phezulu, yithina
okufanele sikhulume, sithathe izicelo zawo ukuze siqinisekise ukuthi
uyakuthola lokho okucelayo, futhi siziphindaphinde kaningi ukuze zifike
esiphethweni. Kufuneka singalali ubuthongo kodwa sijule ngengxoxo ngaso
sonke isikhathi.

Kunabanye-ke abantu okuthi uma sebeqashiwe emsebenzini babone ukuthi bona
sebenamandla angaphezu kwawabantu, sebeyizikhulu. Umuntu uthi angathola
isikhundla esiphezulu sokuba ngumabhalane omkhulu noma athole isikhundla
esikhulu njengokuba uthisha omkhulu noma-ke ubani, ashintshe ngisho
nokuhamba, angabe esahamba ngendlela esimjwayele ehamba ngayo, ashaye
isitayela esizokwenza sibone ukuthi usemkhulu yena, unamandla. Kunabanye
abashintsha nokukhuluma bangabe besakhuluma ngendlela esibazi bekhuluma
ngayo. Bakhuluma isilungu bebe bekhuluma nabantu bakubo.

Nayi into engiyithole lapha kuleli sonto lonke. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Because communities cannot speak for themselves, especially to higher
authorities, it is us who must speak for them and consider their requests
and make sure that they get what they ask for. We need to make sure that we
constantly pursue the communities’ requests until they are met. We should
never sleep, but we must always deepen the debate.

There are people who, after being employed, feel that they have more power
than the masses. They think of themselves as being better. Whenever a
person gets a higher post like a senior clerk or a school principal or any
other position, he changes even his style of walking, and never walks the
way we usually see him walking, and uses his gait to make us see that he is
now a senior, that he now has authority. There are those who even change
their style of talking, who no longer speak the way they did before. They
speak English when speaking to their own people.

This is what I discovered here this week.]

I have discovered that the flow of information from our government
institutions to the people is not correct – Tshedimošo ga e fihle gabotse
mo bathing. [information does not reach the people properly]. [Applause.]
It is not acceptable that after so many years you still do not know how to
apply for tenders. That can’t be right. There’s something wrong!

It is not right that up until now ...

... ga le tsebe gore mananeo a mmušo ao a lego gona ke a mohuta mang [...
you are not aware of the kind of government programmes which we have].

There is something wrong, either with our communication or with the flow of
information to the people.

Kubalulekile ukuthi ngaso sonke isikhathi sihlangane nomphakathi, sikhulume
nawo, senzele ukuthi izinto zonke okufanele uzithole, uzithole ngesikhathi
esizobe sisibekile ukuthi lezo zinto zizokwenzeka ngaso.
Sengiphetha, ngoba isikhathi sami sesiphelile – ningikhumbuze ngoba
angifuni ukudlula esikhathini bese ngithethiswa - ezikhungweni zethu
zezempilo kukhona lapho kushoda khona abahlengikazi. Siyikhulumile le ndaba
nePhini likaNgqongqoshe Wezempilo. Kukhona futhi lapho kushoda khona
othisha; sikhulumile noNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe ngalokho. Sizozibhekisisa
zonke lezi zinto umphakathi okhulume ngazo njengokubhekelwa kwezidingo
zabantu, izindaba zemigwwaqo, ezezindlu, ezokuthuthwa kwendle.

UNdunankulu ungithembisile ngoMsombuluko ukuthi uma kuphela lo nyaka ka-
2007 amabhakede azobe engasekho ngoba akufanele kunuke lapho kuhlala khona
umphakathi. Ungithembisile uNdunankulu ukuthi azophela amabhakede. Sizobuya-
ke thina namakomiti ethu ukuzohlola ukuthi lezo zinto ziyenzeka na. Ubaba
uShiceka ukhona lapha futhi uyena ophethe ikomidi lezohulumeni bezifundazwe
nabasekhaya. Ubaba uTau ukhona lapha neNkosi uMokoena ikhona lapha – yona
ekwikomidi elibhekene nezobugebengu. Bonke laba bangosihlalo bamakomidi
abhekene nalezi zindaba. Umama uMasilo ukwelibhekene nezempilo.

Ngifuna ukuthi ngoMeyi babuye lapha bazosebenzisana kanye nomasipala
namakomiti esifundazwe. Ngifuna bazobheka ukuthi sekuqaliwe yini ukwenziwa
kwalezo zinto okuthiwe zizokwenziwa.

Ngibonga abasebenzi baseGauteng nabasebenzi boMkhandlu Kazwelonke
Wezifundazwe; ngibonge kubo bonke abenze lo mcimbi ukuthi uphumelele -
amaphoyisa kanye nani nonke enihlelile. Ngithi, ngiyabonga. Nisale kahle.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[It is imperative that we meet regularly with the community and talk to
them, so that they get everything that they are supposed to get, at the
time we shall agree upon.

In conclusion, as my time is up now – please remind me, because I do not
want to exceed the time that I have been given, lest I be shouted at – we
still have health centres which do not have enough nurses. We have
discussed this issue with the Deputy Minister of Health. There are also
places where there is a shortage of teachers; we have discussed this with
the relevant provincial minister. We shall pay attention to all these
things which the community has spoken about, like paying attention to basic
services to the public, such issues like roads, housing and sanitation.

The Premier promised me on Monday that by the end of this year, 2007, the
bucket toilet system will have ended because there should be no stink where
a community resides. The Premier promised me that the bucket system will
come to an end. We will come back with our committees to see whether those
things have happened. Mr Shiceka is here. He is the Chairperson of the
Select Committee on Local Government and Administration. Hon Tau is also
here, as well as Kgoshi Mokoena who is on the safety and security
committee. All the above-named are chairpersons of committees concerned
with these issues. Mrs Masilo is on the health committee.

I want them to come back here in May and work with the municipality and the
provincial committees. I want them to come and check whether the things
that are supposed to be done have started or not.

I want to thank the public servants of Gauteng and the staff of the NCOP;
all those who made this event a success – the police and all of you who
were involved in the arrangements. I say thank you. Good bye. [Applause.]]

Ms Q MAHLANGU (Gauteng): Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy President,
hon Premiers present here, my colleagues, MECs, members of the provincial
legislatures, hon members of the NCOP, executive mayors, councillors, the
community of Sebokeng at large, ke a le dumedisa. Lotshani. Sanibonani.
Goeie môre. [I greet you.]

When we came to power in 1994, we defined the vision of democracy that we
sought to achieve in the reconstruction and development document. The
Constitution of our country also recognises public participation as an
essential element of a broad representative democracy. As the Constitution
and the principles outlined in the RDP continue to guide our work, it is
therefore appropriate to go back to this document to respond to the theme
of this debate, which is to strengthen participatory democracy at local
government for effective and sustainable service delivery.

Democracy is not something that South Africans should take for granted,
because it did not come easy. In five days’ time we will be commemorating
Human Rights Day in Sharpeville. This is the day on which we remind
ourselves of the supreme sacrifice made by many for the democracy we enjoy
today. It was on this day that gallant men and women stood up and
challenged the pass laws that sought to entrench the exclusion from
participation in decision-making processes that affected their lives.

Ngicabanga ukuthi abantu balesi sifundazwe bayakhumbula ukuthi kwenzekani
ngo-1960, mhla zinga-21 kuMashi. Sithi-ke uMashi inyanga ebalulekile
kakhulu, ikakhulukazi uma sikhuluma ngamalungelo esintu. Sithi
masingayithathi kancane ngoba sithi sesikhululekile. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[I think people of this province remember what happened on 21 March 1960.
Therefore we are saying March is a most important month, more especially
when we talking about human rights. We must not take this month for granted
and simply say we are now free.]

In 1994, on coming to power, the new democratic government had an enormous
task of bringing the oppressed and the marginalised majority of our people
into meaningful decision-making processes and wealth-generating activities.

Ngalokho sisho ukuthi uma sisondeza iningi labantu ababebekwe eceleni,
sisuke sisho abantu abafana nami nawe ababengavunyelwe ukuvota kodwa
abavota okokuqala ngo-1994, nokuthi abanye abantu abamnyama
babengenamathuba emisebenzi futhi bengenawo namabhizinisi abo abaziphathele
wona. Sathi uma sithatha umbuso ngo-1994 sathi thina bantu abamnyama
sinelungelo lokubamba iqhaza, ukuze sikwazi ukufinyelela kuzo zonke lezi
zinto engikhuluma ngazo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[By that we mean - if we bring closer the majority of people who were
marginalised - people like you and me were previously not allowed to vote,
but we voted for the first time in 1994. Other black people were not
employed and they also did not have their own businesses. When we took over
the reins in 1994 we said that we, the black people, have a right to play a
meaningful role in all these things, so that we will be able to achieve all
these things I am talking about.]

The local government is the sphere that is closest to the people and that
should provide us with an important lever to ensure that this type of
development takes place.

Even though we have one of the most progressive constitutions in the world
and our laws enable democratic participation at all levels of government,
we need to acknowledge that there are people who still live under poor
conditions.

IPhini likaMongameli likhulumile ngalabo. Siyazi ukuthi lapha eGauteng
sisenabantu abasebenzisa amabhakede, ikakhulukazi e-Evaton. UNdunankulu
ushilo ngoMsombuluko ukuthi sinohlelo lokukuqeda konke lokho. Omasipala
banayo imali yokwenza isiqiniseko sokuthi lawa mabhakade asekhona
ayidlanzana ayancipha, ngoba kwakunamabhakede ayi-12 000 eGauteng kanti
okwamanje sisele nayi-1 256. Sizibophezele ngokuthi uthi uma uphela lo
nyaka kungabi namuntu eGauteng ongenayo i-VIP toilet uma ngabe ehlala
emkhukhwini, kungabi namuntu ongenalo ithoyilethi elishaywayo uma ehlala
endlini ye-RDP nanoma iyiphi enye indlu ejwayelekile yaselokishini.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The Deputy President has spoken about these people. We know that here in
Gauteng we still have people who use the bucket toilet system, mostly in
Evaton. The Premier stated on Monday that we have a programme to finish all
that. Municipalities have the money to ensure that the small number of
existing buckets is minimised, because of the initial 12 000 households who
were identified as using the bucket toilet system in Gauteng, only 1 256
households are still using it. We are committed to making sure that, at
least towards the end of this year, every household in the informal
settlements in Gauteng has a VIP toilet, and every family in an RDP house
and any other normal township house has a flushing toilet.]

These challenges are exacerbated by migration.

Siyazi ukuthi baningi abantu abeza eGauteng. Beza ngezizathu ezingefani.
Beza ngoba befuna umsebenzi, befuna amathuba angcono. Kodwa-ke thina
njengohulumeni wesifundazwe senza isiqiniseko sokuthi, kuzo zonke izinhlelo
esinazo, sibambisene nomasipala bethu nokuthi abantu abakhona eGauteng
bayahlomula, ikakhulukazi laba abafanele ukuhlomula emisebenzini
abayilethelwa uhulumeni.

Ezinye izinselelo esizibonayo eGauteng ukuthi akukho ukuxhumana kahle,
ikakhulukazi kithina bomasipala nabasebenzi bakamasipala, abahlali,
abasebenzi bakamasipala namakhansela athintekayo. Ngaphandle nje kokuthi
sinomqulu nemithetho ekhuluma ngezinto zikahulumeni, ikakhulukazi imithetho
kahulumeni wasekhaya, amakhansela kufuneka ahlale ebuyela njalo kubantu
bawo afike abanikeze izincazelo. Kufuneka futhi abike ukuthi yini ayenzayo
emihlanganweni ayibambayo maqondana nezinto azithunywayo. Ezinhlelweni zama-
IDPs, kufuneka kubanjwe imihlangano ezophathwa yikhansela elingusihlalo
wekomidi lesigceme.

Sibonile ukuthi lezo zinto ziyinkinga. Yingakho sitshala izimali eziningi
njengohulumeni wesifundazwe ekuqeqesheni amakomidi ezigceme. EGauteng
sesisungule amakomidi ezigceme anga-410. Kodwa noma sesiwasungulile
awasebenzi ngale ndlela esifuna ukuthi asebenze ngayo. Yiziphi izizathu
ezenza ukuthi lawa makomidi ezigceme angasebenzi ngendlela efanele?

Ezinye zezizathu ezibangela lokho ukuthi, njengoba bengishilo
ngoMsombuluko, amakomidi ezigceme ngabantu abakhethwa umphakathi abaphuma
ezikhungweni ezihlukene, emabhizinisini, kubantu abasha, nasematekisini
njalo njalo. Uma sebekhethiwe labo bantu base bengena emakomidini ezigceme,
baye bengabe besabuyela emuva baye kobika ngalokho abakwenzayo. Umphumela
kuba ngukuthi nabo basuke bengasathunywe muntu futhi namakhansela nawo aba
nomthelela ekutheni amakomidi ezigceme angasebenzi kahle. Yingakho sifaka
izimali zokuqeqesha amakomidi ezigceme ukuze akuqonde ukuthi yimuphi
umsebenzi wawo. Sisuke sifuna futhi nokugcizelela kumakhansela angosihlalo
bezigceme ukuthi anesibopho sokuqinisekisa ukuthi ahlale eyibiza
imihlangano ukuze umphakathi wazi ukuthi yini ayenzayo ngaso sonke
isikhathi.

Yingakho-ke lapha eGauteng, ukuze sibe nenqubo yentando yeningi ebandakanya
wonke umuntu kanye nentuthuko eqhubekayo, senze isiqiniseko sokuthi zonke
izigceme zinabasebenzi ababhekela intuthuko yomphakathi - laba iPhini
likaMongameli elikhulume ngabo. Kungumsebenzi walaba basebenzi ababhekela
intuthuko yomphakathi ukusebenzisana namakhansela ekuqinisekiseni ukuthi
labo bantu abangazitholi izinsiza ezivela kuhulumeni bayazithola, kodwa
hhayi ukulwa namakhansela namakomidi ezigceme singekho isidingo. Lokhu
kubaluleke kakhulu futhi sizoqhubeka ngoba amakomidi ezigceme nabasebenzi
bezentuthuko babalulekile ekuqinisekiseni ukuthi abantu bawazi umsebenzi
esiwenzayo singuhulumeni, sizwe futhi nasebantwini ukuthi bona bafuna
kwenzekeni ezindaweni abahlala kuzo. Lezi yizikhonkwane ezibalulekile
zokuqinisekisa ukuthi inqubo yentando yeningi iyajuliswa, kanye nokuthi
abantu bakuqonde ukuthi yimaphi amalungelo abo nezibopho zabo. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[We know that there are many people who come to Gauteng. They come for
different reasons. They come for job opportunities and a better life.
However, we in the provincial government, together with our municipalities,
must make sure that in all the programmes that we have, our people in
Gauteng benefit, particularly those who are supposed to benefit from
government services.

One of the many challenges we encounter here in Gauteng is that there is no
proper communication amongst the municipalities, the workers, the residents
and the councillors concerned. Besides the fact that we have a charter and
pieces of legislation about government services, especially legislation
pertaining to the local government, councillors must always go back to
their people and explain these things. They must also give reports on the
meetings they are mandated to attend. When it comes to the writing of the
IDPs, meetings must be chaired by a councillor who is the chairperson of
the ward committee.
We have realised that these things are problematic. It is against this
background that we in the provincial government are pumping more money into
the training of ward committees. In Gauteng we have established 410 ward
committees. Despite their existence, these ward committees are yet to
function the way we want them to. What are the causes for these ward
committees not working as they should?

One of the many causes is that, as I explained on Monday, ward committees
consist of people nominated by the communities, people who come from
different walks of life, who could be from business, youth, taxis, etc, and
when those people have been chosen to join the ward committees, they do not
go back to report about what they are doing. They end up having no mandate,
and the councillors also play a role in making ward committees ineffective.
That is why we are injecting more funds into the training of ward
committees so that they can understand their role. We also want to
emphasise to the ward committee chairpersons that they have a
responsibility to frequently convene meetings so that the community can be
kept abreast of what the councillors do at all times.

That is why here in Gauteng – where we practice an all-inclusive democracy
and where we have progressing development - we made sure that all the wards
have community development workers, the ones that the Deputy President
spoke about. It is the duty of community development workers to work with
councillors to ensure that those people who do not get certain services
from government, get them. They should, however, not needlessly fight with
councillors and ward committees. This is very important. The presence of
the community development workers is also equally important in ensuring
that people know what we in government are doing. We also need to hear from
the people about their needs in their respective areas. These are the
important pillars of making sure that democracy is indeed deepened. People
also need to know their rights and responsibilities.]

In Gauteng we are working towards a global city region, as the Premier said
on Monday. We are looking at the region perspective as a means of improving
access to service delivery and growing the economy in the province,
fighting poverty and accelerating development.

In 2004, after the elections, the executive council adopted a five-year
strategic programme of action which, amongst other things, talked about
ensuring that we build Gauteng into an integrated and globally competitive
city region where the economic activities of the different parts of the
province complement each other in consolidating Gauteng as an economic hub
of Africa and an internationally recognised global city region.

Kubaluleke kakhulu lokho ngoba esikhathini esingaphambilini kwenzekile
ukuthi omasipala nohulumeni wesifundazwe bangasebenzisani ngokubambisana.
Lokho kudale ukuthi thina nabomasipala singayiboni inqubekela-phambili,
ikakhulukazi ezintweni esizenzayo. Yingakho le-global city-region iyinto
ebaluleke kakhulu kithina ngoba yenza siqinisekise ukuthi sisebenza
ngokubambisana ngenhloso yokuthuthukisa abantu baseGauteng. Ngiyabonga
kakhulu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[That is very important, because it has happened before that municipalities
and provincial government did not work hand in hand. That hugely hampered
progress, especially in what we are doing. It is against this background
that this global city region is so important to us, because it ensures that
we work co-operatively in developing the people of Gauteng. Thank you very
much.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President in absentia, hon
Ministers, hon Premiers, MECs, hon members, all protocol observed, the IFP
maintains that the new democratic government’s sharing of power within the
co-operative government authority will achieve effective and sustainable
service delivery. The IFP also believes that greater diversity and
flexibility functioning in co-operative government is a major prerequisite
for sustainable development and improved service delivery. The central
government, therefore, should not only gain more powers, but also adequate
resources to increase its capacity to fight the escalating levels of
poverty and unemployment.

The IFP believes that it is only a capacitated and adequately resourced
system of local government that has the ability to build an effective and
sustainable service delivery to undeveloped communities. It is therefore
incumbent upon the national government to ensure that local government
operates within an enabled framework and is structured in a way that best
enables it to promote development of impoverished communities.

Ukusebenza ngempumelelo kuhulumeni wasekhaya kuncike obambiswaneni
olungunxantathu: uhulumeni omkhulu, owesifundazwe nowasekhaya. Kudingeka
ubambiswano olunzulu kulo mkhakha ukuze kulunge izinto. Siyambonga
uhulumeni wethu osivezela leli thuba lokuhambisa iPhalamende kubantu.
Kuvela ithuba elihle lokuxhumana, kuboniswane ukuze kusetshenzwe kahle; uma
kukhona okungahambi kahle, kusheshe kulungiswe kungaze konakale kakhulu.

UXoshindlala useyinkinga kuhulumeni wasekhaya, yena ohlezi eduze nabantu
futhi obona usizi lwabo. Umphakathi awuluthole uxhaso maqondana nokwenza
imisebenzi onamakhono kuyo, okungaba umsebenzi wezandla onhlobonhlobo,
ezolimo, izingadi, nokunye. Abaluthole abantu uxhaso. Kusenesikhalo
esikhulu kulo mkhakha.

Okwesibili kumaqondana nokwakhiwa kwezindlu. Yebo kuyenzeka kodwa isekhona
inkinga. Uhulumeni onxantathu akabhekane nayo nqgo, athi ukwenyusa izinga
kosekwenziwe. Okunye ngukuthi umlilo oshisa imijondlolo nawo useyinkinga.
Maqondana nemigwaqo engenela emakhaya kuseyinkinga lokho, futhi nakhona
emadolobheni kunezigceme ezinemigwaqo engahambeki.

Ubugebengu osekukhulunyiwe ngabo nobudlova osebudlulele emiphakathini
eminingi buyinkinga enkulu kakhulu. Mayelana negciwane leNgculazi, libikile
lapha iPhini likaMongamei wezwe ukuthi liseyinkinga enkulu kakhulu. Konke
lokhu nokunye engingakubalanga kuncike kulo hulumeni onxantathu ukuze
uhulumeni wasekhaya asebenze ngempumelelo. Masijuleni ngengxoxo ukwenza
isimo esingcono emhlabeni wokhokho bethu. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The success of local government rests on the full co-operation amongst the
three spheres of government, namely the national, provincial and the local
government. There is a need for serious co-operation in this sector so that
things can go well. We are grateful to our government for giving us this
opportunity of taking Parliament to the people. This is a good opportunity
for proper communication and the sharing of ideas. It also helps in working
coherently to correct whatever wrong there may be just before it gets
worse.

Poverty eradication is still a problem for local government, which is the
government closest to the people, and it is able to witness the people’s
misery. Communities should be given grants to upgrade the skills they have.
The skills could include, among others, different handcrafts, agriculture,
gardening and many others. Let the people be given grants. There is a great
complaint in this sector.

Another point is about the building of houses. We accept that houses are
indeed built, but there is still a problem. All three spheres of government
should pay more attention to this problem, and put more effort into what
has already been done. Another problem is the fire that burns down the
shacks. We still also have a problem with the roads going to villages. Even
in towns there are still wards which have roads that are not in good
condition.

Much has been said here about crime and disorderliness which seem to be so
extreme in many communities and they still cause a big problem. Concerning
HIV and Aids, the Deputy President mentioned that it is still a big
problem. All these things and many others that I have not mentioned here
will only be solved if the three spheres of government work co-operatively
which would make things easier for the local government. Let us deepen the
debate in order to create better conditions in the country of our
ancestors. I thank you.]

The PREMIER OF THE EASTERN CAPE (Ms N Balindlela): Deputy Chairperson of
the NCOP, Premiers present here today, hon guests, comrades and friends ...


... lelona he batho bahesu kea dumedisa, le kae? Lenna ke teng. [... and to
you, fellow citizens, I convey my greetings. How are you? I am also fine.]

Chairperson, thank you very much for taking Parliament to the people. This
slogan that you brought to us is really a practical slogan. Taking
Parliament to our people is true to the spirit of our Freedom Charter and,
in the Eastern Cape, it is also true to what we have done to launch
operation Ixingephi from the presidential outreach programmes and izimbizo.


Recently we also launched a survey that covered 12 000 households. We asked
our people to tell us how they felt about the third term. Indeed ...

... abantu bakowethu abasoze bangayithethi inyaniso xa befumene ixesha
lokwenza oko. Bayixelile into yokuba bayabona ukuba kusafuneka sibengathi
siyakhawuleza kwiimeko ngeemeko ezithile. [...our people will never stop
speaking the truth when they have an opportunity to do so. They have
appealed that we move fast in different situations.]

That survey is going to help us to speed up once more on service delivery.
However, we do get best practices from other provinces and I would like to
recognise so many of my comrades here, particularly the Premiers and
representatives of those provinces in which we have remained focused
because we got best practices from such provinces.

Phaya eFreyistata sahamba, saya kujonga ukuba benza njani nge-monitoring
tool safumanisa ukuba ingasinceda nathi. Kangangento yokuba sine-monitoring
tool okanye isixhobo sokuenamandla, eyenza ukuba sikwazi ukuyibeka esweni
into yokusa kwethu iinkonzo ebantwini, nto leyo sayikopayo.

NaseLimpopo safika saya kujonga ukuba benza njani bona ngale mfundo yabo,
njengokuba besoloko bephuma ekuqaleni size thina siphume ekugqibeleni. Saye
safumanisa ukuba zikhona izinto esinokuzifunda seba ke ngoku sade seba nala
mlawuli jikele wayentloko yabo, DG, waya kungena phaya kuthi eMpuma Koloni,
satsho saphezilwana kancinci. [Kwaqhatywa.] Into ethetha ukuba siyafunda
kwezi-best practises esizifumana kwiindawo ngeendawo.

Izolo elinye besingaphaya eRhawutini sifuna ukujonga i-shared services yabo
ukuba bayenza njani na. Siye ke sayijonga kuba kaloku bona basoloko benee-
audits eziphambili, sakhangela safumanisa ukuba singancedakala kakhulu
kwiRhawuti ngolu hlobo. Ngoko ke ndifuna ukuthi siyafundisana ezi best
practises. Nabo bayeza kuthi baze kufunda. Isincedile ke loo nto, ngoba...
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We went to the Free State to see how they are using their monitoring tool,
and we discovered that it would help us too to have one. We now have a
monitoring tool that enables us to monitor service delivery to the people,
which is something we learnt from them.

We also went to Limpopo to see what it is that they are doing with their
education, as they always come first and we last. We discovered that there
are things we could learn from them, and we eventually poached their
director–general. We have improved a bit since he joined the Eastern Cape.
[Applause.] We learn from the best practices that are applied in the
different provinces.

The day before yesterday we were in Gauteng, to look at how they deal with
their shared services. We did this because they always have unqualified
audit reports. We discovered that we can benefit a lot from interacting
with Gauteng in the way we do. So we are learning from each other about
these best practises. They also come to us to learn. That has helped us,
because ...]

... it works well with this acceleration of service delivery. One other
thing that we have done as a province was to focus on governance. We wanted
to focus on this, because ...

... ininzi imali etyalwa phaya ngurhulumente. Khangela nje phaya kwi-goods
and services. [...a lot of money is invested by the government there. Just
look at the goods and services.]

We have a budget of about R13 billion that we can use to improve our
people’s lives, in order to remove them from the poverty trap. Therefore we
made use of that and we actually delegated this to our directors-general to
look at how they can unblock the supply chain. Our supply chain is too
sophisticated for our ordinary poor people.

Kwaye inkulu ingaka, ungafika ingamaphepha angama-32, ayifundeki. Abakwazi
ke ngoku aba bahlelelekileyo ukuba bakwazi ukuzuza nto ... [Because it is
such a big volume - you will find that it is about 32 pages - it is
difficult to read. Therefore, the disadvantaged do not benefit from it ...]


... because they will be told to fax this and that. So we have tried to say
we must unblock the supply chain. We must also have centralised supply data
services. I will tell you why we decided on this.

Umntu uyakwazi uye kusona kwiSebe lezeMfundo ... [You find that a person
approaches the Department of Education, gets a tender ...]

... and does not deliver. When such a person gets the tender, and is given
the money, he is expected to deliver. On the last day when we are expecting
the schools to receive the support material, the same person will tell us,
“I have no warehouse, and I have no bakkie“.

Njani kaloku, ebethe nje uyakwazi ukuzisa iinkonzo eluntwini? [How come? He
said that he could bring services to the community!]

So if we had centralised data, it means we will be able to track the person
down, and realise that we should not consider the person for a tender again
in other departments. However, if we do not have a centralised databank,
the person will go and do the same thing in education, or housing and go to
other departments. So it is a very complicated thing that we are trying to
bring together so that we can know the people who help us.

I would also like to say we have projects that we have identified, such as
Umzimvubu.

Sihlalo ukuba kukho igama endifuna laziwe apha eSibokeng ... [Chairperson,
if there is a name that I want people to know here in Sebokeng ...]

... aketsibi hore nkareng kaSesotho impa kaSiXhosa ke Umzimvubu. [... I do
not know what the word is in Sesotho, but in isiXhosa it is called
Umzimvumbu.]

It is a huge project. It is where we can tap our water, and where we can
even get energy for Eskom, for Gauteng and all other places. It is an
undiscovered area which we are now trying to reveal to our people. We will
be building dams, a catchment area and, of course, a hydroelectricity
scheme which will help our people.

Ndiyavuya ke, ngoba uSekela Mongameli uwukhankanyile umkhankaso we-
HIV/Aids. O hayi ke! Asikwazi ukungatsho bantwana bam ukuba buthandeni
ubuntombi benu! Ilula lento, noSekela Mongameli uyibeke kakuhle wathi,
thatha isigqibo uthi, “ndiyabuthanda ubuntombi bam, kwaye andizi kuvuma
ukuba buthathwe ngumntu ngobuqhinga.” Yinto elula bethu. Ngoko siyazama
ukukhuthaza amantombazaza asakhulayo. Nathi kaloku sisuka kwezi meko,
kudala sihamba sibhulwa ngapha nangapha singamantombazana, kodwa uyakwazi
ukukhetha abantu, utsho uthi, “hayi lo, hamba hamba ecaleni kwam, andizi
kukunika... niyazi kudala nathi sichithelwa zi-emele zamanzi. Siyazazi ezi
zinto, asithethi nje, bantwana bam.

Ihlebo linye lelokuba uzithande wena. Ndiyayivuyela ke loo nto. Phaya
kwamanye amalinge ethu esithetha ngawo sithi, uloliwe uyabuya kweleMpuma
Koloni. La loliwe wawukade usuka ngapha, ngoku niza kuthatha ibhaskithi
zenu zemiphako, nemileqwa nihabe, niye kwiihambo zenu, ngoba uloliwe
uyabuya. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I am glad, because the Deputy President mentioned the HIV/Aids campaign.
Oh no! There is no way, my children, that we cannot tell you that you have
to keep your virginity. This is simple, and the Deputy President has put it
nicely and said: “Take a decision and say, ‘I like my virginity, and I will
not allow anybody to take it away from me by devious means.’ It is that
simple, fellow people. Therefore we are trying to encourage young girls to
strive to keep their virginity. We have, ourselves, been through these
experiences as young girls, with many young men proposing to us. However,
you should know how to reject this one, by saying: “You can walk beside me,
but I am not going to accept your proposal”. You know, we have had enamel
buckets filled with water fall off our heads as we resisted forceful
suitors. We know these things, my children. We are not all talk. There is
one secret, and that is to love yourself. That would make my day.

One other initiative that is worth mentioning is that we are restoring the
train service in the Eastern Cape; the very same train that used to depart
from here. Now you are going to take your provision baskets – containing
traditionally cooked chicken, etc - and go and travel, because the train is
coming back.]

Finally, we are then saying these things can only happen if we identify the
poorest towns and municipalities. In our province we have identified the 10
poorest areas like Nyandeni and Ngqushwa, amongst others. You all know
them. We want to focus all our energies ...

... ekubeni ke baphume ke ekuhluphekeni [... on removing them from
poverty].

That is why we have established monitors to help the ward committees follow
up on some of those decisions and responses that were taken, so that when
the President arrives in the Eastern Cape, he will not ask us again:
“Ixingephi?” [Where is it stuck?]. He must know that we have tried and put
in monitors to go around and assist people, because we even have the
service charter.

We have launched the service charter because we want people to be closer to
us ...

... ukwenzela ukuba abantu bakwazi umzekelo, xa umnxeba ukhale kwakahlanu
uwubeke phantsi, uye komnye umntu, ngoba kaloku ... [... so that, if the
telephone rings five times, you move on to the other person, because ... ]

... you do not have to wait for such a long time.

Siyabulela kakhulu ngale mbeko siyifumeneyo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [We would like
to thank you for the honour you gave us.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, I would
like to make an announcement, and that is that we apologise to hon members
for the inconvenience in the changes on the speakers’ list.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Ms E D Peters): Chairperson, I would like
to recognise the hon Deputy President in absentia, the Chairperson of the
NCOP and the Deputy Chairperson, hon Premiers – and I want the chairperson
to note that most of the time it’s the women Premiers who respond to his
call - MECs, mayors and councillors, the leadership of Salga, batho ba
Sebokeng, batho ba Gauteng [people of Sebokeng and Gauteng]. Washington
Irving once said: “Great minds have purpose, little minds have wishes.”
[Applause.]

I am here today to inform you that the Northern Cape has a purpose and not
a wish. I have been sent by the people of the Northern Cape to assert that
the initial source, which provided the funds for the greater expansion of
the South African mining industry, should be accorded its rightful place.

Ke tlile Gauteng ke romilwe ke batho ba Kapa Bokone gore ke tle go le
gopotsa, batho ba Gauteng le batho ba Aforika Borwa, gore leina la Teemane
le tswa ko le tswang teng, kwa Kimberly, kwa teemaneng kwa ba neng ba e
bitsa Liberos. Diteemane di ne di tswa kwa Kimberly, gompieno Kimberly ga e
na se e ka se supang ka gonne e setlhefetse.

Ke tlile mo gompieno go tla go le gopotsa gore Poresidente ka 16
Ngwanatsele 2004 o ile a ya kwa Antwerp kwa diteemanene tsa lefatshe di
beilweng teng, tse di tswang gona mo Aforika Borwa. Tse dingwe tsa tsona
tse kgolo tse di tswang kwa Kapa Bokone di beilwe teng. A ya go ba bolelela
a re, o tlile go tsaya maemo a teemane a a busetsa kwa Aforika Borwa, kwa
Kapa Bokone kwa Kimberly e leng teng.

Ke batla go le gopotsa gore ... (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[I came to Gauteng, sent by the people of the Northern Cape, to remind you,
the people of Gauteng and South Africa, that the name Teemaneng, previously
called Liberos, originated from Kimberley. Diamonds were mined in
Kimberley, but today it is so poor and it has nothing to show.

I came here today to remind you that on 16 November 2004 the President went
to Antwerp where all diamonds from South Africa are kept. Some of those
were mined in the Northern Cape. He told them that he was intending to
reclaim the status of mining diamonds to South Africa in the Northern Cape,
where Kimberley is found.

I would like to remind you ...]
... since the discovery of this precious stone, which is the diamond, the
city and province have had little to show for these priceless gems. These
have benefited other centres around the country and the world. This is
despite the fact that it was that city which hosted the first stock
exchange, the embryonic stage of the University of Witwatersrand, and the
first streetlights, to mention only a few firsts for Kimberley. We don’t
want those things back. We are saying there are important things that we
want.

Taking cognisance of all these issues mentioned, and that the Northern Cape
is currently contributing 36% in value to South Africa’s diamond
production, which includes the best quality marine and alluvial diamonds in
the world, one could rightfully ask: Where does all this wealth go?

With the announcement by De Beers of the closure of the three diamond mines
in Kimberley, including one in the Free State, in Koffiefontein, only the
CTP plant continues to date. That CTP plant employs only 14 people. The
headlines of newspapers across the world were saying “Kimberley has lost
its sparkle”. Now we are saying, together with the leadership of Gauteng
and the leadership of South Africa, we need to return the sparkle to where
it belongs, and that is in Kimberley.

We are saying today, as the Northern Cape, that, based on the Asgisa
principles, the Northern Cape has developed a diamond strategy and a
business plan. Three key objectives were identified: firstly, we need to
ensure that we develop a cutting and polishing centre of world standard in
Kimberley; secondly, we need to develop Kimberley into a jewellery centre
of excellence; and, thirdly, we need to develop Kimberley into an
international service centre with all the necessary ingredients that go
with diamond mining.

It was considered critical that relevant critical mass be created in terms
of the full diamond pipeline. We have been told that just one cutting and
polishing centre will be able to create more than 2 500 jobs. Regarding
these initiatives, that is why we say, with the diamonds having gone, we
want to return those diamonds to the Northern Cape so that we can add
value, beneficiate them and bring the sparkle back to where it belongs.
[Applause.]

It was identified as critical that a relevant critical mass be created in
terms of the full diamond pipeline. This includes the actual traders,
beneficiators, service providers, statutory bodies and, finally, the
wholesale and tourism sector. Combined with this is an establishment of a
specific brand. Where else would you find Kimberley, except in the Northern
Cape? Where else would you find Kimberley being associated with diamonds,
except in South Africa and the Northern Cape?

Therefore, we say the Northern Cape government has identified seven wonders
of the Northern Cape diamond strategy to realise the above-mentioned. These
are: diamond cutting and polishing, jewellery making, the Kimberley
International Diamond and Jewellery Academy, the Kimberley diamond
gemmology and jewellery hub, branding, tourism and the relocation of
statutory bodies - the State Diamond Trader.

I am here to emphasise that the relocation of the State Diamond Trader to
Kimberley is critical to the successful implementation of the Diamonds
Amendment Act. The trader will have to ensure these: close access to rough
sources in order to minimise risk, cost and infrastructure implications for
the government; equitable distribution and access to rough diamonds;
lowering of barriers to entry and ensuring that initiatives by PDIs and
SMMEs can take place; positioning of the trader where the full diamond
pipeline can be accessed; that diamonds, combined with gold and platinum
jewellery, have maximum benefits and impact in the national context.

Kimberley has given assurances regarding the security and safety of
diamonds so that they are not seen as conflict diamonds, in accordance with
a process called the Kimberley Process. Nowhere in the world will you be
able to sell a diamond if the source is not known, so as to make sure that
diamonds are not used to create conflict in our continent. Therefore we are
saying, if we can give credibility in terms of the city’s name to a process
that ensures that diamonds are clean, then we are the rightful place for
the state to trade in diamonds and to make sure that there is access to
rough diamonds from the source itself - Kimberley. We should not just
remain with the Big Hole, which is a reminder of the more than 14,5 million
carats of diamonds that were removed from this part of the country called
the Northern Cape.

We are saying to you that we want your support in the NCOP to make sure
that, through this initiative, which is actually carrying the full support
of the Minister of Minerals and Energy, as well as the Deputy President and
the President, we can address these industrial imbalances.

We are saying it is important that the benefit of industrialisation in
South Africa be felt all over. Let us make sure that the lives of the
people in the Northern Cape are equal to the lives of the people of
Johannesburg. Let the lives of the people of Limpopo or Polokwane be equal
to the lives of the people in Johannesburg. Let the people of Qunu also
feel that they are as important as the people of Johannesburg. [Applause.]

We are saying, if we speak about equality before the law, then we must also
speak about equality in industrialisation. It is therefore important to
support the Northern Cape. It is important for us to make sure that our
people are not moving from these poor provinces to come and create burdens
regarding housing in Gauteng by staying in shacks. Let us enable them to go
back and create jobs and benefit from the opportunities that are created in
their communities.

We are saying Gauteng can be a catalyst for industrial decentralisation. We
are appealing to the leadership of Gauteng to say, “South Africa belongs to
all who live in it, black and white.” Let umnotho [the wealth] of South
Africa belong to all who live in South Africa, irrespective of which
province amongst the nine you come from. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President in absentia ...

... alle ander hooggeplaastes, dames en here, ek groet julle. [... all
other dignitaries, ladies and gentlemen, I greet you.]

Dumelang Maloko a Palamente le bontate le bomme ba Gauteng!
[Interjections.] Le kae? [How are you?] [Interjections.] [Good day, Members
of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen from Gauteng! [Interjections.]]

Sanibonani nonke. [Ubuwelewele.] [Greetings to you all. [Interjections.]]

Go monate mo go rona gonne re le etetse. Ke a leboga. [Interjections.] [It
is a great pleasure for us to have visited you. Thank you.]

The word “participatory”, as used in our topic for today, is not recognised
in any of the dictionaries that I looked at, but I accept that it is
derived from the word “participate” which means to take part, to
contribute, to share, to involve yourself and to play a part.

In the context of our Constitution, I understand it to imply participation
by all stakeholders, including other spheres of government, but
predominantly the primary stakeholders in local government, namely the
people that are being governed.

What the word “participatory” simply doesn’t mean is to obstruct or
interfere, whether it be by an individual, government or a political party.
Effective and sustainable service delivery on the one hand is the golden
thread that runs through government as a whole, but it is unquestionably
also the primary mandate of local government.

Other spheres of government, particularly provinces, must therefore, in the
words of our Constitution,


   ... support and strengthen the capacity of municipalities to manage
   their own affairs, to exercise their powers and to perform their
   functions.

Why am I saying all of this? Precisely because there is growing evidence
that the opposite is happening. Municipal councils are passing resolutions
and adopting bylaws that have adverse effects on their ratepayers and the
business sector as a whole, without prior and proper consultation. On the
other hand, when councils are proactive in ways that may not suit their
party bosses, legitimate decisions are cast aside by structures outside of
council, with total disregard for due process and the rule of law.

Let me explain this one by referring to a very recent and very relevant
example. Just last week in Nelspruit, in my constituency, in the council of
the Mbombela Municipality, the capital of Mpumalanga, a unanimous vote of
no confidence in the executive mayor was carried. When I say “unanimous” I
mean just that.

More than 60 ANC councillors, including the members of the mayoral
committee, together with the DA and other opposition councillors, supported
the motion. But why? These councillors recognised economic growth and
development as being of paramount importance in ensuring sustainable
service delivery and job creation. They are also very proud of their great
opportunity as a hosting city of the 2010 Fifa World Cup and proud of their
R920 million soccer stadium project. I am sure the Deputy President will
applaud that.

However, they have grown tired of being sidetracked in their various
attempts to get to the bottom of the underlying major financial
irregularities regarding this project. The recent forensic investigation
now indicates that no less than R43 million of a R70 million payment was
unauthorised and in breach of the Municipal Finance Management Act. This
sparked their actions.
They hold their executive mayor responsible for these problems. His
inability to find and communicate solutions has finally resulted in their
vote of no confidence in both the mayor and the municipal manager. This
meant that both were legally removed from office by resolution of the
council, and along with them, of course, also the members of the mayoral
committee. However, the mayor was back in office the very next day, because
the ANC party bosses from outside of council decreed the legal and binding
resolutions of council as invalid, because the ANC ...

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, on a point of order: I wanted to check if the
member is prepared to take a question. He is debating a Mpumalanga issue,
but we are in Gauteng.

Mr A WATSON: No! I said the mayor went back to the office because the ANC
decreed the legal and binding resolutions of the council invalid. The ANC
councillors reportedly exceeded their political mandate. Is this what the
ANC means by participatory governance and is this how they intend to
strengthen service delivery? I say no! Ke a leboga. [Nako e fedile.]
[Legofi.] [Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

The PREMIER OF FREE STATE (Ms B Marshoff): Deputy Chair, members of the
NCOP, the Premiers present here this morning, members of the legislatures,
Chairperson of Salga, our executive mayors and councillors, distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen, I bring with me greetings from the people of
the Free State who had an opportunity and the honour to interact with the
NCOP last year from 6 to 10 November in the Fezile Dabi district, not too
far from here. We also had the honour of participating in the tabling of
the NCOP report to the Free State during the plenary of 9 March 2007, which
was last week Thursday.

Also, we had a follow-up visit by the members of the NCOP to the province.
This was done just to ensure that the issues that were identified during
the visit of the NCOP and the recommendations that were tabled in the
report to the NCOP would be attended to by the working committee which will
ensure that those recommendations are taken on board. That delegation met
with members of the district council, members of the local municipality and
our MECs who were present. A programme of action is coming out of that
follow-up visit.

I would also like to report to this gathering here today that, out of that
visit and out of the follow-up visit and the report that was tabled, the
provincial government will also work on a programme of action with the
provincial departments and the municipalities. We are also linking this
programme of action to the performance management system of our municipal
managers and our HODs. For us, this is part and parcel of ensuring that
interactive and co-operative governance becomes a reality in our province.

These visits of the NCOP to the provinces are indeed a practical expression
of our participatory democracy. We want to urge the communities of Gauteng
to also ensure that follow-up visits do take place; that the implementation
plans out of the recommendations are made known to them, as well as that
they participate in those processes. They must continue to hold us
accountable, because without that process we cannot speak about the
deepening of democracy. We need to involve our communities to ensure that
democracy actually gets deepened through that participation. These are not
mere symbolic or public relations exercises, because not only do our people
have an opportunity to interact at a personal level with their public
representatives, but they also empower the NCOP to exercise its oversight
role more effectively.

We firmly believe that the NCOP, as a public representative of our people,
does indeed play an important role in ensuring that all spheres of
government do not just pay lip service to the legislative imperative of the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act. Through its lawmaking and
oversight functions, the NCOP is best placed to support the realisation of
co-operative governance in a manner that advances the government’s
commitment to service delivery and the attainment of the 2014 vision of
halving levels of poverty and unemployment by the conclusion of our second
decade of freedom. Through the tabling of our state of the province
address, as well as our budget, we also want to report to this gathering
here today that, in the Free State, we have ensured that those imperatives
are taken on board; that through the tabling of the budget we have made
sure that in halving unemployment and creating jobs, our budget is indeed a
developmental budget that concentrates on investment and creating those
opportunities for our people.

As a provincial government, we are quite aware of all the challenges
presented by the imperative of building effective capacity at local
government level to improve on service delivery. However, as many speakers
before me have said, improvement in service delivery is not just about
improvement at local government level. We all have to ensure that we work
hard to make this a reality; that we put service delivery at the
cornerstone of what government has to do; that we improve service delivery
through effective health services and effective education programmes,
through interaction with our school governing bodies, our hospital
committees, our community policing forums; and that our people are given
the opportunity to interact with us at all levels.

In the province, through the Premier’s co-ordinating forum, we have ensured
that we roll out all of these programmes to assist local government to
achieve its objectives. They had to be given not just financial but also
non-financial support at various levels to create opportunities for our
people to be able to realise those hopes.

We are also making sure that the implementation of our programmes remains
within communities and that our communities take ownership of these
programmes through participation of the community development workers and
ward committees, and also through the strengthening of ward committees to
enable them to work in the communities and fulfil their responsibilities.

To facilitate and to ensure that these programmes are implemented
effectively, we have established a dedicated unit in the provincial
government known as a provincial government programme co-ordination unit.
Among other things, this unit co-ordinates all government and private
interventions at municipal level to ensure that the credibility of our
municipal IDPs, especially the extent to which they respond to community
needs, is not only in line with our growth and development strategy, but is
also in line with the local economic development programmes.

We also have our own outreach programme in the province through our Exco
Meets the People campaign, which is similar to what the NCOP is doing,
where we visit communities in the Free State, go to the municipalities and
have izimbizo where we listen to what people are saying to us. When we come
back, we implement and draw up a programme. We also go back, to report to
those communities on our achievements, as well as our way forward on how we
are going to interact with them.

Through our Exco Meets the People campaign we have been able to reaffirm
the notion of a single government located at different spheres, and we have
further succeeded in strengthening the confidence of our people in local
government. We use this campaign to present a united front of government’s
service delivery and we undermine all intentions of isolating any sphere of
collective ownership concerning problems and successes.

There is a lot more that can be said about our interaction with the people
of the Free State and their successes and challenges they are confronted
with. We are using this opportunity intended for the deepening of democracy
and the opportunities that are being created for us at various levels of
government. Let us deepen the debate to ensure that all of us take
ownership of what needs to be done, where it should be done and the way in
which we have to do that. [Time Expired.] Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chair of Chairs, Madam Deputy President in
absentia, Premiers present here, hon Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of
the NCOP, members of provincial legislatures, special guests, people of
Gauteng, all protocol observed, once again we have convened our Council in
one of the communities that, under apartheid, would not have had the
opportunity to directly interact with its elected leaders.

Our programme of Taking Parliament to the People by visiting various
communities throughout the country continues to give a voice to the plight
of our people. Throughout the week, our hon members visited various sites
and communities around the Sedibeng district. The jubilation and various
proceedings during the week have affirmed that our people are indeed
honoured and are appreciative of the suggestions that our hon members
continue to make in order to ensure that they get quality and sustainable
services.

We are honoured to be here during the month of the anniversary of Human
Rights Day after the Sharpeville massacre which happened in March 1960.

As the ANC, we committed ourselves to ensuring that our people take part in
the governance of their affairs and that they play an integral role in
shaping strategies to fight the appalling conditions, a legacy of the long
years of apartheid in their communities.

Amongst some of the key pillars of the national democratic revolution was
our reassessment that the transformation of the South African society would
be incomplete unless our people are able to interact with their elected
leaders and government in the very communities where they live.

It is occasions like these that give concrete expression to such principles
that are found in the Freedom Charter and the national democratic
revolution. As part of our commitment to strengthen participatory democracy
and citizens’ involvement, our Parliament has adopted the overall theme for
this year, including this event, which is Masijule Ngengxoxo Mzansi. It
means “Let’s deepen the debate, South Africa - ha re tibiseng moqoqo Afrika
Borwa”.

This occasion demonstrates our continued political commitment as the
elected representatives of our people in the NCOP to recognise the leading
role that our people should play in our quest to push back the frontiers of
poverty, and to ensure that they are all emancipated from the social and
economic ills of the apartheid legacy.

We are grateful for the theme of the Deputy President’s annual address,
which is: strengthening participatory government and local government for
effective and sustainable service delivery. Indeed, experience has shown
that community participation is an essential part of effective and
accountable governance at all local government levels. It serves as
affirmation of our commitment to ensure that our people are given access to
quality and sustainable services. It ensures that our people are part of
the solution to address their challenges and it reassures them about our
unshakeable commitment to addressing those challenges.

While we are conscious of the challenges ahead of us, we are proud that our
government has made great strides in ensuring that our people have a better
life. This week we have been reassured that while some of our people have
no jobs, shelter, water and sanitation and live in abject poverty, plans
and projects have been put in place to address these.

In this regard, we are grateful for the commitment made by the hon Premier
of Gauteng, Mr Mbhazima Shilowa, to report back to our Council within the
next six months on the progress that the government of Gauteng would have
made to implement the recommendations and suggestions that were made by our
hon members and the people of Sedibeng District Municipality.

As the ANC we are proud that our movement is well on course in dealing
decisively with the scourges of poverty, poor health and underdevelopment
that have been confronting our people for many years. We will continue to
ensure that proper mechanisms and programmes are put in place to ensure
that all the challenges faced by our people, including the people of
Sedibeng, are addressed.

The issues of access to basic services and economic opportunity were raised
on several occasions during the course of this week. We who represent the
poor know as a matter of fact that our communities are increasingly
becoming impatient because of the pace of service delivery. We are now
aware of that. Let me say to our leaders and officials of our local
government that we are not going to tolerate the cutting of services to our
poor communities without due consideration of their social conditions.

Asisoze neze sikuvume lokho singuhulumeni kaKhongolose. [As the ANC-led
government, we will never allow that.]

Hohang re ka sedumele. [We will not accept that at all.]

We will continue rooting out corruption that continues to prevent the
delivery of quality services to our people. We will not tolerate nepotism
in any structures of our government. Indeed, we say that those who do
disservice to our people should not be part of our government. We will do
away with lazy and uncaring public servants.

Sifuna ukuthi kubasebenzi bakahulumeni abavilaphayo, abangogombela kwezabo
izisu, abanganaki lutho ngokwenzeka emphakathini, asisoze sigoqe izandla
sibukele amahhovisi ethu ecekelwa phansi. Izifiso nezidingo zomphakathi
mazifezwe. [Ihlombe.] Abasebenza emahhovisi omasipala abadede uma
bengazimisele ukusebenza. [Ihlombe.] [Ubuwelewele.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[We want to say to the lazy and greedy public servants who disregard our
communities that we will never fold our arms and watch them ruin our
offices. The interests and the needs of the community should be served.
[Applause.] Those who work in municipal offices should resign if they are
not prepared to work. [Applause.] [Interjections.]]

Ha re ba batle hohang. Ha ba suthe. [We don’t want them at all. They must
go.]

Ngikusho lokhu ngoba omasipala yibona ababalulekile emphakathini futhi
yibona abangenza izinguquko ezibonakalayo ngokushesha, ngaphandle
kokungabaza. Ngakho siyabadinga omasipala abazimisele ngokuguqula izimpilo,
babuye babuyise isithunzi sabantu bonkana. Kubalulekile ukuthi sizimisele
sonke ngokusebenzisana, sizikhandle ukuze sifeze ukubhekelwa kwazo zonke
izidingo zomphakathi.

Mangisho ngithi noma beyingcosana abantu abasasebenzisa izindlu zangasese
ezibizwa ngokuthi yi-bucket system kuleli laseGauteng, nginethemba lokuthi,
kuwo lo nyaka ophezulu, zizoqedwa nya. Nginethemba futhi lokuthi ugesi
uzofakwa ngokuphelele ngonyaka ka-2012 ukuze phela kuhlomule abesimame,
izintandane kanye nabo abakhubazekile.

Abantu mabangabuyiselwa emuva emitholampilo ngenxa yokuthi imithi ethize
ayikho, noma kuthiwe sekufinyelelwe enanini elithize elidingekayo.
[Ubuwelewele.] Abantu banelungelo lokulashwa ngokuphelele, nezingane
ngokunjalo zinelungelo lokufunda. Lokhu sikusho ngokungangabazi
siwuKhongolose, kanti futhi abantu banelungelo lokuthola izindlu.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I say this because municipalities, without any doubt, are the most
important sphere of government in communities and as such they can make
rapid visible changes. We need municipalities which are prepared to change
the lives of all the people and bring back their dignity. It is important
that we all work together tirelessly to achieve the needs of the people.

I must also say that although there are only a few households with a bucket
toilet system in Gauteng, I have hope that this system will be completely
eradicated this year. I have hope that electricity connections will be
completed entirely by 2012, so that women, orphans and people with
disabilities can benefit.

People should not be turned away from clinics due to a shortage of
medication or just because they have exceeded the number of patients to be
seen per day. [Interjections.] People have a right to a complete medical
treatment. Children also have a right to education. As the ANC we say this
without any hesitation, and people also have a right to housing.]

In the past few days, the opposition parties and some of the beneficiaries
of long years of apartheid in South Africa have challenged our commitment
to ensure that our people are economically empowered through the BEE
policy. As articulated by one of the fathers of our liberation movement,
Chief Albert Luthuli, “the road to freedom Is via the cross”, we will not
compromise the emancipation of our people, even if it means going via the
cross – emunqamulezweni [the cross].

We will not be deterred from our commitment to ensure that our people are
empowered to confront the long years of apartheid capitalism. We will never
lose sight of the fact that poverty and unemployment remain the biggest
threat to the progress that our country has made. We will continue to work
tirelessly to ensure that the empowerment of our people remain central to
our quest for a better South Africa.

The contributions of hon members and the people of Sedibeng have renewed
our vigour to work tirelessly to push back the segment of society that
still lives in poverty and appalling social conditions. [Time expired.]

USIHLALO WENDLU (Nk M N Oliphant): Sicela ukuthi uma amalungu omphakathi
ekhuluma ehlise amazwi kancane, kanjalo naMalungu ePhalamende sicela nawo
ehlise amazwi kancane uma ekhuluma. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): We would like to request the
members of the public to kindly lower their voices when speaking amongst
themselves. Members of Parliament are also requested to do likewise.]

Rre J O TLHAGALE: Motlotlegi Modulasetilo, motlotlegi Motlatsa-
Mopresidente wa lefatshe la rona yo o senang le rona, batlotlegi botlhe ba
ba fano le bagaetsho ba poroferense ya Gauteng, lantlha, ke rata go
lebogela kamogelo ya maemo a a kwa godimo e re e boneng go tswa mo
Palamenteng ya porofense ya Gauteng. Dithulaganyetso tse re di diretsweng
tsa mokoloko wa di tente, ke tse di sa gaisiweng ke dipe, mme re itumelela
matsapa a lona bagaetsho.

Thulaganyo e, ya go isa Palamente kwa bathong ka maikaelelo a go ba utlwa,
go utlwa dilelo tsa bona le go di arabela, ke motheo wa temokerasi. Fa re
bua nnete, ga ise e ke e diragale mo dipusong tsa maloba tsa tlhaolele.
[Legofi.]

Thulaganyo e, e tlhagisetsa bagarona sebaka sa go bolela le go tlhagisa
ditlhokego tse ba di labalabelang, jaaka matlo, metsi a a phepa, motlakase,
thulaganyetso ya kgelelo ya leswe, twantsho ya botlhoki le lehuma. Kana
Setswana sa re, ngwana yo o sa leleng o swela tharing.

E rile ka Laboraro maitsiboa, motlotlegi Tonakgolo ya Gauteng Mbazima
Shilowa, a patilwe ke motlotlegi Meiyara wa Sedibeng le Motlatsa-Tona
motlotlegi Elizabeth Thabethe, ba buisana le bagwebi ba merafe yotlhe ka ga
ditlhabololo tsa kgaolo eno, le dikgato tse di ka tsewang go tlhamela
bagarona ditiro gore bagarona batswe mo lehumeng le le kanakana. Matsapa a
a ntseng jalo, a a tsewang ntle le tiego a a lebosega.
Kwa bokhutlong, ke lebogela thologelo e e kanakana ya bagarona ba ba tswang
mo Gauteng. Re a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana speech
follows.)

[Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President in absentia, all
distinguished guests who are here and fellow countrymen from Gauteng
province, firstly I would like to thank you for the high-class reception we
received from the Gauteng legislature. The manner in which the marquee
tents have been erected, is out of this world and we really appreciate
that.

This programme of taking Parliament to the people is aimed at listening to
their concerns and responding to their needs, which is a foundation for
democracy. Truly speaking, it never happened in the previous apartheid
regime. [Applause.]

This programme gives our people a chance to speak and to delineate their
needs, such as houses, clean water, electricity, sanitation and the fight
against poverty. There is a saying in Setswana that the child who does not
cry dies in the papoose skin.

On Wednesday evening the hon premier of Gauteng, Mr Mbhazima Shilowa,
together with the hon mayor of Sedibeng and Deputy Minister Elizabeth
Thabethe had a meeting with the businesspeople of all races regarding
developments in this region and steps to be taken to create job
opportunities for our people in order to alleviate poverty. This immediate
response without delay is highly appreciated.

Lastly, I would like to thank many people in attendance who come from
Gauteng. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Cllr A MASONDO (Salga): Sanibonani! Dumelang! Avuxeni! Môre! Morning!
Molweni!

Mangiqale ngokusho ukuthi iNingizimu Afrika iyizwe elingaphansi kwabantu
bonke abahlala kulona. Ngibingelela uSihlalo woMkhandlu Kazwelonke
Wezifundazwe, ubaba u-M J Mahlangu; iPhini likaMongameli weRiphabuliki
yaseNingizimu Afrika, uNk Mlambo-Ngcuka - yize noma esehambile; aMalungu
ePhalamende akhona lapha; oNdunankulu uDipuo Peters, Balindlela, Marshoff;
uNgqongqoshe wohulumeni basekhaya u-D Mahlangu; izimeya naboSomlomo;
ozakwethu abangamakhansela; abaholi baka-Salga oSomyo noJohnson abakhona
lapha ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Let me begin by saying that South Africa is a country which belongs to all
people who live in it. I greet the Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr MJ Mahlangu;
the Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa, Mrs Mlambo–Ngcuka in
absentia; Members of Parliament present here; Premiers present, Dipuo
Peters, Balindlela and Marshoff; the MEC for Local Government, hon D
Mahlangu; Mayors and Speakers; colleagues who are councillors; leaders of
Salga, Somyo and Johnson who are present here ...]

... distinguished guests, members of the community, the media, ladies and
gentlemen, we salute this effort, an unprecedented initiative to bring
Parliament to the people.

Siyabonga. Sibonga ukuba iPhalamende lilethwe ebantwini, ngoba siyazi
ukuthi selokhu kwathi nhlo, ayizange yenzeke into enje eNingizimu Afrika.
[Thank you. We are grateful that the Parliament has been brought to the
people, because we know that this is something which has never happened
before in South Africa.]

We are meeting this afternoon to demonstrate, not only that local
government is that sphere of government that is closest to the people, but
also to affirm it as local democracy in action. We believe that its local
practitioners should at all times be preoccupied with bread-and-butter
issues, service delivery imperatives, and seeking always to address the day-
to-day needs of local citizens and residents.

Uhulumeni wasekhaya unguhulumeni osondele kakhulu ebantwini. Yingakho thina
njengabantu baseNingizimu Afrika kufanele sihlale njalo sithe njo ngeso
kohulumeni basekhaya. [Local government is the government closest to the
people. That is why we, the people of South Africa, must always monitor the
progress in the local government sphere.]

These local issues have far-reaching implications. Lack of delivery of
water, electricity, roads, health care, safety and other basic services can
have a serious negative impact on the economic, social and political realm
of life.

Ohulumeni basekhaya-ke kufanele baqinisekise ukuthi izinhlelo zikahulumeni
ezifana nokuletha ugesi, amanzi, ezezindlu zangasese, ezempilo njalo njalo
kuyafinyelela ebantwini. Sithi uhulumeni akafake isandla kwezentuthuko
nemisebenzi kanye nezinhlelo ze-Asgisa. Sithi asihlale njalo sithintene
nabantu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Local government must always ensure that government services, such as
electricity and water supply, sanitation, health facilities, etc, reach the
people. We are saying government must help in development, job creation and
Asgisa programmes. We are saying let us keep in touch with the people at
all times.]

In addition, we are saying that, in the context of this debate, it is
important that the participatory processes aimed at deepening democracy
should indeed be strengthened even further. Participation does not mean
token consultation or manipulation.

To us as Salga, to participate means to take part in or share in. Public
participation means creating a platform to enable the public to participate
in matters of government in general and local government in particular.

UMthethosisekelo nawo wanda kabanzana ngalolu daba lokuthi ohulumeni
basekhaya kufuneka babuyele ebantwini. UMthethosisekelo uthi masikhuthaze
abantu ukuba babe yingxenye yokuletha intuthuko nezinhlelo zikahulumeni
emphakathini. Ake sikhumbuzane ngoMthethosisekeko. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[The Constitution also elaborates on this matter, that local government
must report back to the people. The Constitution states that we must
encourage people to be part of the team bringing development and government
programmes closer to the community. Let us remind each other about the
Constitution.]

It says that we should provide democratic and accountable government for
local communities; that we must ensure the provision of services to
communities in a sustainable manner; promote social and economic
development; promote a safe and healthy environment; encourage the
involvement of communities and community organisations in matters of local
government; and that the municipalities should strive within their
financial and administrative capacity to achieve these objects.

One of these aspects, just to emphasise, is the question of encouraging the
involvement of communities and community organisations in matters of local
government. The basic assumption regarding this public participation matter
is that, firstly, there must be an open and transparent process –
ukusebenzisana ngokusobala, zingafihlwa izinto [that is to work co-
operatively and transparently, not to hide anything]. It means that people
and groups can influence decision-making.

Kusho ukuthi abantu bangaba nezwi ezinqunyweni ezithathwa uhulumeni. [It
means that people can have a voice in decisions taken by government.]

It means that people are active participants in development.

Kusho ukuthi, ukuze kube khona inqubekela-phambili nentuthuko, kufanele
abantu bakwazi ukufaka isandla emsebenzini owenziwayo. [It means that, for
progress and development to take place, people must lend a hand in service
delivery.]

The question however, can be posed: Why do we engage in public
participation? We do so, I’ll argue, to ensure that we sensitise the
elected public representatives, the managers and officials on key concerns
of communities at that particular point in time.

Kusho ukuthi kufanele siye njalo ebantwini. Ngoba ngezikhathi ezihlukene,
izinto abantu abakhala ngazo azifani ncamashi. [It means that we must
always go back to the people. This is so because people would always want
different things at different times.]

To enable people to get an understanding of what government is ...

... ngiye ngisho ngithi kwesinye isikhathi siye sicabange ukuthi indaba
kahulumeni yinto elula nje. Kufanele sikhumbuzane, bantu bakithi. Kunendaba
engihlala ngiyixoa lapha ngithi omunye umkhulu owayesemdala wake wabuza
umbuzo kwabanye abafana abafundile. Wathi kubo: Bantabami, ake nisho kahle,
ingabe uhulumeni lo owakabani isibongo? (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[... I often say, sometimes we simply think that government is just an easy
thing. We need to remind each other as fellow Africans about this. There is
a story I always tell which is about an old man who once asked some
educated boys a question. His question was: My children, tell me, what is
the surname of the government?]

What the old man really meant was that this question of the state and
government can indeed become very complex, and unless it is brought to a
practical level and brought as close as possible to the understanding of
ordinary people, indeed, we might get lost in a complex maze.

We engage in public participation to promote the values of good governance
and human rights; to annul the social distance between an electorate and
those elected; and to allow citizens to have a voice in local politics in
order to influence all the decisions, discussions and engagements that take
place in informal political institutions.

However, what are the structures and mechanisms for public participation?

Angizukungena kabanzi kule ndaba ngaphandle kokugcizelela nokufaka izwi
lokugcwalisela kulokho osekukhulunyiwe ekutheni masisebenzisane namakomiti
ezigceme. Masiyihambele imihlangano ebizwa emiphakathini nezimbizo njalo
njalo. Masisebenzise izindlela zokwenza izinto ekuhleleni nokuqinisekisa
ukuthi izinhlelo zikahulumeni zihamba ngendlela okuyiyonayona. Izinhlelo
zentuthuko ezihlanganisayo, ama-IDPs, izingqungquthela zentuthuko ...

USIHLALO WENDLU (Nk M N Oliphant): Khansela elihloniphekile, isikhathi
sakho sesiphelile.

Khansela A MASONDO: Sihlalo, awuthi ngivale ngokusho ukuthi imigomo-ke
efana ne-inclusivity, diversity, transparency, flexibility, accessibility,
accountability ...

USIHLALO WENDLU (Nk MN Oliphant): Khansela, isikhathi sakho sesiphelile.
Khansela A MASONDO: ... nokuthi asijule ngengxoxo emzansi ... Phambili!
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I am not going to dwell much on this issue, except to emphasise what has
already been said about us working together with the ward committees. Let
us attend community meetings and izimbizo, etc. Let us follow the proper
channels to make sure that government programmes reach the intended
recipients. The developmental programmes, the IDPs, the developmental
forums ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Councillor, your time has
expired.

Cllr A MASONDO: Chairperson, let me conclude by saying principles such as
inclusiveness, diversity, transparency, flexibility, accessibility,
accountability ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Councillor, your time has expired.

Cllr A MASONDO: ...and that we should deepen the debate in South
Africa...Forward! [Applause.]]

Ms K C MASHIGO-DLAMINI (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, my greetings to the
Chairperson of the NCOP and the Deputy Chairperson, the Deputy President in
absentia, Premiers who are here, members of the executive council, hon
executive mayors, hon delegates of the NCOP, and the community of Sebokeng.


Our people cannot fully enjoy true democracy and a better life until we
deepen our democracy. This must remain a priority that will guide us in our
endeavours of ensuring that everyone enjoys the better life that we
promised our people. As we continue in our effort to improve the lives of
our people, we must seek to ensure that we involve them in all issues in
their areas.

We need to promote conditions of heightened and vibrant public
participation in all community matters. It is for this reason that our
Local Government: Municipal Systems Act and the Intergovernmental Framework
Act put emphasis on public participation at local government level. We need
to engage our people vigorously. They must tell us what they think of our
system of local government and what they think needs to be done to make the
system function more effectively and efficiently. Most importantly, they
must tell us what they think their role is in all this.

Communities must not only be consulted, but they must participate and give
input in all processes and activities undertaken by the municipalities.
Community participation is a fundamental pillar on which our democratic
government is built. It is a principle that must be implemented without
fail. Municipalities need to work hard to encourage their communities to
participate in the different structures that promote public participation.
We must remember that this is a legislative requirement.

Sihlalo, iProvinsi yaseMpumalanga ingitfumele kutsi indzaba yekucedza
emabhakede emiphakatsini yaseMpumalanga seyentiwe yaphela. [Tandla.] Kodvwa
kunye lesifuna kukusho kutsi iMpumalanga Provinsi ingaba ngulapho
iNingizimu Afrika ingafundza khona kwekutsi Lubambiswano Lwemiphakatsi
lwentiwa njani.

Emphakatsini wetfu siye satfola kutsi kukhona bantfu labangawafuni
emathoyilethi etitatanyiswa, nekutsi kunalabangafuni kususwa etindzaweni
letihlelenjiswe kahle bayiswe etindzaweni kuletihlelekile, satfola kutsi
kunebantfu labangafuni kwemukela bemagontilaki labangachamuki kumavileji
abo. Loko kusifundvo kutsi kube umhlaba wonkhe waseNingizimu Afrika
ungatimisela kutsi ususe emabhakede emiphakatsini, kuncono ucale
eMpumalanga utewufundza sifundvo. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs
follows.)

[Chairperson, the Mpumalanga province has mandated me to report to this
House that the existing bucket system has been eradicated. [Applause.] We
would also like to say one thing, that the Mpumalanga province is setting
an example for the rest of South Africa, demonstrating how community
participation is carried out.
We have found, in our communities, that there are people who do not want
the modern toilets, and there are those who do not want to be moved from
informal settlements to areas that have been developed instead. There are
also those who do not accept building contractors who come from unfamiliar
areas or areas other than the surrounding villages. This is a valuable
lesson in that if the whole of South Africa wants to commit itself to
eradicate the bucket system in the communities, we in Mpumalanga province
had better start learning how to do it.]

We have yet another opportunity to improve that initiative of participatory
governance and deepening of public participation through encouraging the
participation of lower-ground structures that are closer to the people,
such as community-based organisations, ward councillors, ward committees
and community development workers. Accessibility of information through
multipurpose community centres can assist in proper planning and management
processes.

It is for these reasons that, in the Water for All flagship project in
Mpumalanga, which aims to accelerate the eradication of water backlogs in
the province, we must make public participation and consultation a
priority. We shall mobilise and involve the communities in this project
from the beginning to the end.

Our province has taken good governance and public participation very
seriously. We established 363 ward committees out of 365 soon after the
local government elections. Further, we have been able to make a positive
impact with the Community Development Worker Programme, where a total of
360 city CDWs have been employed at level 6, from the financial year 2006-
07, and were successfully deployed to the different wards in all the
municipalities. What we need to carefully look at is how to use them
effectively to reach our communities. We must use them to assist us in
monitoring our projects, verify information in our communities and also
address the obstacles that hinder service delivery in our communities.

Linked to this is a need to make further inroads for the development of our
communities in the rural areas through the Integrated Sustainable Rural
Development Programme, ISRDP. There are areas that rely on active
participation and responsible ward committees. The izimbizo programmes at
national, provincial and local government levels are very crucial to our
governance and participation matters. The departments, in consultation with
the office of the Premier, will form partnerships with the district
municipalities to ensure the success of those programmes.

Chairperson, I would really like to respond to issues that have been raised
by hon member Watson regarding Mbombela municipality. What I can say now is
that we have communicated with all structures, especially the NCOP. The
Mbombela municipality falls under section 106 of the systems Act. The NCOP,
as a structure, will be informed accordingly about developments. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mna A MOTSOALEDI (Limpopo): Modulasetulo, kea tamiša! Good morning! Môre!
Molweni mawethu! Sanibonani! Avuxeni! Ndi matsheloni! Thobela magagešo!

Taba ye ya go tliša Palamente setšhabeng ke taba ye bohlokwa ya go dira
gore batho ba sepedišane le pušo ya bona. E sepelelana le mokgatlo wa rena
wa tikologo e bile e kwana le lengwalo la Freedom Charter leo le rego
setšhaba se tla buša. Ke lenaneo leo le dirago gore kontaraka yeo re e
saennego le setšhaba ya go lwantšha bodidi le go hloka mešomo, e phele.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A MOTSOALEDI (Limpopo): Hon Chairperson, I greet everybody!

This issue of bringing Parliament to the people is significant because it
updates people about what is happening in their government. It is in line
with our movement and the Freedom Charter which states that the people
shall govern. It is the programme which makes our contract with the people
alive.]

The President, in his state of the nation address in February this year,
aptly captured the essence of the urgent task when he said:

  None of the social problems we have to solve is capable of resolution
  outside the context of the creation of jobs and the alleviation and
  eradication of poverty.

This relates to everything from the improvement of the health of our people
to reducing the levels of crime, raising literacy and numeracy, and opening
the doors of learning and culture to all. We are pleased that the NCOP
programme responds to these challenges. In our interaction with the people
of Gauteng over the past four days we have confirmed the urgency of
addressing these challenges, and these have further served to enrich our
understanding of what needs to be done to speed up the process of delivery.


In our previous sessions we noted that most of the concerns raised in these
platforms are not new, but are common with those we normally encounter in
our various provinces during outreach programmes and government’s izimbizo.
These challenges usually centre around the delivery of basic services such
as water, housing, electricity, sanitation and roads. Most of our
municipalities are building capacity to address these issues as part of
Project Consolidate, as outlined by the Minister for Provincial and Local
Government.

Job creation continues to be an overarching challenge for most provinces
and the entire country. In our Limpopo province, there is a commitment by
big mining houses to invest not less than R14 billion in expansion of
programmes during the course of this year. So, in terms of mining we want
to warn Kimberley, Northern Cape and Gauteng to watch out because Limpopo
has arrived. [Applause.] We have no doubt that this major capital
investment will lead to improved economic growth and an increase in our
labour absorption capacity as a province.

Despite this, there is ongoing conflict between mines and their surrounding
communities. In the recent past, we have seen communities up in arms
against mining houses in the Tubatse and Mogalakwena areas of Limpopo.
Their concerns range from lack of meaningful partnerships, inadequate
corporate social investment, and insufficient compensation over land, as
well as failure to engage local labour. We believe that there is a need for
all these affected parties to resolve their conflicts amicably in order to
build long-lasting relationships that are mutually beneficial to all the
parties concerned.

The trends in race relations in Limpopo province are showing signs of
improvement, more especially in the agricultural sector. This can only mean
that we have been working in the white communities, particularly Afrikaner
communities. That work is starting to yield positive results.

Despite this noble progress, we know that there continues to be horrible
isolated incidents such as the one in which a boy was shot by a farmer
after being allegedly mistaken for a rabid dog in Thabazimbi; and one in
which a man was shot after being allegedly mistaken for a baboon in
Messina. We all have a responsibility to condemn in the strongest terms
this type of criminality. To this effect, we would like to reiterate what
we always say, that white communities have the responsibility to make the
loudest noise when the victim is black, and that, similarly, black
communities should do the same when the victim is white. This will
obviously serve to discourage racist perpetrators who might be thinking
that they are advancing a white cause by killing black people and the
opposite would be true for black people, as well.

Chairperson, when we speak about the eradication of poverty, let us remind
this House that the surest and most secure way in which to bring an end to
poverty in all households in our country is through education, but the most
unfortunate and most vulnerable person in this time and era of democracy is
the black learner.

Black learners are exposed to drugs like their white counterparts but there
is also something that they are exposed to which exists only in black
communities. Every time there is a conflict in a village or township, there
is a potential for closing schools and bringing teaching and learning to a
complete standstill. In rural areas when two kgoshis [chiefs] fight over
bokgoshi [chieftainship] they are likely to close schools. When two bishops
fight over a church they are likely to close schools. When two adults fight
over their sexual partners they are likely to close schools.

I had the dishonour of presiding over a meeting of a kgoshi who came with
his village to inform me that there is going to be no school in their area
because the principal had slept with two lady teachers in that school. One
of them was a wife of a very powerful man in the village and there would be
no education. The fight of unscrupulous people over provincial and
municipal boundaries is likely to cause schools to be closed, as we have
seen. The fight over availability of water concerning municipalities is
likely to cause schools to close, and the fight over mining rights is
likely to cause schools to close. We want to call upon leaders to prevail
on black communities to address this because it is very counterproductive.

While our province has HIV and Aids prevalence rates which are low compared
to the rest of the country, we are still worried, as the Deputy President
said. We are worried, Deputy President and Chairperson, because the present
generation of learners is a generation of three Cs: cellphone, cash and a
car. These things expose them to all these tendencies.

I want to tell the Deputy President, the MEC from the Eastern Cape and the
Chairperson of the NCOP, because they raised these issues, that there is no
amount of cajoling, no amount of shouting that we can do as leaders that
will improve the situation in our schools if we don’t take drastic steps
about drugs.

When a learner has taken drugs, no matter how decent the family from which
they come can be, they will sleep anywhere in full view of the public
because they stop being human beings and become animals, and some of their
actions are even worse than those of animals.

So, I want to prevail on the MPs that they must pass very strict and harsh
laws about the distribution of drugs, especially in our schools. I thank
you, Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnu S N MTHETHWA (KwaZulu-Natal): Sihlalo, mangibingelele iPhini
likaMongameli noma lingasekho, ngibingelele oNgqongqoshe bonke abakhona
lapha, uSihlalo woMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe nePhini lakhe, ozakwethu
ngezikhundla zabo, osodolobha abakhona lapha namakhansela, nezicukuthwane
zalo mcimbi ubukhona bethu obungeke buphelele zingekho, okungamalungu
omphakathi. Sanibonani nonke! [Ubuwelewele.]

Angixolise-ke Sihlalo, ngixolisele uNdunankulu wakithi KwaZulu-Natali
ukuthi akabanga khona ngenxa yokuxakwa umsebenzi omningi abhekene nawo.

Namhlanje ngikhuluma lapha ngimele isishayamthetho saKwaZulu-Natali kukhona
zonke izishayamthetho zaleli zwe. Ngikhuluma eSebokeng. Lokhu nje kukodwa
kuxoxa indaba, mphakathi wale ndawo. Siyabonga Sihlalo ukuthi le nkonzo
ulokhu uqhubeke nayo njalo. Baningi abasizakalayo.

Enye indaba engiyizwe izolo nakulezi zinsuku ezidlule ngesikhathi kukhona
abakade beveza uma bekhuluma ukuthi bona bangobani, basuka kuphi, ukuthi
bengilokhu ngizwa osihlalo bethi, “Cha bo, asikho emhlanganweni wenhlangano
ethile ethinta u-ANC kodwa sisemcimbini kahulumeni. Ngakho, uma ukhuluma
bhekisa kuhulumeni.” Lokho kukhombisa ubuholi obuhle obukwazi ukuphatha le
micimbi ngendlela ekwazi ukuhlukanisa izinto, ingaxovi. [Ihlombe.]

Uyabona, lokho kungikhumbuze ngesikhathi abantu bakha usomqulu wabo ngo-
1955. Uma usuwucubungula lowo Somqulu Wenkululeko, uzothola ukuthi uchaza
ngalo mcimbi esikuwona, ungowabantu futhi. Yilokho engikunakile, Sihlalo
wethu, namhlanje. Angidlule-ke.

Manje ngifuna ukuthinta kancane, Phini likaMongameli, njengokusho
kwesihloko sengxoxo yanamhlanje yokuthi sikhuluma lapha ngokuqinisa
uhulumeni osebenza ngokubambisana nohulumeni wasekhaya ukuze alethe
intuthuko engenamkhawulo. Ube esefuna-ke ukuzwa ukuthi sithini ngezinye
izihlokwana. Angikuqinisekise Phini likaMongameli nawe Sihlalo woMkhandlu
kaZwelonke Wezifundazwe ukuthi KwaZulu-Natali sisaqhubeka siya phambili
noZibambele – lapho omama nezintokazi, abondli bemizi, benikwa amathuba
okuba basenge lapha kuhulumeni. Angifuni-ke ukukhuluma ngezinhlangano
zobambiswano ama-co-operatives ngaphandle kokuthi ngithi luyaqhubeka
uhlelo. Kuma-SMMEs luyaqhubeka uhlelo, emisebenzini yama-BEE luyaqhubeka
uhlelo. [Ubuwelewele.]

Kodwa ngiyafuna ukuthinta futhi ukuthi abasebenzela ukuthuthukisa
umphakathi, ababizwa ngama-CDWs, sebekhona. Ngoba phela ukuze uqinisekise
ukuthi noma iyiphi inhlangano futhi noma yisiphi isakhiwo siyaphila,
kufanele kuphile izakhiwo zakhona. [Ubuwelewele.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S N MTHETHWA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, the Deputy President in
absentia, all Ministers present here, Chairperson of the National Council
of Provinces and his Deputy, my colleagues in their respective positions,
the mayors present here and councillors and the most important guests whose
absence would have made this gathering a fiasco – I am referring here to
the members of the public - greetings to you all! [Interjections.]

Chairperson, the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal sends his apologies for not
coming here because of his many commitments.

I am talking today, representing the legislature of KwaZulu-Natal in the
presence of all the legislatures of this country. I am talking in Sebokeng.
To the members of the community here, this alone tells a tale. We thank the
Chairperson of the NCOP for continually spearheading this mission. Many
people are helped.

Yesterday, even during the previous days, when people were given the
platform to say something, they would start by telling us who they are,
where they come from, etc. I would constantly hear the programme directors
keeping them in check by saying, “No, we are not in a meeting of an ANC-
aligned political party, but we are part of a government event. Therefore,
if you speak, direct your concerns to the government.” That shows good
leadership by those who deal with these events in a proper way without
mixing up issues. [Applause.]

You see, that reminded me of the time when people wrote their Freedom
Charter in 1955. When you look closely at the Freedom Charter, you will see
that events such as these are catered for. This event is for the people.
Chairperson, that is what I noticed today. Well, let me continue.

Now I want to touch a bit - through your permission, Deputy President - on
today’s main topic which is about the strengthening of co-operation amongst
the different tiers of government so as to deliver everlasting development.
Let me assure the Deputy President and the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces that in KwaZulu-Natal we are making progress with the
Zibambele road maintenance programme where women and young women,
breadwinners, are given opportunities to gain from the government. I do not
want to talk about the co-operatives except to say that the programme is
progressing. With the SMMEs, the programme is progressing, as well as with
the BEE projects. [Interjections.]
However, I want also to mention here that we now have community development
workers, the CDWs, and it is evidently true that for every organisation or
structure to be functional its formation must be functional.
[Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mnu S N MTHETHWA (KwaZulu-Natali): Amakomidi ezigceme akhiwe futhi
ayasebenza. Kodwa ngifuna ukunitshela ngalokho okusha KwaZulu-Natali.
Njengoba nazi ukuthi lesiya yisifundazwe esinobuholi obuningi cishe kunazo
zonke izifundazwe uma kuza ebuholini bendabuko noma bomdabu, kuthe uma
sidlula ekwakhiweni kwezakhiwo zentando yeningi kubaholi bendabuko sathi,
cha, akwenele ngoba kukhona abanye abaholi abangemuva kwabo: izinduna. Lezo
yizinduna okungaba yizinduna zamakhosi, izinduna zezinsizwa namaqhikiza.
Sabe sesithi ake sivule inkundla yabo nje abaholi bomdabu. Sahlangana-ke
sathi kubo, “Nani niyingxenye yaleli zwe. Niyingxenye yalesi sifundazwe.”
Ababekhona banganixoxela, mina anginaso isikhathi sokuthi ngixoxe ngoba
iwashi lakho lizokhala khona manje. [Uhleko.]

Malungu ahloniphekile, siyavuma siwuhulumeni ukuthi esikufisayo
nenikufisayo kuyenzeka kodwa akukapheleli. Kodwa noma kungakapheleli
kunjalo, uhulumeni okhona, ngazo lezi zimbizo nangezinye izakhiwo, useyazi
ukuthi uma ekhuluma ngokuthi abantu bonke ezweni kufanele bawathole amanzi,
ayobe esekhona nini kubantu bonke. Lokho ukwenza ngokuqhathanisa
isabiwomali kanye nangobuka izidingo zabantu. Useyazi ukuthi uma ekhuluma
ngogesi, eqhathanisa nesabiwomali nangokwezidingo zabantu ezibalulekile
nezijahekile, uyoba usukhona nini kubantu bonke lowo gesi. Ngalokho,
ngiyafisa ukuthi nihlale ethembeni, nazi ukuthi nakunina kuyeza lokho ngoba
phela thina asisayisaphazi imali njengoba kwakwenzeka kuqala. Imali
ikhonela ukuthi ithuthukise abantu abaya phambili.

Ngiyafisa futhi ukuthinta ukuthi KwaZulu-Natali – ngibonile abanye behleka
uma ngithinta, kanti ngizothinta futhi ... [Uhleko.] Ngifuna ukuthinta
lapha ukuthi KwaZulu-Natali siyaxoxa njengamanje sithi sifuna ukuyishintsha
kancane indlela yokuya ebantwini, kungagcini nje kuphela ngokuthi silalele
abantu, ngoba kunezinto eziningi esesizenzile singuhulumeni, okungaba
owasekhaya, owesifundazwe noma kazwelonke, maqondana nalokho okungaba
yimithetho eshayiwe ezohlomulisa abantu kodwa abangayazi. Uma-ke uthi,
Phini likaMongameli, kufuneka sijule ngengxoxo, sithi-ke sizoke siphume
manje sikhulume ngemithetho ethinta abantu ...

USIHLALO WENDLU (Nk MN Oliphant): Mhlonishwa, isikhathi sakho sesiphelile.

Mnu S N MTHETHWA (KwaZulu-Natali): Ngiyazibongela. [Ihlombe.] (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S N MTHETHWA (KwaZulu-Natal): Ward committees have been formed and they
are functioning. However, I want to tell you about what is new in KwaZulu-
Natal. As you all know, our province has the largest number of amakhosi and
traditional leaders in the country compared to other provinces.

And after having revived the traditional structures, we felt that, no, we
had not done it all because we still had other traditional leaders who were
left out which are izinduna - headmen. We had different izinduna, those
working under amakhosi, those responsible for regiments as well as female
izinduna responsible for young girls of marriageable age. We then decided
to open a forum for all traditional leaders. We duly met and said to them,
“You are also part of this country. You are a part of this province.” Those
in attendance would tell more because unfortunately, your watch would just
tell me that my time is up. [Laughter.]

Hon members of the public, we in government admit that what we wish for and
what you also wish for is happening, but it is not yet complete. Be that as
it may, the present government - through these izimbizo and other
structures - knows that when it says that everybody in the country should
get water, when that will happen. It becomes aware of all this by weighing
its budget against the needs of the people. The government knows when it
talks about electricity, weighing it against the budget, when electricity
will be made available to all the people. With that in mind, I want you to
have faith, and know that all these good things are also coming to you too,
because we are not wasting money anymore like before. The money is there to
develop people who are moving forward.

I also wish to mention something in passing about KwaZulu-Natal. I saw
others laughing earlier on when I spoke of KwaZulu-Natal. Anyway, I will
touch on it again. [Laughter.] I want to say that in KwaZulu-Natal we want
to change a little about the way we go to the people. We felt that it
should not only be confined to listening to the people - because there are
many things that we have done as local, provincial or national government -
but it will also be about the laws that have been passed, aimed at
benefiting the people. We often find that they are not aware of them.
Therefore, Deputy President, if you say we need to deepen the debate, we on
the other side say we will go out now and talk about laws that concern
people ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, your time is up.

Mr S N MTHETHWA (KwaZulu-Natal): I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy President, all protocol
observed, good morning Gauteng. The Houses of our intergovernmental system
may strike some as a boring and merely philosophical matter. In fact, the
importance of a well-functioning intergovernmental system can hardly be
overstated.
We cannot achieve the broad goals of cutting red tape, putting customers
first, empowering employees to get results and cutting back to basics
without a new approach to intergovernmental partnership in delivering
services to our people. The same applies to dealing with the problems of
duplication and overlapping.

Unfortunately the myriad of mandates and regulations that accompany grant
programmes are cumbersome and very costly to administer. The lack of a co-
ordinated implementation strategy between levels of government is not
achieving the intended outcomes. Each separate programme has its own array
of rules and regulations that must be observed. Regardless of the impact or
effectiveness and quality of customer service, we need goals of change.

Governments at all levels, but especially the national government, must
reduce the degree to which unfunded mandates are imposed on other levels of
government. Programme rules and regulations must be fundamentally
rethought, and the focus changed from compliance to outcomes and from
sanctions to incentives.

Intergovernmental collaboration must be actively facilitated if any real
improvement in government’s credibility is to be successful. We need to cut
red tape and eliminate bottlenecks by allowing waivers of regulations that
detract from accomplishing programme objectives or interfere with effective
service delivery. We need to simplify costly reimbursement procedures,
thereby saving time and money.
The NCOP, as the custodian of intergovernmental relations and co-operative
governance, has a major task in ensuring that we work together effectively
across the different spheres and sectors of government. Co-operative
governance between different spheres of governments and between large
departments is not easy to achieve. It requires commitment, leadership and
a strong drive towards common objectives.

In terms of the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill, various
departments are strengthening their own structures of intergovernmental
relations, and also participating in the structures of intergovernmental
relations at provincial levels, such as the Premiers’ co-ordination forums
and the mayoral forums. There is a responsibility to ensure that the system
regulating intergovernmental relations is effective in meeting our
country’s developmental needs. This means achieving our targets on time,
which is a fundamental shortcoming.

There is, however, a need for specific accountability; proper management of
delivery and integration of the policies; policy programmes and service
departments in the region; balancing priorities and objectives of
departments and regions; overseeing the management of allocated
departmental assets and resources; and establishing associated performance
measurements and accountability frameworks. The challenge is daunting, but
not insurmountable. I thank you. [Applause.]
USIHLALO  WOMKHANDLU  KAZWELONKE  WEZIFUNDAZWE:  Make  silalelaneni   sonke.
Kunabantu ababanga umsindo  laphaya  emuva.  YiPhalamende  leli.  Asiwubangi
umsindo uma sisePhalamende, siyathula silalele.  Ngicela-ke  ukuthi  nithule
size  siqede.  Sizoqeda  khona  manje.   Uma   ufuna   ukukhuluma,   phumela
ngaphandle. Lapha akukhulunywa, masithule nje sithi cwaka.  (Translation  of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Let us please listen to each other. There are
people who are making a noise there at the back. This is Parliament. We
don’t make a noise when we are in Parliament. We keep quiet and listen. I
therefore ask you to keep quiet until we finish. We will finish just now.
If you want to talk, go outside. Here we don’t talk. Let us be dead quiet.]

Rre H D YAWA (North West): Moradisi Rre Mahlangu, Motlatsa Moradisi wa ntlo
ya gago, le Motlatsa-Mookamedi wa rona yo o setseng a re siile a tsamaile,
le maloko otlhe a ntlo ya gago, le bao ba tlotlilweng ba ba tshwanetsweng
ke tlotlo ... (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr H D YAWA (North West): Chairperson Mr Mahlangu, your Deputy Chairperson
in this House, the Deputy Director who has already left, all members of
this House and all distinguished people who command respect ...]

... on the occasion of the opening of the North West provincial legislature
and during the state of the province address, we made an observation that
we stand at the mid-term point of this government since the elections in
2004. It is appropriate that we use this historic mark to take stock of how
far we have travelled in our historic journey since 12 years ago.

The third term of the democratic government began in 2004 with a solid
mandate for further and faster transformation, building on the foundations
of the first decade of democracy. We committed ourselves to the 2014 vision
built on three pillars: building a social security net to meet the
objectives of poverty alleviation; promoting growth and development of the
first economy, thus increasing possibilities to create jobs and address the
problem of unemployment; and adoption, as well as implementation of the
interventions and programmes to address the challenges of the second
economy.

As the government, we are collectively mindful of the huge backlog that we
have inherited from our historic past, and fully agree that we have to live
up to the expectations of the majority of our people.

As we pursue our vision for a better life for all and the goal of
transforming the legacy of our past, it is helpful that at certain
historical intervals, like today, we should pause to remind ourselves of
where we began this journey. Let us take stock of the distance we have
traversed, not only since 12 years ago, but also in the two-and-a-half
years into this term of the government.

In our province we recently observed violent protest and unruly behaviour
from some community members. We have since indicated that government
respects the democratic and constitutional rights of all South Africans to
exercise their democratic rights to legitimate protest. At the same time,
government maintains that this should be expressed through peaceful and
legitimate channels.

Government is always prepared to engage all our communities around issues
of government and service delivery. However, the law-enforcement agencies
will continue to act firmly against any form of lawlessness, damage to
property and any threats to human life.

We believe that one of the issues giving rise to the situation is
inadequate communication. In some instances, members of our communities do
not know the progress and challenges municipalities are making with regard
to service delivery. Therefore, it is always important that our
communication channels are strengthened.

To address this, we are focusing on strengthening the capacity of
municipalities in the province and departments to communicate effectively
with the public. This enables communities to understand the extent to which
government is succeeding in improving their living conditions. It also
enables them to know some of the development programmes that are in the
pipeline and to appreciate some of the constraints that stand in the way.

Government believes that effective communication is critical for stability,
effective governance and service delivery. Accordingly, government appeals
to all our people to take advantage of all available democratic platforms
such as izimbizo and ward meetings to express their views, and to influence
the content, pace and quality of service delivery.

The new dispensation requires not only that societal institutions be
transformed but, most importantly, that the dispensation itself be
transformed. We are in a constitutional dispensation. We have established a
number of institutions that support democracy. Citizens can exploit many
avenues to exercise their right to protest without resorting to
criminality. Indeed, the courts have played a critical role in their
jurisdiction of societal and individual disputes. The question is whether
we have transformed enough to take advantage of the freedom that we
recently enjoyed.

With freedom comes responsibility. Those who cherish freedom and democracy
cannot afford to be seen to encourage and celebrate mayhem in society.
Democracy demands a particular conduct of citizens and those in public
offices. Inasmuch as we speak of the need to transform our institutions
into those befitting the new dispensation, the same is demanded of our
conduct.

Contrary to these actions, during the state of the province address, we, as
the government, made progressive observations. We inherited a province that
was characterised by generally low levels of service delivery, coupled with
huge backlogs.

Irrefutable evidence tells the story of the people and its provincial
government at work to create a better life for all. As we do this, we have
also redefined a new milestone that we need to accomplish towards the full
realisation of our historic mission of creating a better life for all our
people. We welcome the NCOP in bringing government to the people.

During our African Peer Review Mechanism exercise there was a belief that
we need to improve the process of participatory democracy, thus
contributing immensely to the objectives of fostering the adoption of
policies, standards, high economic growth, as well as identifying
deficiencies and assessing the need for capacity-building.

As we move forward, mindful of the fact that government needs to move in a
coherent manner, we need to improve our safety. We also believe that in
Asgisa we have a model that makes our target of halving unemployment by
2014 possible. In this regard, we are proud to tell this House that,
regarding this endeavour, our Expanded Public Works Programme in the North
West has been able to create 40 000 job opportunities and 14 000 training
opportunities for our people. [Applause.] Since this programme started, we
have been able to create entrepreneurs and learner contractors who have
today reached level 3 of the Construction Industry Development Board
rating. We are therefore on the march.

We are very heartened that this sitting of the NCOP has been dedicated to
addressing this important call on all of us to increasingly consider ways
of sharing the wealth of the nation and the growth of our economy among all
our citizens. In this regard, success is our only option, failure is not. I
thank the House, once again, for the opportunity to say a few words. Thank
you very much. [Applause]

Mr Y GABRU (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Chairperson, I want
to thank you for the opportunity to participate in this debate. For me it’s
a great honour and a privilege to participate in a debate taking place in
this region which has played a historic and decisive role in our struggle
for liberation.

I also want to take the opportunity to congratulate the NCOP on organising
this event, Taking Parliament to the People. It’s the first time that I
have participated and seen such an event. I want to say that I have been
exceedingly impressed with what I’ve seen here during my interaction with
people.
I want to agree with all those people who said yesterday that this was
truly democracy in action. For me, what was most significant about
yesterday in particular – and that was my first day to attend – was to see
people, many of whom I assumed were government supporters, who criticised
government. I think it is absolutely significant that supporters of
government are able to come and say: These are the problems.

What I think was more important, perhaps, was the response from some of the
people at the table. I was really impressed with our Deputy Minister of
Safety and Security. When people raised issues about police stations that
she agreed with, she would say so. However, when she thought that in some
cases the issues the people raised in their objections were not accurate,
she would challenge them.

I think that what we had yesterday was the essence of participation, with
people raising issues, debating them with government and resolving to do
something about them. I want to say, therefore, that I hope sincerely that
all those people who did bring their issues to the forum yesterday,
especially the ones who were directed at the Table, will indeed have all
their issues attended to.

I think that what we have to do is to make sure that participation is
meaningful, and participation will begin to grow when we respond to the
issues that people raise.

Hon Chairperson, as you are aware, all of us in provincial legislatures are
currently involved with the Division of Revenue Bill. We’ve had a briefing
on it and we also organised a public hearing on it a few days ago. We
publicised it quite well, and we individually invited all the 30
municipalities in our province to attend. Unfortunately only three
municipalities attended, together with a representative from Salga.

I’m not sure why that was the case. Perhaps it was because it was the first
time this had been done, or perhaps they imagined that they would not be
able to intervene in the process. It would seem to me that in all the
different legislatures in our country, including national Parliament in the
form of the National Assembly and the NCOP, as well as the provincial and
local governments, we must make a major effort to ensure that when people
do participate, it is meaningful and consistent.

I think that one of the important things is that it must also be regular.
The citizens must know that at a certain point in time they will be able to
go to the government and raise their issues. It is fundamental that
people’s participation is consistent and regular, and not a one-off thing,
in such a way that if you come to a meeting one day and you do not raise
your issue, you are not going to have another opportunity to raise it
again.

Of course, as I have already suggested, it must also be a meaningful
process. I’ve said what I understand by that, that when people come and
raise issues, we must respond to those issues. If we can’t respond to them,
we should be able to tell the people why we are unable to respond to their
issues.

We must also make sure that the participation that we do develop with our
citizens happens on the basis of people understanding the issues. I want to
refer to the example of the budget again. I think that the budget, which we
all accept is one of the most important instruments of government in
deciding what it is going to do in the course of the year, must be
understood by all our citizens at every level.

In our province we have changed the manner in which we interrogate the
budget in the provincial legislature. We now have a situation in which, if
a standing committee is considering its budget, each section of the budget
is divided into three parts. The first part allows the relevant department
to justify and defend its budget to the standing committee. The second part
allows the standing committee to interact and challenge the budget. The
third and last part allows for public participation in a way we never had
before.

They are also allowed and entitled to question government officials about
the budget. I must say that initially departments were not very excited
about that, and they were a bit wary, but the process is now becoming
entrenched. When we advertise for this budget that we are dealing with now,
we will go through the same process. We will invite and allow the public to
participate in the budget process and to challenge facts and figures in the
budget itself.

Furthermore, when a standing committee writes its report, the comments of
the public are taken into account. It is my view that municipalities can do
much more to explain their budgets to the citizens and allow them to
participate in the budget process in a much more meaningful way.

I think that citizens need to understand and to appreciate why, on the one
hand, we are building stadiums for the 2010 Fifa World Cup, but we are not
in a position to build hospitals, on the other hand. I think that by
discussing budgets with our citizens we will be able to explain those
issues and indeed debate them.

Government on its own can’t solve all the problems; government on its own
doesn’t have all the answers. It’s only through successful participation
that we will be able to deliver to our communities. I thank you, hon
Chairperson. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE EASTERN CAPE (Ms N Balindlela): Chairperson, the Deputy
President, as we all know, had to leave and has asked me to say a few
words. Firstly, she said that she is very much encouraged by the
interaction that has happened here today.
Uyivuyele kakhulu into yokuba sonke sibe sihleli apha, siyaxoxa. [She was
very happy that we are all sitting here, discussing issues.]

She felt that this is how we are going to improve the co-ordination between
municipalities and the provinces, through service delivery.

Into ke ayibetheleleyo phambi kokuba ahambe yeyokuba ... [What she laid
more emphasis on before she left was the fact that ...]

... she has been encouraged by the report that was given by the Chairperson
of the NCOP, particularly about the feedback that the committees of the
NCOP will be engaging in. She also stressed the aspect of following up on
these issues and to really have timeframes ...

... ukwenzela ukuba zide ziqhubeke ezi zinti. Uthe ke enye into
emandiyigxininise yeyokuba ... [... for addressing them. One other thing
that she said I should emphasise is the fact that ...]

... economic development cannot happen without the involvement and co-
operation of the neighbouring provinces.

Ngoko ke nje ngokuba singamaphondo nje, uyibalule ke into yokuba, elinye
iphondo liyakuthi ukuze likwazi ukuhluma lincedwe yinto yokusokolo sibanye,
ukuba siyiFreestate sidibane neLimpopo, neMpumalanga, kunye
neloMntlantshona. [She also made the point that in order for us to develop,
as provinces, we should work in partnerships. For example, the Free State,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga and Northern Cape will have to work together in
partnership.]

That is what she emphasised.

Another issue that encouraged her was the participation of community-based
organisations such as CPFs, SGBs, home-based centres, early childhood
development centres and organisations for veterans and retirees.

Uthe, Sihlalo, ndize ndikhumbule ukuyibeka into yokuba kubalulekile ukuthi
... [Chairperson, she said that I must remember to highlight the fact that
it is important ...]

... when we go back to our community-based structures, we must make sure
that we attend the meetings. We must also make sure that we strengthen our
critical structures there.

Ndiyabulela kakhulu, Sihlalo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order in the House!

Bab’uMasondo, mangixolise kakhulu ngokuthi ekuseni ngenkathi ngiqala
inkulumo yami bengingabonanga ukuthi ukhona. Ngiyaxolisa kakhulu. Ubaba
uMasondo unguSihlalo we-SA Local Government Associaiton ezweni lonke
laseNingizimu Afrika. Uyena osimele kwezohulumeni basekhaya. Niyazi ukuthi
basebenzisana kahle noMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ukuze kudingidwe
izindaba zohulumeni basekhaya.

Ngixolisa kakhulu futhi kumama uQedani  Dorothy  Mahlangu.  (Translation  of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Masondo, let me apologise that when I started my speech this morning,
I did not recognise you because I had not seen that you were present. I am
very sorry about that. Hon Masondo is the Chairperson of the SA Local
Government Association, and he is representing us in local government. You
all know that Salga works very well with the National Council of Provinces
and they both discuss issues concerning local government.

I also extend my heartfelt apology to the hon Qedani Dorothy Mahlangu.]

She is an acting Premier, and I did not announce that. [Applause.] We have
an acting Premier of Gauteng with us, Dorothy Qedani Mahlangu.

Kunezinto lapha ebezilahlekile kodwa esizitholile. Ngicela ukuthi umnikazi
wazo aye kozilanda ehhovisi lethu laphaya. Izicathulo eziphinki zikaNkk
Mokgoro sizitholile, futhi nesikhwama sakhe esimnyama naso sisitholile.
Sicela ukuthi aye laphaya ehhovisi lethu aye kozilanda khona lezo zimpahla.
Noma-ke uma engekho, uSodolobha uTsotetsi - hhayi utsotsi - ngikholwa
ukuthi uyamazi uNkk Mokgoro, angamphathela zona bese ebuye emazisa ukuthi
zikhona futhi ehhovisi likasodolobha.

Incwadi kaMazisi ka-Mothibedi R Moses nayo siyitholile, ikhona laphaya
ehhovisi lami. Angimazi-ke yena ukuthi ungowakuphi. Ungathola mhlawumbe
ukuthi ungowaseBenoni noma eSoweto. Kodwa-ke sicela ukuthi usodolobha
asisize futhi maqondana nokuhlela ukuthi uma engekho lapha umnikazi
angawuthola kanjani uMazisi wakhe.
Kunendaba enye engithanda ukuyimemezela. Kunomndeni ohlupheke kakhulu
laphaya kwa-9726 Madileng Street, Zone B, eSebokeng. Uma ngingaphosisi,
omunye walowo mndeni uSusan Plaatjie. Sithole lapha-ke ukuthi umama
uMargaret Nziba ohlezi laphaya ... Ake asukume uMargaret. Nanguya uMargaret
Nziba. Uye wabazwela ubuhlungu kakhulu.

Kube yisimemezelo lesi esibe khona phakathi nesonto. Bathe-ke laba bantu
bakulowaya mndeni abanayo ngisho into yokudla, kwazingubo zokugqoka
nezingubo zokulala, abanalutho. UMargaret Nziba ongaphansi komkhandlu
kaMamabolo uthe uzonikela ngezingubo kulo mndeni. [Ihlombe.] Abasebenzi
boMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe bazomsiza ngemoto ukuze balayishe lezo
zingubo bese bezihambisa kulowo mndeni, uma siqeda kulo mhlangano.
[Ihlombe.]

Kukhona nokunye-ke ebengithanda ukukwazisa amalungu e-NCOP ...  (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[There are several items which had gone missing here, but they have since
been found. I am appealing to the owners of the same to come and collect
them in our offices. Miss Mokgoro’s pink shoes have been found. We have
also found her black bag. Could she please go to our offices and collect
her items? If she is not here, Mayor Tsotetsi - well, not tsotsi - whom I
believe knows Miss Mokgoro, can collect these items on her behalf and she
can inform her later on that they are in the mayor’s office.

The identity document of Mothibedi R Moses was also found. It is there in
my office. I am not sure where he comes from. Perhaps you can find out if
he is from Benoni or Soweto. We request the mayor to help us with
arrangements for the owner to get his identity document back, if he is not
here.

There is another thing that I want to announce here. There is  a  very  poor
family at 9726 Madileng Street, Zone B in Sebokeng. If I  am  not  mistaken,
one of the members of that family is Suzan Plaatjie. We have found out  that
Mrs Margaret Nziba, who is sitting over there ...  can  Margaret  stand  up,
please?
There she is, Margaret Nziba. She felt pity for them.

This announcement was also made during the  week.  Members  of  this  family
said that they don’t have anything to eat. They don’t even have  clothes  or
blankets.  They  have  nothing.  Margaret  Nziba,  who  is  from  Mamabolo’s
constituency, said that she was going to  donate  clothes  to  this  family.
[Applause.] The staff of the National Council of  Provinces  will  help  her
with the transportation of these clothes to the family when we adjourn  this
meeting. [Applause.]

There is another thing that I want to announce to members ...]

... so that you do not leave here with the impression that the provincial
government is not doing anything about the Mbombela issue. The MEC of local
government in Mpumalanga, hon C Mashego, has already written to me under
section 106 of the Municipal Systems Act to say that they are investigating
allegations of fraud, corruption, maladministration and other
irregularities against the affairs of the Mbombela local municipality.

The letter arrived in my office on 23 February 2007, and the irregularities
are listed in the letter. The letter is available to all members of the
NCOP who may want to scrutinise it. However, normally, in terms of our
processes, you know that with this type of letter, we send it to the
chairperson who is in charge of the provincial and local government, so
that the committee would then go into that matter.

You also know that, in terms of section 106, there is not much that we can
do, but we can monitor that those things actually happen. So, the
provincial government is doing something about that issue. The letter is
available to those members who would like to have an insight into it.

Lastly, Mr Gabru, the Deputy Speaker of the Western Cape, we are coming to
the Western Cape in November when we take Parliament to the people. So, you
will see it in action in your province. We are coming. I am announcing this
well in advance so that people can get ready.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 11:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            MONDAY, 12 MARCH 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bill submitted

      (1)   The Minister of Finance


          a) Finansiewetsontwerp [W 5 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).



         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Finance
         Bill [B 5 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Works

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2007 to
          2009.

                           TUESDAY, 13 MARCH 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency
      (a)   Strategic Plan of the Media Development and Diversity Agency
        (MDDA) for 2007 to 2010.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Draft Amendment of Regulations made in terms of section 92 of
        the Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of
        2000).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (a)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Rand Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).


      (b)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Namakwa Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (c)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Botshelo Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (d)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to  30 June 2008 by
        Lepelle Northern Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
        Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
        of 2003).

      (e)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Bloem Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (f)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Umgeni Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (g)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Magalies Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (h)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Sedibeng Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (i)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Pelladrift Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (j)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Mhlatuze Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (k)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Bushbuckridge Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (l)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
        Amatola Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003).

      (m)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
         Albany Coast Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
         Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
         2003).

      (n)   Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 by
         Overberg Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
         Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
         2003).

                          WEDNESDAY, 14 MARCH 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Regulations issued under section 13 of the Small Business Tax
      Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Act, 2006 (Act No 9 of 2006),
      prescribing the circumstances under which the Commissioner may waive
      any amount of additional tax, penalty or interest payable by specific
      persons.

2. The Acting Minister of Health

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2007/08 to
      2009/10.

3. The Minister in The Presidency

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Government Communication and Information
      System (GCIS) for 2007 to 2010.


4. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

   (a)      Report on the provisional suspension from office of Mr I X
      Masimini, an additional magistrate at Queenstown, in terms of section
      13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

   (b)      Report on vacancies in the offices of magistrates, in terms of
      section 9(5)(b) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act, 1944 (Act No 32 of
      1944).

5. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

   (a)      General Notice No 8 published in Government Gazette No 29528
      dated 9 January 2007: Extension of the deadline for public comments on
      the Draft Subsistence and Small-scale Commercial Fisheries Policies,
      in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

   (b)      General Notice No 1832 published in Government Gazette No 29487
      dated 12 January 2007: Publication of National Environmental
      Management: Waste Management Bill – for general comment: National
      Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

   (c)      Government Notice No 147 published in Government Gazette No
      29647 dated 23 February 2007: Waste tyre Regulations, in terms of the
      Environment Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).

   (d)      Government Notice No R.150 published in Government Gazette No
      29657 dated 23 February 2007: Commencement of threatened or protected
      species Regulations, in terms of the National Environmental
      Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

   (e)      Government Notice No R.151 published in Government Gazette No
      29657 dated 23 February 2007: Publication of lists of critically
      endangered, endangered, vulnerable and protected species, in terms of
      the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No
      10 of 2004).
   f) Government Notice No R.152 published in Government Gazette No 29657
      dated 23 February 2007: Threatened or protected species Regulations,
      in terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,
      2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


                           THURSDAY, 15 MARCH 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 15 March 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment
              Bill [B 1 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Public
         Services of the National Council of Provinces.


    (2)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 15 March 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Finance Bill [B 5 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77)
         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
         the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2005.

   (b)      Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2005.

   (c)      Government Notice No R.186 published in Government Gazette No
      29681 dated 1 March 2007: Amendment of Regulations in terms of the
      Long-term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 52 of 1998).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

   (a)      Report on the confirmation of the provisional suspension of
      Magistrate K Suliman, a magistrate from Durban, in terms of section
      13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
      ended June 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
      the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.


                            FRIDAY, 16 MARCH 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Special Report of the Auditor-General on the status of tabling
         of annual reports and consolidated financial statements of national
         government departments and public entities for the financial year
         ended 2005-2006 as at 31 October 2006 [RP 260-2006].

    (b)    Performance audit report of the Auditor-General on consultants
         at the Department of Trade and Industry – January 2007 [RP 9-2007].

2.    The Acting Minister of Transport

    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2007 to 2010.


