---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 20 November 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-11-20
---

TUESDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:08.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcements)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the hon Kgarebe to the NCOP. The hon member was
sworn in on Tuesday, 13 November 2007. I wish you all the best in your
activities as a member of the National Council of Provinces. Hon Kgarebe
replaces hon Tlhagale from the North West, and will represent the ACDP. Is
she in the House? Can you stand up and let them see you? [Applause.] Thank
you very much.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Does anybody wish to give a notice of motion?
No. Does anybody wish to move a motion without notice? [Interjections.]
Which one? [Interjections.] Can members please wake up when I get into the
Chair!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it
parliamentary for a member to address the Chair while eating?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That is unparliamentary. Who is eating? Please
stop eating. You must not eat anything in the House.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Ms H LAMOELA: Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes that the first Victim Support Room attached to a rural
        police station in the Western Cape, at Witsand near Atlantis, was
        initiated and planned by a member of this Council, the hon Denise
        Robinson, and that the converted container was donated by another
        member of this Council, the hon Sherry Chen; and


   (2)      acknowledges that this is a noteworthy start to the campaign on
        16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children.


                    DEATH OF FARMWORKERS IN WESTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

   (1)      notes with grave concern and regret that almost a year to the
        day of the horrific train smash that claimed the lives of 21
        farmworkers at the Faure railway crossing, the Western Cape province
        has experienced yet again two similar fatal incidences that resulted
        in the death of 16 farmworkers within five days;


   (2)      notes that in the first incident that took place on Friday, 9
        November 2007, ten farmworkers died in a bus accident near Piketberg
        in the Swartland and in the second incident seven farmworkers were
        killed when a truck carrying 50 farmworkers overturned on the N1
        near De Doorns in the Boland;


   (3)      calls on transport operators in the province and the Western
        Cape authorities to ensure that proper systems are urgently put in
        place for the safe transportation of farmworkers; and


   (4)      takes this opportunity to convey its deepest sympathy to the
        families of the deceased and reiterates the call of the province to
        the people of South Africa, especially the business community, to
        come to the fore and assist the families of the deceased in this
        very trying time.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO SERVE ON MEDIATION COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF
                          CHILDREN’S AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I want to move a draft resolution
on behalf of the Chairperson of the NCOP:

  That the Council appoints the following members to serve on the Mediation
  Committee in respect of the Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19D - 2006
  (Reprint)] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76(2)):


      Qikane A N D                 Eastern Cape
      Setona T S             Free State
      Mazibuko F             Gauteng
      Vilakazi J N                 KwaZulu-Natal
      Sibiya J                     Limpopo
      Tolo B J                     Mpumalanga
      Sulliman M A                 Northern Cape
      Kolweni Z S                  North West
      Lamoela H              Western Cape

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speaker’s list, I shall now put
the question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their province’s votes. Are you all present? Yes?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? None. We shall now proceed to the voting on the
question. I’ll do so in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads
must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or
abstain from the voting.

Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal siyavuma. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re a tega. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson: I move:

   That Rule 239(1), which provides inter alia that the consideration of a
   Bill may not commence before at least three working days have elapsed
   since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the purposes of
   consideration of the Public Service Amendment Bill [B 31B – 2007]
   (National Assembly – sec 76(1)) on Tuesday, 20 November 2007.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speaker’s list, I shall now put
the question, and the question is that the motion be agreed to. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber
to cast their province’s votes? Are you all present in the Chamber? Yes.

We shall then, in accordance with Rule 71, allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? None. We shall now proceed to the voting on the
question. I will do so in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads
must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour, against or
abstain from voting.

Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal ke a rona. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a etega. [Support.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga ya sikela. [Mpumalanga is in favour.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          CHILDREN’S AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, before we proceed, I would like
to draw your attention to the fact that the report of the committee has
been circulated and it is on your tables.

As there is no speaker’s list, I shall now put the question, and the
question is that the Bill be rejected. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, we shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provincial
votes. Are you all present in the Chamber?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? None! Thank you very much. We will now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do so in an alphabetical order, per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: We vote in favour of the report of the committee.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: There is no mandate from KwaZulu-Natal.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ha yi seketela. [We support the report.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: We support the report.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West supports the committee report.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.}

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Eight provinces have voted against the Bill. I
therefore declare the Bill rejected in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.
Bill accordingly rejected in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution
and referred to the Mediation Committee in terms of section 76(1(d) of the
Constitution, read with Joint Rule 186(2)(b).

                        PUBLIC SERVICE AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, hon members, let me apologise
on behalf of the Minister for Public Service and Administration. She is
abroad and has asked me to present the Bill. I also need to apologise that
I will not be able to make closing remarks on this debate, because I have
another commitment at 3 o’clock.

I trust that we all agree that effective service delivery requires an
efficient and accountable administration devoid of red tape, with strong
anticorruption and compliance measures. The regulatory framework for the
administration should, whilst embedding stability and certainty, also
facilitate dynamic innovation to allow for the use of new institutional and
technological instruments to enhance the provision of services.

The Bill before you today for the second reading provides an opportunity
for Parliament to strengthen the democratic values and principles governing
public administration – as contained in Chapter 10 of our Constitution -
with respect to national and provincial departments.

These values and principles include a high standard of professional ethics,
efficient economic and effective use of resources; a development-orientated
public administration; impartial, fair, equitable and unbiased provision of
services; and responding to the people’s needs.

We need to recognise that certain organisational and human resource
practices in the current Public Service Act directly or indirectly hinder
service delivery. In broadening access to services for the masses of our
people, we must continuously identify innovative ways of delivering
services. Currently some government functions are provided by national or
provincial departments, away from the points of service delivery and
without direct accountability and decision-making by those functionaries
responsible for their delivering. Other government functions are provided
by entities outside the Public Service without being directly accountable
to a political functionary.

We have also come to recognise that compliance with Public Service
prescripts does not meet the desired standards. The weakening human
resource management results in time-consuming and costly litigation.
Employees dismissed by departments for corruption-related and other types
of misconduct are often reappointed by other government departments soon
after dismissal, which means that misconduct does not carry effective
sanctions. Employees suspected of transgressions sometimes resign and are
appointed in other departments without disciplinary steps being instituted
against them or, if they are instituted, they have been instituted without
being sustained.

The primary aim of the amending Bill is, therefore, to improve the
organisational and human resource framework for national and provincial
departments to address these obstacles to service delivery. This includes
facilitating the easier day-to-day administration of the Public Service Act
by addressing certain legal difficulties, simplifying or clarifying several
provisions, removing obsolete provisions and aligning the Act with other
legislation.

The Bill proposes the introduction of a new institutional form, separate
from departments but within the Public Service - a government component as
well as specialised service delivery units ring-fenced within departments.
The heads of government components will serve as accounting officers in
terms of the Public Finance Management Act.

The component model is suitable for an institution with a unique identity
that has specific measurable functions that can be logically grouped in
terms of a particular service delivery model. Such a component may have
original statutory functions or be assigned to delegate the statutory
functions, or a combination of these.

The assignment of statutory functions of the executive authority to the
head of a component, with accompanying shifting of accountability, is
proposed to be subject to Parliament’s approval. Government components may,
however, not engage in socioeconomic functions to give effect to the rights
envisaged in sections 26 to 29 of the Constitution.

A government component is partnered with a principal department, which will
assist the executive authority or third department, that is the responsible
Premier or MEC in the case of such an Office of the Premier, or a
provincial department with oversight of such component.

The advantages of using this organisational form in the Public Service
include the customisation of the administrative and operational
arrangements designed to suit a particular service delivery environment,
better governance through direct accountability and decision-making as
close as possible to the point of service delivery which will be an added
advantage.

Political heads will also have more direct control and influence over
service delivery outcomes without the need to necessarily create entities
outside the Public Service.
While proposing this alternative service delivery model, it is important to
stress that it is not intended to fragment the state. On the contrary, it
responds directly to forms of fragmentation that have already occurred
through the establishment of public entities. Indeed the government
component model will also be an institutional mechanism to reincorporate
some public entities, where appropriate and if required, into the Public
Service. The responsible Minister or political head of that component could
also, if required to, create an advisory board to advise on service
delivery matters or to accommodate stakeholder interest.

In addition to the government component model, the Bill also proposes an
enabling provision for the establishment of specialised service delivery
units within departments. The features of these units are similar to those
of government components except that they may, unlike such components,
perform services pertaining to constitutional socioeconomic rights.
Moreover, these units will operate within departments while government
components will be separate accountable institutions outside departments.

Provision is also made that when the executive authority or head of the
relevant department delegates human resource functions affecting
specialised service delivery units, these functions must be delegated to
the heads.

Subject to the Treasury’s approval and special arrangements regarding
accountability, the Bill also provides for compulsory financial delegations
to the unit head.

To assist with the enforcement of the provisions of the Public Service Act,
executive authorities are compelled to take disciplinary steps against
heads of department transgressing its provisions and heads of departments
to take such steps against transgressing employees. They are also required
to report transgressions to the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration and the Director-General of the department respectively.

The Minister for the Public Service and Administration may also report
transgressing national executive authorities to Cabinet and transgressing
provincial executive authorities, through the relevant Premier, to the
provincial cabinet in question. That Minister must also annually report
transgressions to the relevant committees of Parliament and of the
provincial legislatures concerned.

A further important measure to improve compliance with the Public Service
Act is the compulsory implementation by political administrative heads of
the directions of the Public Service Commission regarding certain human
resource matters.

The Bill also proposes the institution of disciplinary steps against the
employees at their new departments for alleged transgressions at
departments where they were formerly employed.

Anticorruption measures are to prohibit the re-employment of persons in the
Public Service dismissed for specific kinds of misconduct. Examples of
misconduct involving corrupt activities are also contained in the Bill. It
is proposed that the prohibition on re-employment should endure for a
stipulated period, and the different periods may be prescribed by
regulation in respect of different types of misconduct.

A number of the amendments in the Bill will enhance employees’ rights,
which include compliance measures that extend to collective agreements.
These measures will assist employees where departments fail, to the
employees’ detriment, to comply with collective agreements and other Public
Service prescripts.

Provision is made for a fair process before employees may be transferred to
other government departments in the public interest. An employee may make
representations on why she or he does not want to be transferred. These
representations must then be considered and weighed against the public
interest, and that is to better serve the needs of the people.

Employees of government institutions outside the Public Service who
voluntarily join a national or provincial department will be transferred in
order to recognise their years of service and certain benefits, for example
pension and leave credits.

Under the current Act employees need permission to undertake remunerative
work outside of the Public Service. The Bill proposes criteria that the
employer must consider when deciding whether to give such permission,
namely that such outside work should not interfere with the relevant
employee’s functions or be in conflict with the code of conduct applicable
to public servants.

Certain restrictions on political rights of employees are removed and
employees are permitted to participate as candidates in elections. They may
be candidates without resigning from the Public Service during the election
period. Only when they are elected and accept such election will their
employment in the Public Service terminate.

Provision for disciplining employees moving from one department to another
will enhance the morale of compliant employees. That means that
transgressing employees cannot avoid being disciplined by simply resigning
and obtaining employment elsewhere in the Public Service. Similarly, the
prohibition on the re-employment of employees dismissed for particular
categories of misconduct, including misconduct relating to corrupt acts for
a specified period, would assist the morale of honest and otherwise
compliant employees.

If this Bill is adopted by Parliament and signed into law by the President,
I submit that it will contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of the
organisational and human resource framework for national and provincial
departments. This it will do by introducing new service delivery models and
enforcement mechanisms, as well as by improving the day-to-day
administration of the Public Service Act. While compliance in itself does
not guarantee efficient and effective service delivery, it is a necessary
step in ensuring improved performance, which is what all of us seek in
public services. Indeed all the measures proposed in this Bill are designed
to enhance governance, accountability and compliance that I am convinced
will lead to better service delivery.

I would like to thank the Select Committee on Local Government and
Administration for its vigorous engagement on the proposed measures in the
amending Bill. Their participation was aimed at ensuring that these
measures accord with the constitutional values and principles of public
administration. I also thank them for facilitating public participation
through the provincial legislatures.

As hon members are aware, government intends to propose draft legislation
to create a single Public Service and administration in the three spheres
of government for consideration and debate by Parliament during 2008. I
urge all stakeholders to analyse the provisions of the draft legislation
for the Public Service to ensure that interest groups and the general
public are correctly informed about its scope and purposes. We should all
debate this legislative initiative in a robust yet innovative and
constructive manner in order to create the conditions for a better life for
all our people. Thank you very much, Chairperson and hon members.
[Applause.]

Mr S SHICEKA: The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
Ministers present, colleagues, special delegates, comrades and friends,
today is another milestone where this House is passing a Bill, a Bill that
is aimed at building structures and systems that will accelerate the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals. As we all know, government
in this country is the single biggest employer. It employs over a million
people. Today, we are developing the rules of the game that must govern
these more than a million employees; manage, co-ordinate and facilitate
what has to happen.

As we all know, the development goals are about halving poverty and
unemployment by 2014, but they are also there to ensure that we address a
range of constraints in this Bill that include skills, the demands of the
second economy, public administration and economic matters. These
instruments are aimed at ensuring that we have a better Public Service; a
service that is responsive and a service that is friendly to the people.

The state is enjoined constitutionally to ensure that high quality service
to the people is delivered. The state has to find the most innovative
methods and channels to deliver services within the system of government.
The state should have a prerogative to optimally utilise resources in the
most effective and efficient manner. The state is reliant on the strength
and capability of systems of government in place to ensure successful
implementation of a range of programmes designed to respond to
developmental challenges.

The current delivery initiatives are hampered by weaknesses in the system.
One of them is the continuing silo approach in the delivery of services,
resulting in poor co-ordination, poor integration and therefore affects the
collective efforts of government. There is a lack of protocol even when you
want to co-ordinate services. There is no protocol that ensures that the
approach of integration around service delivery is attained.

There is a lack of administrative integration and poor co-ordination
between departments and spheres of government. There is an inconvenience to
citizens because they have to travel long distances to get to many of the
service delivery points. Research has shown that government institutions
are not citizen-friendly and Batho Pele principles are far from being
implemented as required. The question that we must ask ourselves is:
Whereto from here?

The committee agrees to the Bill in as far as it addresses these issues
that we believe are important: The creation of a strong centre of
government that is in a position to hold service delivery vehicles together
and to provide support, guidance and advice where needed; the creation of
seamless and integrated service delivery through a single-window approach;
the convenience to citizens, integrated service delivery platforms and
front offices; the creation of a shared vision with a common culture of
service delivery and a systematic sharing of knowledge, expertise,
resources and best practices to preclude weak links.

Therefore, we believe that special payment regimes have to be developed so
that we are able to attract scarce skills and not only attract them, but
also retain them within the system. There should be an optimal utilisation
of the limited resources underpinned by the creation of government
institutions that are accessible, efficient, representative, accountable,
sustainable and responsive to the service delivery needs of people.

Before we came to the Chamber, we had a meeting with the Department of
Defence. They are raising an issue of interoperability between systems.
They are unable to ensure that systems speak to each other in terms of
information and communication technology. Not only that, they are also
getting a lot of qualified audits because of systems that are obsolete and
old, 25 years old, but at the same time these systems are not helpful in
ensuring accountability in relation to resources.

We believe that this Bill is going to create a platform where these things
are addressed. Among others there is the issue of mobility of staff. Staff
members can be taken wherever they are required. For example, one can take
a director-general from a particular department and make him a municipal
manager in another area, so that people are able to access skills that are
required in a particular area where there is need. To us that is very
important.

The police are putting that into practice. In Botswana this system is also
in operation. When an official is employed by government he knows that he
is employed by the state and not by the department. An official can be
moved wherever the need is.

In conclusion, I want to say that when the single Public Service is being
discussed we’ll require the department to involve the committee a bit
earlier. I also want to thank my colleagues for their contribution, which
has been valued, but also thank the Ministry and the department for their
insightful engagement with us and say that we are looking forward to the
engagement, which will be robust, on the single Public Service. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Mr Chairperson ...
An HON MEMBER: Jy moet mooi praat, hoor! [You should speak very nicely.]

Mr D A WORTH: Ek praat altyd mooi. [I always do.]

Chairperson, firstly I wish to thank the Minister and her department for
the presentation and in particular, the Minister for attending our
committee briefing on the Public Service Amendment Bill. The Bill seeks,
amongst other things, to improve staff mobility arrangements for the Public
Service and introduce government components as a new institutional form
within the Public Service, as well as specialised service delivery units.
It also seeks to enhance compliance with the Act through compulsory
discipline of transgressors and reporting on such matters.

Government components have evolved from government agencies. A government
component will only be established after a feasibility study has been
conducted. It is not clear what its purpose will be as it cannot perform
functions related to the delivery of a service such as housing, health
care, food, water, social security, etc.

The Minister, through a regulation, may also establish a consultative body.
This body will consist of prescribed employees. The connotation of these
prescribed employees is open-ended and it is not clear who these employees
are. This body will either be consultative or advisory. It would have been
expedient to categorically say that the function of this body would take
one form or other, that is, consultative or advisory and not either of
these. Consultative would mean that the Minister would not act before she
consults and they have given her a directive. Advisory capacity could mean
that the Minister is not obliged to take the advice.

With regard to the functions of the specialised service delivery units, the
functions are clear because the units can perform specific functions that
would enhance service delivery of a department within a department. An
executive authority may delegate human resource powers to the head of a
unit and not to the head of department. The unit head operates on delegated
powers.

The Bill also makes provision for the transfer and secondment of heads of
departments. This is a political matter because the head of department
executes policy of the government in a national or provincial department.

In all cases of the appointment of a head of department, a Cabinet
committee comprising of the Minister under whom the head of department will
serve recommends the candidate to the President. In the case of a province
the procedure is different, as the Premier or MEC decides who this is going
to be, because the province is another sphere of government.

This, of course, is a potential for conflict if the President were to
transfer a head of department to a province where the Premier belonged to a
party other than the President’s political party. It might be said that the
appointment of a head of department is an administrative matter, but this
is not so. It remains a political matter.

Whilst the Bill is a good regulatory mechanism regarding conditions of
service and service delivery, this Bill will be repealed soon after the
draft Single Public Service Bill becomes law, as there will be bulk
transference of sections from the Public Service Act and the Public Service
Amendment Bill to the draft Single Public Service Bill.

As the hon Minister said, “You ain’t seen nothing yet”. The creation of a
single Public Service is nothing more than placing the Public Service under
one central control leading to a central bureaucracy. The DA would rather
strengthen our local, provincial and national governments to improve
service delivery.

More sinister, however, is the draft proposal being circulated of a Public
Administration Management Bill, PAMB, which may become law in 2009. This
Bill is set to curtail municipalities’ autonomy by transferring decision-
making to central government and bringing local public sector employees
under Pretoria’s control.

As the Minister said, and I repeat: “you ain’t seen nothing yet”. The DA
cannot support the centralisation of power and a single Public Service, and
therefore not the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M P THOBEJANE (Limpopo): Chairperson of the House and my colleagues,
following in the footsteps of my other colleagues, may I say that, as the
legislature of Limpopo, having read and looked at the inputs made by the
public and knowing pretty well that it is our function as politicians to
make sure that we harmonise all our laws, we see this as one of the Bills
which will be able, if passed, to take this country forward. If passed into
law, the Bill will improve service delivery through the establishment of
government components and specialised service delivery units within
departments.

It will further determine employee candidates in the legislatures and
municipalities. The Bill will require the exhaustion of internal remedies
before external legal remedies in the case of disputes of a labour nature.
This Bill, if passed into law, will also effectively address the question
of employees who take pension from the age of 55 without losing pension
privileges. It will also address the redeployment of people with scarce and
special skills to where they are most needed by our people.

The Bill will also adequately address the changing of departments by
employees without any negative effect on their pensions and salaries.
The Bill, however, as it attempts to do, should clearly stipulate that
employees in management and senior administrative positions shouldn’t
occupy public representative positions, as this has proved to be an
impediment to service delivery.

In conclusion, the legislature of Limpopo, having considered and supported
the provisions of the Bill, and taking into consideration the inputs made
by the people out there, urges this House to pass this Bill into law, as
this is one of the best ways of unlocking blockages in the Public Service
administration and as it is one of the ways which will enable us to move
swiftly towards the delivery of effective service on the ground. We support
the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G B BHENGU (KwaZulu-Natal): Hon Chair of the NCOP, hon Ministers
present, hon members of the Council, colleagues, I have been mandated by
the KwaZulu-Natal legislature to support this Bill. The mandate was
conferred by the majority of the legislature on 15 November 2007. The Bill
tightens up a number of problem areas in conditions of service for public
servants, and I not going into details.

The most important areas that have been problematic relate to the transfer,
retirement, discipline, dismissal, outside work, assignment of power,
grievances and political rights of employees.

The Bill also makes provision for alignment of conditions of service of the
general Public Service and sectors with their own employment laws such as
educators, SAPS, Defence, Intelligence and Correctional Services. A
committee of Ministers will need to concur with the determination of annual
salary adjustment. Perhaps most importantly, the Bill makes provision for
two new structures known as a government component and a service delivery
unit.

A government component is a separate institution within the Public Service;
answerable to the Minister and partnered with the department, it is subject
to the Public Finance Management Act. Its employees are public servants and
it will have a ring-fenced function allocated to it, which will either be
assigned or delegated or statutory. The advantage of the government
component will be that services will be streamlined closer to the point of
delivery and, where deemed necessary, they can re-incorporate some public
entities. A component can be established by proclamation of the President
or the premier of the province, which must be preceded by a feasibility
study.

Service delivery units are similar to government components, but, unlike
government components, are able to perform services related to
socioeconomic rights, which government components are not able to do. The
objective behind government components and service delivery units is thus
to customise administrative and operational arrangements to soothe the
service delivery environment. There will be better government via direct
accountability and decision-making as close as possible to the point of
service delivery. Political heads will have more direct control over
service delivery outcomes without the need to create entities outside the
Public Service.

In conclusion, it gives me pleasure on behalf of the KwaZulu-Natal
legislature to support this Bill.

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Modulasetulo, mošomo wo montšhi o šetse o dirilwe ke
maloko ao a tlilego pele ga ka. [Chairperson, a lot of work has already
been done by the members who came before me.]

I am not going to go back and repeat what they have said. However, there
are important points that I think need clarification, especially to help Mr
Worth. I think it is extremely important for members who serve in this
House to always be honourable so that they can help our people to better
understand the laws passed by this House, and not mislead our people -
which is exactly what Mr Worth has done.

Mr Worth says that this Bill intends to centralise power. What Mr Worth is
not telling the people of this country is that this Bill addresses
challenges faced by government - the bottlenecks that block speedy delivery
and the problems of skills that need to be shared by all spheres of
government. He is not telling the public that. This Bill is actually
intended for that.
Having said that, Mr Worth should also, as an hon member, have the honour
to tell our people that South Africa is a developing state. As a developing
state, we have a responsibility to change things that were done by the
previous government which are not helpful for the state to develop as
expected.

But what also becomes important for us to communicate to the public is that
the government of the day has an agenda – an agenda to transform the
country. Mr Worth is not telling the people that. Mr Worth is not telling
the people that this Bill is one instrument that is being used to ensure
that this country is speedily and effectively transformed. I think as hon
members we must learn to do that.

Having said that, I want to mention as I stand here that this Bill was
tabled before the select committee. The select committee deliberated on the
Bill and saw an urgent need for this Bill to support the existing Act in
order to transform the state as expected, particularly in view of civil
servants - to clarify certain roles that were not clarified by the Act.
Therefore, as members of the ANC serving in the select committee,
understanding the need to transform and understanding that we are a
developing state, we have agreed that this Bill be passed by this House.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question in respect of the
Second Order. The question is that the Bill, B31B-2006, be agreed to. As
this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
need to ascertain very clearly whether delegation heads are present in the
House.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to make a declaration? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayixhasa. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat ondersteun. [Free State supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga ondersteun. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Elethu. [Supports.] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You said it correctly. Don’t mind what they
are laughing at.
The nine provinces have voted in favour. I therefore declare the Bill
agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                        RENTAL HOUSING AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP, according to
the most recent statistics at our disposal, only 10% of our population can
afford to buy and own a house at current prices. This should tell all of us
here of the dire need that exists out there. We cannot cater for the rest
of the population, or those who do not fall within the 10% bracket as
indicated. For this group, we are dependent on rental as the only means for
provision of accommodation and shelter. We are therefore heavily reliant
and place particular stress on the efficient functioning of the rental
housing market.

Over the past eight years we have operated under a very specific rental
framework and have found that we needed to urgently attend to its
shortcomings so as to ensure greater efficiency and fairness in its
application. What we bring to the House today is an amendment to the
existing rental legislation, brought about after extensive consultations
which began exactly a year ago. Subsequently, the amended Bill was
published in the Government Gazette. What we bring for your approval is a
culmination of these processes.

Basically, the Bill endeavours to address some critical implementation
problems and to remove vestiges of discrimination that stubbornly remained
in our system and also to remove a great deal of unfair burden placed on
the landlord. We start off by defining “unfair practice” to ensure that all
manner of unseemly practices which had dishonouring and discriminatory
effects were included in the definition and therefore prohibited. The
definition now means: “any act or omission by a landlord or tenant in
contravention of the Act; or a practice prescribed as a practice
unreasonably prejudicing the rights or interests of a tenant or a
landlord.”

The Bill makes provision that unfair practice will be dealt with fully in
the regulations which are currently being drafted in full consultation with
provinces and rental housing tribunals. A workshop is currently planned to
be held between 22 and 23 November this year with government stakeholders
to obtain inputs for these regulations. The reason for this amendment was
that there was uncertainty as to what constituted unfair practice. With the
amendment and the regulations, all unfair practices will be covered and
there will be no uncertainty.

Consequently, a great deal of unhappiness experienced with the law is
minimised. We have deleted references to “bona fide” in the law. This is
done to ensure that a landlord may not discriminate against any visitor to
a tenant, thus removing the current limitation. Currently, a landlord has a
prerogative of prohibiting any visitor they do not consider bona fide.

Rental tribunals are given the right to issue rulings pertaining to the
seizure of possessions subject to any regulations by the Minister. The Act
is being amended to expressly provide for the seizure of possessions of
defaulting tenants, but only after a ruling to that effect by a Rental
Housing Tribunal or an order of court.

Furthermore, amendments are made on information on rental receipts. A
relevant section specifies information that must be contained in the
receipts issued by a landlord for payments made by the tenant. They should
follow a particular prescription. An argument has been raised that where,
for instance, tenants are able to make payments at supermarkets, etc, all
the required information is not provided. To cater for this situation, a
subsection has been amended to allow a tribunal in exceptional
circumstances to exempt a landlord from providing certain information.

This amendment was necessary because in some cases it was difficult for a
landlord to provide information, particularly if there was an agent acting
on behalf of the landlord. However, the tribunal will certainly require
proof of all monies paid by the tenant, which will protect the tenant from
unscrupulous landlords. Section 5 of the Act is therefore amended to
clarify aspects pertaining to the issuing of receipts by landlords, namely
that the tribunal may in exceptional cases give the necessary leeway.

There is an additional subsection in the Act providing that any costs in
relation to contract fees in lease agreements shall only be payable by the
tenant upon proof of factual expenditure by the landlord. This will prevent
landlords from charging exorbitant costs for a standard contract of lease.

Amendments make provision for the manner in which the landlord must invest
the deposit paid by a tenant. The problem encountered in this regard has
been that the law provided that the landlord must invest the deposit in an
interest-bearing account with a financial institution and must pay the
tenant the interest accruing, provided that the rate of interest may not be
less than the rate applicable to a savings account with that financial
institution. In practice, however, different financial institutions have
different interest rates, and the current wording of the provision does not
allow for this. A technical amendment is therefore made to refer to such
interest rates applicable to the particular financial institution that is
used by the landlord.

A new paragraph has been included to deal with any costs associated with
compliance with the provisions of the law such as contract fees - as we
have mentioned above.

Most importantly, the jurisdiction of the rental tribunals is clarified.
The Act is amended by the inclusion of a subsection which gives the
tribunal the power to issue spoliation and attachment orders and to grant
interdicts. This was not spelled out in the original Act. The spoliation
orders and interdicts could be to the benefit of both the landlord and the
tenant, whereas the attachment orders would generally be to the benefit of
the landlord against the tenant. The rulings of the tribunals must now be
enforced in terms of the Magistrates’ Courts Act, Act 32 of 1944, and a
tribunal must refer any matter that requires eviction to a competent court.
The reason for the above inclusion is to ensure that no tribunal has the
right to evict in terms of section 26(3) of the Constitution. Only a court
may order an eviction. We have therefore amended the law to ensure that we
are in line with this.

The Act is further amended to empower the Minister to make regulations.
This amendment is necessitated by the need to ensure uniformity throughout
the country with regard to procedures followed by tribunals, as well as
rulings made by them. In the past, this power was vested in the MEC and
this has resulted in a great deal of variation, which is ultimately
unworkable.

Unfortunately, in relation to landlords, the common occurrence in which
landlords make unlawful lockouts and the shutting off of utilities is now
regarded as an offence. Landlords are required to ensure that they comply
with the correct legal proceedings at all times, whatever their grievances
may be against their tenants.

The Bill is amended by the substitution of some of the subsections so as to
vest the power in the Minister to make regulations as compared to the
current provisions which enable MECs to make regulations.

Finally, in our view, these changes will bring much-needed changes in the
rental housing market which will enable it to be one of the dominant
instruments of our policies. As consultations over the Bill revealed, our
interactions with the housing sector show that the sector approves and is
ready to accept these changes. I therefore introduce the Rental Housing
Amendment Bill 2007 to this House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson and hon Minister, I must say that my life has never
been as difficult as it is today, precisely because of you. If I had it my
way I would have said, “Chair, we agree” and I would have sat down.

Nevertheless, it is quite as important that one must just re-emphasise a
few aspects of what the Minister has already put before us. As a section 76
Bill, I think what came out of the public hearings that we had throughout
the provinces was what seemed to be quite common - the excitement that was
expressed by our people.
As the Minister has already mentioned, the people who are mainly affected
by the environment of rental housing in the main are the working class and
the poor. This piece of legislation that we are putting before the House
for adoption seeks to protect them and to ensure that they are not treated
unfairly. What came out frequently was the question of the lockouts
because, at times, you would be confronted with the way our people are
treated, especially when there are disputes between the landlord and the
tenants. The landlord would automatically have the upper hand and would
just lock our people out and they would not have anywhere to go.

As a result, it is only fair that one must express the great appreciation
that our people have for this. Of course, it did not also just come about
without any serious issues of contestation from some other provinces but,
out of the nine provinces that held public hearings and participated
actively and vigorously in the development and finalisation of the Bill
itself, six provinces expressed their support for the Bill. As a result,
the committee was then given an overwhelming mandate to then submit to the
House that this Bill be adopted. I thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon members ... Hon Minister, I am sorry. I
started by addressing members when I was supposed to have started with you
first.

This Bill comes at a time when some people have encountered some
difficulties and suffered a lot as tenants under landlords or property
owners. The IFP welcomes the objectives of the Bill and also believes that
the common practice of unlawful lockouts, as my colleague has mentioned, of
tenants and of cutting off of utilities will now be an offence.

Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, umthetho osezithebeni manje unikeza umqashi
nomqashwa ilungelo elimfanele. Kwathi cheze nje emthethweni oshayiwe,
umthetho oshayiwe uzoyidlala indawo yawo kulowo ohlulekile ukuwugcina.
Ushayiwe manje umthetho, ohluleka ukuwugcina lo mthetho, uzoyidlala indawo
yawo. Siyethemba ke ukuthi izingxabano eziba khona phakathi ko mqashisi no
mqashi, inkinga ebikhona izophela nya. Sihlalo thina be IFP siyawusekela lo
mthetho ngo elethu. Ngiyabonga [ihlombe]. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, the legislation before us will now give both employer and
employee their appropriate rights. Any deviation from the law, the
envisaged law, once passed, will take its course against the one who fails
to abide by it. The law has now been passed and it will now take its course
against anyone who breaks it. We hope that the disputes that are common
between employer and employee will now come to an end. Hon Chairperson, the
IFP supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr T MAANDA (Limpopo): Hon Chairlady, as the Limpopo legislature we held
public hearings and workshops with various municipalities. All the
stakeholders in Limpopo support the principles of the Bill.

There is nothing much that one can say except to confirm the mandate given
to us as special delegates from the Limpopo legislature, that we are only
here to support the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and members, allow me to start
off with a protest in regard to the shortened times allocated to speakers
for the debates this week. This move is understandable, however, given the
large volume of considerations before the House but that in itself, hon
Chairperson, is emblematic of the total disregard that the institution has
for the NCOP by forcing it to have last-minute, pressure-cooker-style
debates in order to pass legislation and ratify agreements.

The good news is that I won’t talk against the amending Bill before us, but
I will, however, attempt to address a serious matter in the meagre four
minutes allocated to me. According to the ATC of 14 November 2007, the
Select Committee on Public Services reports the amending Bill under
discussion without amendment. This means that all or at least the majority
of provinces will support the Bill as it stands.

Now, this cannot be correct and some dealings must have taken place behind
the scenes agter toe deure [behind closed doors], because I recall very
clearly that certain provinces had serious misgivings about some aspects of
the Bill, and a number of these were supported by the committee during the
meeting at which the negotiating mandates were considered less than two
weeks ago. Even a section where reference to the role of the NCOP select
committee is blatantly omitted now remains uncorrected.

But, be that as it may, because the final mandates of the provinces will
obviously determine the outcome which seems to be a given fact, I am
nevertheless very concerned that we are not doing justice to our task as
legislators and elected representatives of the people. The rushing of
legislation, however inferior it may be considered, is tantamount to rubber-
stamping, and that cannot be condoned. Let me remind you of an old saying,
which warns that you become what you condone. If we condone ineffective
legislative processes, then we become ineffective ourselves.

During the deliberations in the committee and while the process was
unfolding in the provinces, we were made aware of a number of very
important inputs from interested parties and individuals, but nothing could
be done at that stage other than inputs at public hearings.

To name just three of these inputs, I refer the House to the submissions
from the Gauteng Rental Housing Tribunal, an institution constituted in
terms of this very same legislation, the Property Owners and Management
Association of SA and Mr Michael Lazarus, an independent thinker and a
tenant himself.

I referred the inputs from the latter to the provincial portfolio committee
of the Western Cape, and they have undertaken to investigate the
submissions for possible further actions. I am sure that all these
submissions should have been attended to by Parliament’s portfolio
committee. The submissions were, however, too late to be considered and are
now parked in a cul-de-sac.

I think the whole legislative process should be reinvestigated to ensure
that the voice of the electorate is really heard. I have many thoughts in
this regard but, as a start, we could revamp the system to allow for new or
amending legislation to be passed on to the NCOP as soon as it is agreed to
by the portfolio committee but before being passed in the National
Assembly. Legislation should only be debated and passed in both House once
all creases have been ironed out. I refer specifically to section 76
legislation.

This will not only contribute to more meaningful negotiations all round but
will probably also eliminate the cumbersome process of mediation. When all
the wise persons considered and negotiated the Constitution, they could not
foresee the hiccups awaiting the legislators, so if we have to amend the
Constitution to facilitate meaningful legislation, then we must do so,
Chairperson. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B L NTEMBE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister Sisulu and hon members, I’ll
try to finish my speech in the two minutes allocated to me. [Laughter.]

The Rental Housing Tribunal, which is established under the Rental Housing
Act of 1999, deals with disputes between landlords and tenants. Vacuums and
loopholes existed in other areas such as in the self-storage rental
property business. Due to these vacuums, tenants were abused by the owners
of the rental property businesses. In cases of disputes, they took the law
into their own hands by breaking into the premises, removing the property
of the tenants and selling it for coverage of outstanding debts.

The amendments of this Bill should speak to and address the infringement of
the right to privacy. Appropriate legislation should be put in place to
govern such disputes. We are living in a country which is governed by laws;
hence the ID expects these amendments to address the out-of-proportion
rental fees which landlords charge, especially in Cape Town. Yes, hon
Chairperson, the rental fees have become ridiculously high. Something needs
to be done about them.

When houses are built it should be with the purpose of building communities
and not just houses. The ID acknowledges the need for housing out there but
just having houses without any schools, shops, churches and that kind of
infrastructure does not uplift the lives of people. It only provides them
with a roof over their heads.

Housing also is meant provide homes. The use of these houses as tuck shops
is a concern. People who can afford to, buy these houses and use them as
tuck shops. Where it was meant to provide a roof over someone’s head, the
house instead became a business. However, the ID supports the Bill as it is
a good effort. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Madam Deputy Chairperson, hon
members, firstly, I want to say that as the ANC we fully support this piece
of legislation. I want to highlight the issues that were raised by the
provinces. I am not sure whether the hon Watson was part of the meeting
that had the final mandates, because provinces had given indications on how
the process was done at provincial level and the reason why they took a
decision to support that piece of legislation. I would probably urge the
hon member to go through all the submissions that were made by provinces.

There was a proposal by KwaZulu-Natal to say that we needed to change the
name of tribunals. After having discussions at the committee level, the
department clarified that issue by saying, in fact at the beginning, that
that was not their proposal but that the parliamentary committees had come
up with that particular wording of tribunals in 1996 and that was why we
have that wording here. And they were saying it was up to the committees of
Parliament to amend the very same word that was proposed by the committees.

Secondly, I think there was also confusion, particularly regarding clause
13, because the provinces of KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape wanted
clarity on that, asking if we were not contradicting the very same clause.
But that section is substituted by clause 14 which, I believe, if both
KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Cape read carefully, will of course support this
particular legislation. On the argument for KwaZulu-Natal not to come up
with a mandate as to whether they support or not, they said they wanted
clarity on that particular aspect. But as a member from that particular
province, I would urge my province to support it after having read this
carefully.

As the chairperson of the committee has said, six provinces voted in favour
at that particular meeting. In fact, even Gauteng voted in favour. But the
problem with Gauteng was that their mandate was not signed and we urged the
member from that particular province to go out and ask their province to
give a formal final mandate, and he came with the signed mandate after the
meeting was adjourned. I believe that right now the seventh province has
voted in favour. [Interjections.]

Only one province, namely the North West, said it couldn’t give a mandate
because it didn’t do any of the processes in terms of that legislation. The
member said he was told not to come and brief the province and at a later
stage he was also told that because the briefing was not done in the
province, that they therefore couldn’t participate in taking a particular
decision. [Interjections.]

Therefore, I would urge those provinces, particularly KwaZulu-Natal, to
support the Bill. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I would like
to bring to the attention of members of this Chamber this notice on Rule
32, which says: During the debate in the Council, no member may converse
aloud. Rule 33 says no member may interrupt another member who is
addressing the Chair except to call attention to a point of order or a
question of privilege. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairlady, very little remains for me to say. At
the end of this, I’d like to thank all the members who took time to go
through and deliberate on the Bill, and who came here today to support it.

I’m very sympathetic to the member of the DA, hon Watson. However, the bulk
of his concerns do seem to have a bearing on the workings of the House,
rather than the Bill itself. He took time to actually deliberate on the
legislative processes, but I wish to put that aside because he did not deal
with the Bill itself. However, one point needs to be made that the hon
member said, and I quote: “We must give enough attention to all Bills, no
matter how insignificant they are.” I hope that “insignificant” did not
refer to any of my Bills. [Laughter.] That is the only amendment I’d like
to put forward regarding what he had to say. Even though I’m sympathetic,
none of my Bills are insignificant in any way.

I would like to assure the House that a great deal of time has been taken
over a period of a year to ensure that we have as much consensus on this
matter as possible, because it has been a very sensitive matter. This
ensures that we can keep a balance between the interests and the concerns
of the tenants and, at the same time, ensure that the market itself is not
overly burdened with processes that we have put in place.

I’d also like to indicate to hon members the concerns that were raised by
the hon members from KwaZulu-Natal, one of whom did, in fact, say any
amendments that they might have provided, they would put in such a way that
they do not, in any way, change the essential elements of the Bill. So
whatever else they may have put in place, they did include a proviso that
none of this would change the essential elements of the Bill.

Having said that, I would like to thank you very much for deliberating on
this very significant – extremely significant - Bill, Mr Watson. I thank
you for your time.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): That concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question, and the question is that the Bill be
agreed to.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. We will now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this is alphabetical order, per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour of, against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayixhasa. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat ondersteun. [The Free State supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [In favour.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal did not get the mandate.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Mr J M SIBIYA: Limpopo ya yi seketela. [Limpopo votes in favour.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga e go tlatša go menagane. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Ke a rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?
Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [The Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Eight provinces have
voted in favour of the Bill. I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

      CRIMINAL LAW (SEXUAL OFFENCES AND RELATED MATTERS) AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentleman, comrades and friends, may I
firstly apologise for the Minister not being here. She’s busy with a debate
in the other House; we thought it would dovetail, but it hasn’t.

Hon members, I feel privileged to introduce this debate, particularly at
this time of the year when we stand on the eve of the commencement of the
annual 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children. This
campaign, generating as it does an increased awareness of the negative
impact of violence against women and children, can this year be enriched by
celebrating this House’s willingness and commitment to addressing the
plight of women, children and other vulnerable groups who are so often the
victims of sexual atrocities when it approves this Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Bill.

As indicated in the long title, the preamble and the clause setting out the
objects of the proposed legislation, the Bill aims to review and amend the
existing body of law relating to sexual offences comprehensively and
extensively. The aim is to have a single statute, dealing with all aspects
relating to this important and sensitive area of the law and its
implementation. Obviously, members realise that having everything in one
Bill from now on is going to help the police, the prosecutors, the courts,
as well as the victims.

Time simply does not allow me to say all I would like to. I have
consequently decided to focus on some aspects which I consider to be ground-
breaking, particularly those areas which have been hailed as victories in
our commitment to achieving gender equality and to protecting vulnerable
groups, most notably women, children and persons who are mentally disabled,
from the scourge of sexual violence in its many manifestations.

Before dealing with some of these ground-breaking issues contained in the
Bill, I would like to share an observation that has been made, namely that
for the first time in South African legal history, we will have codified a
substantial portion of our criminal law into a single statute. The approval
of this Bill by the National Council of Provinces today will indeed be a
historic event. Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of the Bill contain many examples of
how the shortcomings in our common law dealing with sexual offences have
been addressed in the Bill, with a view to bringing them into line with our
constitutional dispensation and ensuring that we have as many quick and
successful prosecutions as possible, with the least secondary trauma for
the victims concerned. For example, the present common-law offence of rape
is gender-specific. Only a male can commit the offence and the victim can
only be a female. Clause 3 addresses these shortcomings to the extent that
it will now be possible for a man to be raped by another man, for a woman
to be raped by another woman and for a man to be raped by a woman.
[Interjections.] Please, don’t sound so enthusiastic on the last one.
[Laughter.]

This major departure from what the law is currently is to be welcomed.
Persons who commit horrific acts of sexual penetration, which at the moment
do not qualify as rape will, if convicted in terms of the proposed new
offence, be justifiably stigmatised as rapists for the rest of their lives.
The extension of the common-law definition of rape necessitated revisiting
the common-law crime of indecent assault, eventually leading to the
creation of a new statutory crime, namely sexual assault, which covers
nonpenetrative sexual acts, committed unlawfully and intentionally as
contemplated in clause 5 of the Bill.

The destructive nature of crime and especially the barbaric mentality of
some criminals can never be underestimated. In many instances it is not
enough for criminals to commit rape and, as a result thereof, to devastate
the lives of innocent victims. They go further and sometimes force a loved
one of the victim to watch the rape taking place. Clause 8 of the Bill,
therefore, among other things, prohibits any person from compelling another
person to witness a sexual offence being committed in his or her presence.

Two chapters of the Bill have been devoted exclusively to victims of sexual
offences who are particularly vulnerable, and those two groups are children
and persons with mental disabilities. While the Bill singles out these
vulnerable groups, I trust that our courts and the prosecuting authority
will leave no stone unturned to ensure that persons who commit sexual
offences against other vulnerable victims, such as the elderly and the
physically disabled, also get their just deserts.

There are four new crimes in Chapter 3, dealing with child victims, which
deserve particular mention. The first of these four is the crime of the
sexual exploitation of children. In terms of clause 17, a person who
purchases or, on behalf of a child, sells the sexual services of a child,
is guilty of the offence of sexual exploitation of a child. This clause
aims to criminalise the actions of clients and other players who are
involved in the exploitation of children, for instance pimps. A person who
engages the sexual services of a child for reward and then goes on to
commit a sexual act with that child, can also be charged, prosecuted and
convicted of a further offence, for example, rape or statutory rape, in
addition to sexual exploitation. I welcome this extra protection afforded
to children.

The second crime deals with the sexual grooming of a child. This is
something entirely new in our law. It is specifically aimed at providing
additional protection to children against an ever-increasing threat. Our
children are increasingly becoming exposed to the risk of persons who,
through their own devious methods, systematically prepare or soften
children in order to eventually satisfy their deviant sexual needs.

With the age of electronic communication in full swing it has become even
more important to protect our children from the very real dangers that lurk
behind apparently innocent communication tools, such as cellular phones and
the Internet. Clause 18, firstly, aims to draw a distinction between
persons who promote or facilitate the grooming of a child and those who
actively groom children. Here we are talking about people who use
pornography, people who use books and comics and who try to entice children
to look at these things and, in that way, make them used to sex and so on
until the suggestion comes, “Well, why don’t you try it yourself?” That is
what we are talking about here.

The sexual grooming here is by people that use the Internet, for example
the chatrooms, and then talk to the children and organise meetings with
them. Do you remember a little while back with the cellphones? There was
that special, and they found that a whole lot of paedophiles had been part
of that. That is what we are talking about here: using the Internet,
cellphones, comic strips and those types of things to try to soften
children and make them used to sex, make them used to thinking about it and
discussing it and not to make it as if it is something. And when they start
getting used to it, then they of course seduce these children and do what
they want to them. That is what we are talking about with the grooming of
children.

The last two crimes deal with pornography, that is the display or exposure
of pornography and more particularly pornography to children and using
children in any manner whatsoever for the creation of child pornography. We
have criminalised both: if you use children for pornography or you give it
to them or distribute it to them.
Chapter 4 of the Bill, focusing on victims who are persons with mental
disabilities, to a large extent mirrors all the crimes that we have created
for children. Obviously, persons with disabilities are a special category
of people that are totally and utterly helpless, usually, when it comes to
defending themselves and we have created a special chapter on people with
disabilities to protect them as well.

In debates of this nature one tends to concentrate on the substantive
provisions contained in the Bill. I would, however, like to draw attention
to some provisions in the schedule to the Bill. These seemingly less
important or incidental provisions should not be overlooked and my view is
exactly what the Minister said here earlier, about important and
unimportant Bills.

There are three provisions, almost hidden at the back of the Bill, which I
support wholeheartedly and which will go a long way in reducing the
secondary trauma victims of sexual offences so often have to experience.
Firstly, I welcome the overhaul of section 227 of the Criminal Procedure
Act of 1977, which is intended to set out the circumstances when evidence
relating to the previous sexual history of a complainant is deemed to be
relevant. I welcome the criteria which a court must take into account
before it can admit such evidence, for instance, whether such evidence is
in the interests of justice, with due regard to the accused person’s right
to a fair trial and whether the evidence is in the interests of society in
encouraging the reporting of sexual offences.

The amendments proposed in sections 158 and 170A of the same Act will also
assist complainants, the former dealing with the giving of evidence by
means of closed-circuit television - and we want most children to be able
to give evidence with a closed-circuit television - and the latter dealing
with the appointment of intermediaries through which complainants can
testify. These amendments require a court to provide reasons for refusing
an application to invoke the protection envisaged by the two mechanisms in
question in cases in which the complainant is particularly young and
vulnerable, namely under 14 years.

I am also heartened by the provisions of clause 60 that, once and for all,
abolish the cautionary rule in sexual offences, which is another victory
for gender equality. You may not know this, but judges, when listening to
the evidence of a complainant in a case of sexual offence, say: “I take
particular caution in looking at the evidence of this witness as she is a
woman and there is the possibility that she may have fabricated it.” That
is a horrible legacy that we have retained in our law. No other witness has
to deal with that. When you as a man give evidence against someone, they
don’t say, “You are a man and you are involved in this sexual offence and
you may just be lying” and so on.

That cautionary rule is being completely abolished in our law with this
legislation. This clause confirms the decision of the Supreme Court of
Appeal in S v Jackson 1998. The evidence of complainants in sexual offences
cases was, prior to the Jackson case, treated with caution merely because
of the nature of the offence. The Supreme Court of Appeal, in the Jackson
case, abolished the rule and stated that, in sexual assault cases, the rule
is based - ``... on an irrational and outdated perception. It unjustly
stereotypes complainants in sexual assault cases - overwhelmingly women -
as particularly unreliable.”

The repeal of the common-law rule was confirmed in the cases of
S v M 1999 and S v M 2000. However, this approach was not followed in S v
Van der Ross. Therefore we have now introduced into law clause 60, which
eliminates any doubt as to what the law should apply in this regard.

I mentioned earlier that the time available to us simply does not allow me
to speak on all the contents of this Bill. I would also like to briefly
highlight the importance of Chapters 5 and 6 of the Bill. Chapter 5 of the
Bill, among other things, provides that victims of sexual offences are
entitled to be provided with post-exposure prophylactics at state expense
at public health establishments designated by the Minister of Health on
condition that they report the offence within 72 hours of its commission
and obviously receive the treatment within the 72 hours.
Secondly, we are also allowing that someone can apply to a court for an
order directing that an alleged offender be tested for HIV, with the view
to having the test results made available to the victim so that the victim
can make personal lifestyle decisions.

It needs to be stressed that the provisions contained in Chapter 5, dealing
with the compulsory HIV testing of alleged sex offenders, should not be
interpreted as detracting from the importance of a victim determining his
or her own HIV status, notwithstanding the outcome of the HIV testing, and
receiving the necessary medical advice and treatment after the commission
of a sexual offence against him or her. It is just a further mechanism we
are creating to try to create peace of mind for a person, whether the
person needs to take special precautions because the person who raped her
was HIV-positive or not.

Chapter 6 of the Bill, dealing with the creation of a national register of
sex offenders, reflects the government's resolve to promote the safety and
security of certain vulnerable groups by prohibiting certain sex offenders
from being placed in positions of employment, authority, supervision or
care of children or persons with mental disabilities. That is what this
does. It allows you to check on someone you are employing or who is
supervising your children. You can get hold of this office and find out
whether this person has previous convictions of sexual offences, so it’s
that kind of protection.
I commenced my speech by referring to the 16 Days of Activism Campaign. I
would like to conclude on the same topic, again with reference to the Bill.
One of the key messages of this year's campaign is that government, in
creating an extensive policy and legislative framework that deals with
crime, sends a strong message to offenders that violent abuse will not be
tolerated. The enactment of this Bill will, among other things, enhance
government's resolve to address the abuse of women and children by
criminalising the various manifestations of sexual violence and abuse. I
hope that this Bill, when it becomes law soon, will be applied with vigour
by all role-players.

The portion of the Bill to which this is particularly relevant is Part 3 of
Chapter 7, dealing with the adoption of a national policy framework. The
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development must, in terms of the
said Part 3, liaise with her colleagues the Minister of Safety and
Security, the Minister of Correctional Services, the Minister of Social
Development and the Minister of Health, as well as the National Director of
Public Prosecutions with the view to adopting a national policy framework
relating to all matters dealing with the Act in order to try to create
uniformity, consistency and enhanced delivery.

An intersectoral committee, consisting of the directors-general of all the
departments and the NDPP is envisaged, which will play a major role in this
regard. I see this committee and the national policy framework contributing
towards making a success of translating the envisaged line function
responsibilities of all role-players into reality. The development of this
Bill has spanned the administration of three Ministries.

Hon members are aware that this Bill started with the SA Law Commission and
has been here for a long time, and we have to thank the many individuals
who have worked tirelessly to get this very important matter to the stage
where we are now at. Their efforts are appreciated.

I would also like to take a moment to thank members of the select committee
who have shown their commitment to ensuring that the end product
comprehensively and extensively reviews and amends all aspects of laws
relating to sexual offences. I commend the committee for doing just that,
under the able leadership of its chairperson, the hon Kgoshi Mokoena. Your
efforts and hard work have not gone unnoticed.

I also wish to express my appreciation to the many interested parties who
unselfishly shared their knowledge, expertise and experiences by submitting
their comments during the investigative stage and the parliamentary
process. I venture to say that this Bill has been the subject of what one
could almost regard as unprecedented consultation. I thank everyone so
much; please support the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]
Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson and colleagues, Deputy Minister, as the hon
Tau said, my life has been made easy by the Deputy Minister, because he
outlined the purpose of the Bill, its objectives, all its clauses and what
it aims to achieve.
When one thinks that our children, sisters, mothers and even men are being
sexually molested by the heartless, unsympathetic criminals that rapists
are, then this Bill is like sweet music to our ears. I want to touch on a
few issues, with your permission, Chairperson.

It might sound very strange, colleagues, but it is true that there are
people who are forced to rape other people. The question is: Who must be
held responsible for that action? This Bill provides for a person who is
compelled to rape someone to be turned into a state witness. However, there
must be proof that one had been compelled to do so.

One other scenario is that there are people who are compelled to
masturbate. From now onwards, if someone forces you or compels you to
masturbate, it is an offence and this person will be sentenced and dealt
with severely.

One clause that had caused some discomfort for the committee is the clause
that deals with flashing. Because of some religious or cultural practices,
the committee effected some changes to accommodate this. As a committee at
this Parliament, we thought that we should avoid passing legislation that
would easily be defied by our own people, hence those amendments.

Child pornography and those things were touched on and well-explained by
the Deputy Minister – I’m not going to touch on them again. One other
clause that was amended relates to bestiality. We fully agree with the
contents in this clause, except where it outlaws masturbating an animal.
That’s where the committee made some changes, because of the submissions
that were made by some farmers, especially those who are involved with
animal breeding. We made some changes there to accommodate them because
they said one masturbates an animal to check if it can deliver. I trust you
understand what I mean when I say “it can deliver”, because I don’t want to
be explicit.

The sexual grooming aspect was well-explained by the Deputy Minister. The
committee had some concerns around what people might term “interfering with
some practices”. We even gave the examples of some senior people in the
country, but I’m not going into those details now. The committee effected
some changes to accommodate those concerns, but those were not major
changes. They were just made to make it clear to people who might not
understand the exact message the committee wanted to convey to the public.
I’m glad to say that the committee went further – went the extra mile – by
consulting even our political heads in this regard, and we seem to be
speaking the same language.
This Bill provides that all rapists will be compelled to undergo HIV tests,
as the Deputy Minister put it, “bethanda bengathandi” [whether they like it
or not]. We want to make sure that should our daughters, our sisters and
our mothers be subjected to this unsympathetic and satanic act, they are
able to get treatment as quickly as they can.

To all of you rapists, please note that from now onwards, your names will
be registered, and we are going to publish you. Shame on you!

We want to appeal to all our judicial officers to show no mercy when
dealing with these kinds of offences. Let me leave those issues to my
colleagues on the committee.

Before my time is up, I want to thank the officials in these departments.
With your permission, Chairperson, I want to name them: Mr Du Preez, who I
call Hank, Ms Clark and Dr Louw. These are the officials who were patient
and prepared to take the committee through all the clauses. At times they
had to revisit the same clauses over and over again, but they were willing
and dedicated in their dealings with us. These are the people you can call
true South Africans - people who are ready to serve this country with
passion. Deputy Minister, if I had my way, I would promote those three,
because they deserve it.

Colleagues, hon members, I thank you because of what you have done for this
committee, particularly during the past three months of this session. I’ll
express my gratitude fully on Thursday. Because of time constraints today,
I won’t be able to do it, but you deserve to be thanked. I appeal to this
House to vote for this Bill, with those minor amendments. Thank you.

Mr A T MANYOSI: Chairperson, hon members, the law is not there to oppress
the people, but to protect them and ensure their survival in conditions
that humanity deserves. This is precisely why extensive consultations with
stakeholders have to take place - to ensure that our people’s views,
aspirations, interests and concerns are taken into account, hence the far-
reaching consultations that were conducted before the presentation of this
Bill to the committee.

The extent of the severity of the punitive measures with which the offences
are visited must, though humane, always reflect and mirror and be
commensurate with the graveness and callousness of the violation and how
society frowns upon it.

The Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Bill comes
in response to the escalation of brutal sexual offences committed mainly,
but not exclusively, against vulnerable and often defenceless women and
children in circumstances associated with barbaric societies.

There is a history to this Bill. The ANC has long noted the increasing
incidents of sexual abuse and violence in our society and the negative
impact of such abuse and violence on the vulnerable groups - women and
children. Having noted this, our democratic movement resolved to ensure
that South Africa moves towards classifying violence against women and
children, first and foremost, as a social problem and not as a legal
problem, and to implement and concretise international and national
instruments that deal with violence against women and children.

Moreover, our movement also resolved to ensure that our democratic
government shifts emphasis in the criminal justice system to a more victim-
oriented approach. It also resolved to ensure that it improves co-operation
in respect of matters relating to violence against women and children in
our society.

In giving effect to the above resolution of the ANC in 1996, our democratic
government mandated the SA Law Reform Commission to investigate sexual
offences by and against children. However, it was thereafter realised that
both our common and statutory laws do not deal adequately and effectively
with sexual offences.

As a result, the initial mandate of the SA Law Commission was extended to
include sexual offences against adults and the formulation of
nonlegislative recommendations with regard to the reform of the criminal
justice system. This meant legislative reform that would fundamentally
change the processes currently employed by the criminal justice system to
deal with the crimes relating to sexual abuse and violence.

In view of the fact that sexual violence against women and girls is a
problem of extraordinary proportions in South Africa, including virtually
unprecedented incidents of child rape, the Bill essentially introduces
mechanisms and measures that seek to enable our criminal justice system to
give full effect to the protection of the women and children who are
vulnerable to the escalating incidence of sexual violence.

In particular, this Bill seeks to provide for medical treatment of certain
victims of sexual abuse and violence, as well as for related medical or
health services. More importantly, this Bill also creates specific
mechanisms and procedures for compulsory HIV testing of the alleged sexual
offenders.

Furthermore, the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters)
Amendment Bill seeks to eliminate discriminatory differentiation that is
drawn between the age of consent for boys and girls in respect of
consensual sexual acts with children. In essence, the Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Bill reviews and amends
comprehensively and extensively the laws relating to sexual offences in
South Africa.

One provision of this Bill is for the repeal of certain common-law sexual
offences. The Bill also enacts comprehensive provisions that deal with the
creation of new categories of sexual offences that are aimed at addressing
the vulnerability of women, children and mentally disabled persons in
respect of sexual abuse and exploitation.

More importantly, the Bill entitles a victim who has been exposed to the
risk of HIV infection as a result of a sexual offence against him or her,
to receive, at state expense, post-exposure prophylactic treatment at a
public health institution designated by the Minister of Health.

In terms of this Bill, such victim is entitled to free medical advice on
the administering of such treatment and to be supplied with a list of
public health institutions that provide these services.

The ANC deems it desirable that this honourable House pass this Bill for
the protection of the weak and the infirm, that is the vulnerable groups –
women and children. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and hon members, the
Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Bill was first
introduced in Parliament in August 2003. Its adoption today, therefore,
comes more than four years later. This is an inordinate amount of time to
guide a Bill through Parliament, but when one considers the fundamental
changes the Bill makes to our body of law and the extensive and multiple
phases of public consultation it went through, it is perhaps understandable
in this particular case that less haste is less waste.

For decades a very large gap existed in our law dealing with offences of a
sexual nature. This lacuna meant that the criminal offence of rape applied
only to the rape of a woman by a man, as our hon Deputy Minister stated
earlier. This Bill finally closes the gap by expanding the definition of
rape to include all forms of sexual penetration without consent,
irrespective of gender. The IFP welcomes this fundamental change to our
statutory law.

The IFP also welcomes the repeal of the common-law offence of indecent
assault and its replacement with the statutory offence of sexual assault,
and the fact that new statutory offences are created for certain compelled
sexual acts.

We are especially grateful for the creation of the national register for
sex offenders in terms of the Bill. This register will contain the
particulars of persons who have been convicted of sexual offences against
children, and this is very good. The register will fill another gap in our
law, namely the listing of sex offenders, thereby prohibiting them from
committing a range of offences against children. Hopefully this will
result, in practice, in more protection against the abuse of children.

In conclusion, I want to highlight the need for the Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development to launch a project that is aimed at the
promotion and facilitation of training on the legislation and its
implications. This is a vital issue. All too often Parliament passes
legislation that looks good on paper. However, these laws are sometimes
either almost unimplementable or are so difficult to implement and
understand that their objectives are never realised or are only partially
realised.

This Bill provides South Africa, for the first time, with a single,
comprehensive piece of legislation dealing with sexual offences. The IFP
will support the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Voorsitter, agb Adjunkminister en kollegas, vir die
afgelope vier jaar word daar al hard gewerk aan hierdie wetgewing en as ons
kyk na die seksuele geweld teen vroue en veral teen kinders is dit hoog tyd
dat ons baie streng wetgewing kry en die DA ondersteun met graagte hierdie
wetgewing. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and colleagues, for the
past four years there has been a lot of hard work on this legislation, and
if we look at sexual violence against women and particularly against
children, it is high time that we have stringent legislation and the DA
gladly supports this legislation.]

I do not want to repeat what our Deputy Minister said, but I think that I
would just like to say that the object of the Bill is to introduce measures
which seek to enable the relevant organs of state to combat and eradicate
the high levels of sexual offences committed in South Africa. The Bill aims
to review and amend all aspects of the law relating to sexual offences in a
single statute.

Voorsitter, wat egter baie onrusbarend was, is dat sommige ANC-lede van die
komitee, klousule 28, wat handel oor verpligte HIV-toetsing na verkragting,
wou verander. [Chairperson, what is, however, extremely worrying, is that
there are some ANC members of the committee who wanted to change clause 28,
which deals with compulsory HIV testing after rape.]

The argument was that we will infringe on the rights of the alleged
perpetrators if the court forces immediate HIV testing. A legal adviser for
the chairperson even suggested that it would be unconstitutional to enforce
immediate testing. These members of the committee disregarded the rights of
the rape victims to timeously know the HIV status of the alleged
perpetrators.

The rights of a victim in a case of rape are fundamental and must be
protected. How else can a victim make informed choices as far as medication
is concerned? Fortunately, after intensive debate, this clause was not
amended. There was also major debate on sexual grooming of children,
clauses 18 and 22, and on flashing. The drafters were forced to amend
clause 56 in order to satisfy members that cultural rights would be
protected. Only future interpretations by judges will test these clauses
which relate to cultural practices. I would like to quote the clause and I
would be very interested to know what our Deputy Minister thinks of this:

   A person may not be convicted of an offence in terms of section 9 clause
   22 ...

... or 18(1)(c) ...

   ... if that person commits such an act in compliance with, and in the
   interest of, a legitimate cultural practice.

I think only time will tell whether these clauses will really stand the
test of time.

It is fair to say that after many years of debating and drafting we will
have an Act that can and will protect the victims of sexual abuse. What we
need now is to vigorously enforce this Act. I thank you.

Ms B L NTEMBE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, and hon members, the lack
of a constant and co-ordinated approach in the implementation of service
delivery to victims of sexual offences is a concern as there is failure in
instances to provide effective protection to the survivors of sexual
offences.

Criminal justice agencies tend to be ineffective and insensitive in the
handling of cases. The Commission on Gender Equality for 2006 reported the
delays in court processes to finalise cases. Also, it pointed out the lack
of state support for survivors dealing with trauma.

The lack of an effective legislative framework to deal with sexual offences
came to the fore. Taking cognisance of these findings, reports and
observations enable one to understand the dissatisfactory circumstances
South Africans have had to endure in our liberated country.

Are these victims of such circumstances liberated? They are definitely not.
When rape victims of the age of 14 are called aside by state prosecutors to
determine their own fate in their cases, do we really protect them? When a
woman is so-called mistaken for a man and placed in a cell with men and
raped the whole night, is that protection by us? Yet again, the culprit
gets away with it.

No, we cannot continue like this in this country. Hence, the ID is looking
forward to seeing these circumstances addressed and changed in future by
these amendments. The ID supports the Bill. I thank you.

Mr N J MACK: House Chair, hon Deputy Minister, hon members, comrades,
friends and guests ...

Agb Le Roux, ek dink nie die ANC-lede is so gekant teen wat u genoem het
nie. Ek dink ons moet objektief wees wanneer ons kyk na die woord
“vermeende” en wanneer ons ’n beskuldigde het. Ek wil u terugneem na die
Rawsonville-geval in die Wes-Kaap waar ’n dame ’n klag teen ’n blanke boer
gelê het. Die boere was in opstand, want hulle het gesê die vrou is
omgekoop en sy was onder die invloed. Ek dink dis met dit in ons agterkoppe
dat ons ANC-lede gesê het ons moet versigtig wees.

Geen mens is skuldig voor hy nie skuldig bevind is nie en as ons op daardie
gebied beweeg, moet ons versigtig wees. Hierdie is ’n baie sensitiewe saak.
Iemand kan beskuldig word van verkragting en wat doen jy agterna as die man
regtig nie skuldig is nie? So, ons moet objektief kyk. Dit beteken nie dat
ons sê verkragting is goed nie. Daarom ondersteun die ANC hierdie
wetsontwerp en ons wil hê dit moet deurgevoer word juis omdat ons bekommerd
is en ons jare geneem het om dit daar te bring.

As ek u ’n paar jaar terugvoer na toe ek nog ’n klein klonkie was, was daar
baie dinge wat aangegaan het. My ma het my vertel wat gebeur het en nie
eens gerapporteer is nie, want ons was nog skrikkerig om na ’n
polisiestasie te gaan. Jy het nie die goed gerapporteer nie. Ek wil u
verder terugvoer en vir u sê my moeder het my vertel van die apartheidsjare
toe die verkragting van ’n swart- of ’n kleurlingvrou deur ’n blanke nie so
’n erge sonde was as wanneer ’n kleurling of ’n swarte ’n blanke verkrag
het nie. Die stories is daar tussen ons mense en dit het gebeur, so ons
moet versigtig wees. Ons moenie hierdie goed vergeet nie. Daarom wil ek ’n
stukkie in Engels aanhaal. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Le Roux, I don’t think the ANC members are that opposed to what you
referred to. I think we need to be objective when we look at the word
“alleged” and when we have an accused. I want to take you back to the
Rawsonville case in the Western Cape where a lady laid a charge against a
white farmer. The farmers were in an uproar because they said that the
woman had been bribed and that she had been under the influence. I think it
is with that at the back of our minds as ANC members that we said we should
be cautious.

No person is guilty until he has been found guilty, and if we move on that
terrain, we need to be careful. This is a very sensitive matter. Someone
can be accused of rape, but what does one do afterwards if the man really
was not guilty? So, we have to look objectively. That does not mean that we
say rape is good. Therefore the ANC supports this Bill and we want it to be
promulgated precisely because we are worried about it and it has taken us
years to get it here.

If I take you back a few years to when I was still a little lad, there were
many things happening. My mother told me what happened and what was not
even reported, because we were scared to go to the police station. You did
not report things. I want to take you back further and tell you what my
mother told me about the apartheid years when the rape of a black or
coloured woman by a white was not as great a sin as when a coloured or a
black raped a white. The stories are there among our people and it
happened, so we have to be careful. We should not forget these things.
Therefore I want to quote something in English.]


  It is horrifying as it is. Sexual violence against children is not a new
  phenomenon, nor is it peculiar to South Africa. Historical evidence has
  been found of childhood molestation, including incest, among the ancient
  Greeks and the Romans in the Renaissance accounts and during the
  Victorian period.
  -
So, dit vind jy in alle rasse; alle kleure; alle mense; alle nasies. Ons
moet dit verhoed as ons die nasie wil bou. Jy vind dit in stede en op plase
en die Wes-Kaap het hierdie jaar ’n vreeslike jaar in terme van
verkragtings beleef. Ons het Rawsonville gehad. Ons het Oudtshoorn gehad.
In my eie kiesafdeling in Leeu-Gamka, die Prins Albert-munisipaliteit, het
’n boer ’n meisie verkrag.

U sien, dit kom weer terug na die vertrouensverhouding en dit is miskien
een ding, Adjunkminister, waarna ons moet kyk. Ons gaan die nasionale
register van verkragters hê, maar onder die hele ding van “grooming” kan
dit onderwysers wees – mense wat in ’n vertrouensverhouding tot ons kinders
staan. Hulle name gaan nie op daardie register wees nie. Jy hoor van
onderwysers. Hierdie was ’n boer. Dit was ’n blanke, maar tot die blankes
in die Prins Albert-munisipaliteit het dit verafsku. Ons sê vir hulle
dankie, so dit is nie ’n ding van ras nie. Dit is mense in
vertrouensverhoudings wat ons kinders gewoond maak en dan so “groom”. Hoe
help ons – hoe voorsien ons dit? Dit is ons almal se plig.

Die ander ding wat ook opvallend is, is die verantwoordelikheid van ons as
ouers oor ons eie kinders. In die onderwysstelsel het ons nou ’n wet dat
ouers daarvoor moet sorg dat hul kinders in die skool is. Hoe koppel ons
dit aan ouers se verantwoordelikheid en toesig oor hulle kinders wanneer
dit by seksuele teistering en dies meer kom? Baie dankie. [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[So, you find that in all races; all people; all nations. We have to
prevent it if we want to build this nation. You find it in cities and on
farms, and the Western Cape has experienced a terrible year this year in
terms of rapes. We had Rawsonville. We had Oudtshoorn. In my own
constituency in Leeu-Gamka, the Prince Albert municipality, a farmer raped
a girl.

You see, it comes back to the relationship of trust and that is perhaps one
thing, Deputy Minister, we should look at. We are going to have a national
register of rapists, but under this whole thing of “grooming” it could be
teachers – people who have a relationship of trust with our children. Their
names are not going to be on the register. You hear about teachers. This
was a farmer. It was a white, but the whites in the Prince Albert
municipality found it heinous. We say thank you to them, so it is not a
case of race. These are people in a relationship of trust who groom our
children and make them used to things. How do we help – how do we foresee
it? It is a task for all of us.

The other thing which is also noticeable is the responsibility we as
parents have for our own children. In the education system we now have an
Act that says parents should ensure that their children are at school. How
do we link it to the parents’ responsibility and care of their children
when it comes to sexual harassment and such things? Thank you. [Time
expired.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chair, can I just thank everyone for two things: Firstly, for supporting
the Bill. I think it is wonderful that we can send out a uniform message
from this Parliament that we, all the parties in this Parliament, passed
this piece of legislation and that we want people to be as strict as
possible in the implementation. So, I think it is wonderful for all the
parties that we have done that and I want to thank you very much.

Secondly, I want to thank you for the spirit of the debate. I think it was
a very good debate and it was done with the correct seriousness. There is
just one thing that hurt me. Kgoshi Mokoena does not hurt me very easily,
but he hurt me really badly today. He is happy to support promotions and
salary increases for the staff that work under me, but he is not prepared
to propose that the Minister and I get a salary increase. [Laughter.] I am
devastated that he is not prepared to support something like that.

I think we must start talking openly and strongly about this problem. If
you look at statistics in this country, they are terrible; when grown men
start molesting children and babies – there are men in this country who
have molested babies; when grown men are forcing kids to watch how they
rape other people’s mothers and sisters; and in Staggie’s case which took
place a few years ago, when he forced one of his lieutenants to rape
someone in his presence.

The National Prosecuting Authority, the NPA, did a whole audit two or three
years ago. That audit showed us that more than 50% of rapes in this country
are of girls under the age of 16. What are we doing to our children – the
generation of girls and boys? You saw the front page of the Sunday Times.
There are things about that article that worry me, but I am not going to
nit-pick about some of the things in the article. The mere fact that
research can be done to indicate that things which are on that front page
are happening is a travesty. As a South African and one that represents our
people, I am embarrassed by our country when I read these things about it.
We have to take this seriously.

We now have this legislation passed at last. This legislation gives
Parliament the tools to play a role from now on. This Bill gives you tools
when you go to your constituencies or when you do oversight work in
Parliament because it says, for the first time, that you must create a
national policy - we all want to be part of it and we want to see it - and
that there must be committees crosscutting departments that report
regularly on what is happening. So, you have a vital role to play to make
sure that reports come to you and that you watch what is in this Bill. When
you are in your constituencies, check that this Bill is being implemented.
We have to do that.

We have given freedom to our country. But it cannot be free when our women
and kids, in particular, do not know whether they can go to their own homes
and their uncles, brothers or cousins won’t rape them. This is a terrible
thing. It is our duty to set aside politics on this issue and fight
together, because this Parliament now has the tools with this piece of
legislation and we have to use them.

On the issue of constitutionality, I have no doubt that everything in this
Bill is constitutional. Of course, people are going to express their own
opinions on it. If law advisers want to do that, it is fine. We are not
going to pass a piece of legislation as important as this one and have it
knocked down as being unconstitutional. We are quite sure of that.

Let me just say what my approach is and what the Minister’s approach is to
a piece of legislation like this. When it comes to protecting the
vulnerable, children and women, I will personally argue and push the
boundaries of constitutionality as far as I can.

I am prepared to personally give evidence before any court on why we want
this law to be part of our existing laws - even if it infringes on some
person who has been accused of rape – because it can give someone the peace
of mind that the person who is alleged to have committed raped should
undertake a test within 90 days, and not two years later. Their rights
should be invaded to that extent that a woman can be sure whether that
person has HIV/Aids or not – so that she can live. She has to have a sexual
life as well. She has a life to live in the meantime as an adult. We must
be in a position to push the boundaries of laws as far as we can.

In this case of HIV testing, I do not think we have pushed the boundaries
at all. Even if we did, I would strongly protect this matter and am
personally prepared to give evidence on this matter.

I think we must understand the register clearly. We are not creating a name-
and-shame register. We want to create an effective register that will
protect people. All the names of people who have molested children will go
into the register, and over time it will become more effective - especially
if you want to employ someone. So, it will be applicable to teachers. From
now on, if the Department of Education wants to employ a teacher, they will
have to consult the register to determine whether this person has ever
committed a sexual offence.

So, we have created an obligation in the Bill that all people who work with
children in crèches and amusement parks - all those people who will be in
charge of children - must have licences before they are employed. As an
employer, you have a duty in this legislation to check if that person is on
the list or not. It is clearly going to help, over time, as the list
becomes more effective. This will create space for employers to screen
people before they employ someone who is a known paedophile, such as the
case we had in Knysna, etc.

Something that has not been mentioned, and I just want to mention it, is
that for the first time in the history of this country this Bill creates
provision for the crime of trafficking. We have not mentioned that. The Law
Commission, at the moment, is looking at trafficking across the board - all
kinds of trafficking of children. What we have at least done in this Bill
is that if there is any kind of trafficking for sexual purposes, then this
Bill deals with it and outlaws it in the meantime while we are waiting for
the bigger piece of legislation to come. So, we must be clear that we are
also doing that at the moment through this legislation.

Lastly, I want to say again that you have a major role to play. Most of
this Bill, as you have passed it now, will come into operation on 16
December of this year – on Reconciliation Day. I think this is a wonderful
thing we have done for our people, because on Reconciliation Day most
aspects of this Bill dealing with offences will kick in. Chapter 5 will
kick in in March and Chapter 6 will kick in in June as we need to draft
regulations for those two chapters. For the rest of the Bill, the crimes
that we have made provisions for and all the things that we have done in
this legislation will be law from 16 December. From that moment on, we all
need to play a big role in trying to turn this horrible abuse against women
and children in our society around. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Can I ask the hon members not to
leave because we are supposed to vote on this Bill as it is a section 75
Bill. Hon Le Roux, can I ask you to take your seat. You will leave after we
have finalised the vote.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                  CRIMINAL LAW (SENTENCING) AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
comrades and friends, the Bill amends the Criminal Law Amendment Act of
1997, which came into operation on 1 May 1998 in order to further regulate,
amongst other things, the imposition of discretionary minimum sentences for
certain serious offences listed in Parts I to IV of Schedule 2 to the Act;
to give the regional court jurisdiction to convict and sentence a person
found guilty of an offence referred to in Part I of Schedule 2 to
imprisonment for life; to provide that certain circumstances shall not
constitute substantial and compelling circumstances justifying the
imposition of a lesser sentence when a sentence must be imposed in respect
of the offence of rape; and to repeal all sections dealing with the
committal of an accused for the purpose of sentencing by a High Court after
conviction in a regional court of an offence referred to in Schedule 2.

The objects of the Bill are, amongst other things, to expedite the
finalisation of serious criminal cases, to punish offenders of certain
serious offences appropriately and to avoid secondary victimisation of
complainants which, amongst other things, occurs when vulnerable witnesses
have to repeat their testimony in more than one court.

Secondly, the provision requiring a regional court to refer an accused for
sentencing to a High Court is repealed. Regional courts are granted
jurisdiction to impose life sentences in cases where this is prescribed.
Provision is made for an automatic right of appeal in cases where a person
is sentenced by a regional court to life imprisonment. The National
Director of Public Prosecutions is required to adopt policy directives that
set out which prosecutions must, from the outset, be instituted in the High
Court and not in the regional courts.

Most importantly, the Bill contains transitional provisions in terms of
which cases already referred to the High Court by a regional court prior to
the commencement of the Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Act, must be
finalised by the relevant High Court. In those instances in which an
accused has not been committed to the High Court for sentencing prior to
the commencement of the Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Act, the
regional court must dispose of the matter in terms of this Act.

The committee effected amendments to the Bill and consequently the
complainant’s previous sexual history and any relationship between the
accused person and the complainant prior to the offence being committed
will constitute substantial and compelling circumstances justifying the
imposition of a lesser sentence.

I would like to take you back a bit. The Criminal Law (Sentencing)
Amendment Bill, hereinafter referred to as “the Bill,” is a section 75 Bill
and was referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs in terms of Rule 208(1) of the Rules of the National Council of
Provinces. The select committee dealt with the Bill in terms of Rule 210 of
the Rules of the National Council of Provinces and now submits its report
to the House in terms of Rule 211 of the Rules of the NCOP.

The Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1997 came into operation in May 1998 and
dealt with the abolition of the death penalty and created a legal regime of
discretionary minimum sentences in respect of certain serious offences.
Sections 51 and 52 ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I’m afraid your time has
expired. [Interjections.]

Mr Z C NTULI: I’d like to thank the Select Committee on Security ...

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): When your time has expired you don’t
even have time to thank the committee! [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Hon members, you must really adhere to our decisions, because when we
agreed that we would handle this debate in a particular manner, a
particular time was allocated to it. We need to improve on that Rule,
because I’m going to be firm on that.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                         SOUTH AFRICAN EXPRESS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the Bill before
us today is a very simple one. It allows for the transfer of South African
Express shares and interests from Transnet to the Department of Public
Enterprises. This will enable Transnet to focus on its core business,
namely freight logistics. It will also provide for the most strategic
utilisation of South African Express.
The SAX is a regional airline which operates smaller gauge aircraft and
feeds into bigger airlines like SAA. Regional airline services are
particularly well suited to many South African domestic and African
regional geographic areas. A number of thin routes that were loss-making
routes when operated by a larger gauge of equipment are now operated
successfully by SAX. We are proud to note that SAX has been performing well
and that it has been operating profitably, most notably since 2004. We have
no doubt that it will continue to do so. While we fully support the need
for SAX to be financially sustainable, we do think that occasionally
national developmental imperatives should supersede the need for large
profits. In this regard, I specifically allude to rural economic
development.

There are some thin routes, for example into the Northern Cape, which at
this time do not appear economically viable. These areas have demonstrated
potential for economic growth. The lack of efficient, reliable transport
services however is hindering this growth. SAX is a state entity and should
remain one precisely because it has a strategic role to play. Where
potential for growth exists, SAX should be willing to service that area.

SAX also has an important role to play in ensuring regional economic
integration. Through the transfer of people and goods, the airline will
strengthen the interaction amongst members of the Southern African
Development Community.

The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises supports the Bill and
we urge this House to do so. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Before we proceed to the next
Order of the Day, I want to bring to your attention the fact that the
remaining Orders of the Day are all section 75 matters and that we need a
sufficient quorum to be procedurally and legally correct in voting on these
matters. I therefore really want to impress upon members to ensure that at
least we have a quorum at all times as we are dealing with Bills that
require our numbers, not provinces per se.

                           BROADBAND INFRACO BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Minister, hon Chairperson and hon members, the Select
Committee on Public Enterprises wishes to express its elation at the
tabling of the Broadband Infraco Bill.

The Bill allows for the full services network assets of Eskom and Transnet,
comprising the national fibre optic network, to be consolidated into a
single public entity called Infraco. This intervention has become necessary
because telecommunications costs in South Africa are exorbitant in
comparison with other countries. These high costs reduce our
competitiveness on an economic level and also retard the pace at which the
quality of life of our citizens is improved through the deprivation of
access to modern communications technology.

When the Department of Public Enterprises conducted investigations into the
country’s high broadband costs, these studies revealed that the largest
connectivity costs are attributable to national broadband connectivity and
international connectivity. It is in this area that Infraco will intervene.

By increasing South Africa’s broadband capacity and reducing costs at
wholesale level, it is expected that South Africa’s telephony costs will
reduce by 65% within the first year of operation and by 95% after five
years of operation. It is the anticipation of this massive cost reduction
that informs the elation of the select committee around this Bill.

The economic spin-offs that we envisage are enormous. The services industry
is currently experiencing the greatest rate of growth. Business process
outsourcing, in particular, has been identified as a priority growth sector
for South Africa. ICT is very important for attracting investment,
stimulating growth and creating jobs in the services industry and its
reduction is therefore welcomed.

For now we welcome the department’s decision not to sell the full service
network to Neotel. We look forward to Infraco playing a fundamental role in
placing South Africa in the top echelons of a knowledge economy and
accordingly support the adoption of its establishing legislation. As the
select committee we also agreed on this – that we support this Bill and we
urge this august House to support the Bill. We wish you all well, the
department and the Minister. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                    HUMAN SCIENCES RESEARCH COUNCIL BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, the Human Sciences Research Council was established in
this country in 1968. In 2003, government commissioned a review of the
Human Sciences Research Council. As a result of that review, it was then
agreed that this council be re-established.

The Bill before us is actually re-establishing the Human Sciences Research
Council. It provides for the objectives and functions of the council, which
are mainly research and publication of such research in human science
matters. It also provides for the appointment of the board by the Minister.


As a committee of the NCOP, we do propose a few amendments, especially on
the appointment of the board. When the Bill came from the National
Assembly, it was actually saying that the board be established by the
Minister “in consultation with the National Assembly”. Our view is that
this must be established after consultation, not “in consulation with the
National Assembly” and with Parliament.

The other amendment that we are proposing is that when the Minister has to
replace, for instance, a member of the board, the Minister must inform the
National Assembly of the replacement of such a member. However, we are
saying that the Minister must inform Parliament rather than the National
Assembly. Those are the amendments that we are proposing as a committee and
we want to urge this House to support this Bill. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.
Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                     ASTRONOMY GEOGRAPHIC ADVANTAGE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, hon members, friends, guests, all protocol
observed, it does not matter which account one reads, one thing is crystal
clear: Man has always had this inexplicable fascination with outer space.
This fascination has inspired nation states and the corporate world to
invest in astronomy research which has stood mankind in good stead in the
past, and continues to do so even today.

When the ANC came to power in 1994, we promised the people of South Africa,
among other things, that we would not sit by and see technological
advantages pass us by; that we would be part of those advances. That is why
year after year we see more monies being allocated to the Department of
Science and Technology. We also see the fruits of that particular
investment.

Having said that, I also want to draw the attention of this House to the
seemingly desperate situation in the Northern Cape. There is almost nothing
in terms of modern development. We do not have high-rise buildings and
there are no major industries. If one discounts the mining activities in
certain pockets of the province, the condition of our roads can be
perceived as deterring big business from investing there.

Little do some people realise that these desperate conditions would
actually be an advantage to the Northern Cape and indeed to the whole of
South Africa, Africa and the rest of the world. This is because if one
looks at the early advantages of the astronomy research conducted at the
observatory in South Africa and the large telescope in Sutherland, one
realises that this is not something for the people of the Northern Cape
only but, as I said, for all mankind.

This Bill, when coming into effect, will give the Minister of Science and
Technology the power to declare certain areas as astronomy geographic
advantage areas, or central astronomy advantage areas.

Literally the whole of the Northern Cape, except for the area under the
jurisdiction of the Sol Plaatje Municipality, could then be used for
setting up these astronomy nodes where this research could be conducted. It
just goes to show that in all bad situations there is something good to be
found.

The Bill also seeks to ensure that the Minister goes about this process in
consultation with the relevant role-players in all affected communities,
thereby ensuring that we as a government fulfil our obligation to our
people in ensuring that they have a say in what happens in their area.

Very soon South Africa will be embarking on the building of the Square
Kilometre Array telescope which will have to be finished by 2009. With
these projects South Africa could further display its proud status as a
country on the cutting edge of technology. The fact that we were chosen
above a country like Australia must say something to the world. The fact
that the Northern Cape province was selected from other contenders should
say something to the rest of South Africa.

Very soon the people of the Northern Cape will be engaged in a project that
will investigate the origins of man by remapping the history of the stars.
Maybe one day we will find out that we do indeed have some distant cousins
in another dimension or somewhere else.

We in the ANC support this Bill. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

               TRANSPORT AGENCIES GENERAL LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr R J TAU: House Chairperson, in fact if I were to act on the basis of the
mandate I have been given, I would put to the House that we consider the
report as printed in the ATC and we put the Bill to the House for adoption.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:49.
                                 ___________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         WEDNESDAY, 7 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translations of Bills submitted

      1) The Minister of Education
          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Onderwyswette [W 33 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 76).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Education
         Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76).


      2) The Minister of Transport


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp of Algemene Wette op Vervoeragentskappe
             [W 27 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Transport
         Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2007] (National
         Assembly – sec 75).


2.    Introduction of Bills


      1) The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Jurisdiction of Regional Court Amendment Bill [B 48 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 3039 of
             22 October 2007.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within
         three parliamentary working days.


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted:


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 7 November 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38B – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     1991 Amendments to the Convention on the International Maritime
        Organisation (IMO), 1948, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the 1991 Amendments to the Convention
        on the International Maritime Organisation (IMO), 1948.


    (c)     International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling
        Systems on Ships, 2001, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.

    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention on the
        Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling Systems on Ships.

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour  and  Public  Enterprises  on
    the South African Express Bill [B 14B – 2007] (National Assembly –  sec
    75), dated 7 November 2007:

       The  Select  Committee  on  Labour  and  Public  Enterprises,  having
       considered the subject of the South  African  Express  Bill  [B  14B-
       2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified  by
       the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,  reports  the  Bill
       with proposed amendments, as follows:
                                  CLAUSE 1


       1.   On page 2, in line 8, to omit "4" and to substitute "6".
                                  CLAUSE 7


       1.   On page 4, in line 20, to omit "4" and to substitute "6".


       2.   On page 4, in line 23, to omit "or".


       3.   On page 4, in line 24, to omit "SAX." and to substitute "SAX;
           or".


2.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour  and  Public  Enterprises  on
    the Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26B – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 7 November 2007:

        The Select Committee  on  Labour  and  Public  Enterprises,  having
        considered the subject of the Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26B-  2007]
        (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by  the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
        proposed amendments, as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 1


        1. On page 3, in line 2, to omit "9" and to substitute "8".


                                  CLAUSE 6
        1. On page 4, in line 29, to omit ", telecommunications".
        2. On page 5, in line 14, to omit "6" and to substitute "7".


                                 LONG TITLE


        1. On page 2, from the sixth line, to omit "to provide for the
           servitudes and additional rights in favour of Broadband Infraco
           (Proprietary) Limited;".

                          THURSDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

  (1) The Minister of Science and Technology

      (a)   Technology Innovation Agency Bill [B 49—2007] (National
        Assembly—proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
        notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 30164
        of 17 August 2007.]


      Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Science and
      Technology of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
      Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.
      In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
      Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within
      three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Proclamation No 26 published in Government Gazette No 30297
           dated 13 September 2007: Commencement of the Pension Funds
           Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No 11 of 2007).


      (b)   Proclamation No R.27 published in Government Gazette No 30338
           dated 28 September 2007: Determining of a date on which section
           12(1) of the Act shall come into operation, in terms of the
           Second Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2004 (Act No 34 of 2004).


      (c)   Government Notice No R.834 published in Government Gazette No
           30275 dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1
           (No1/1/1343), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 2004 (Act
           No 34 of 2004).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


   (a)      Written statement requesting information in respect of ‘‘Spy
       Row’’, in terms of section 106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal
       Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

       Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
       Administration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
    Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16B—2007] (National Assembly—
    sec 75), dated 7 November 2007:


       The Select Committee on Education and Recreation considered the
       subject of the Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16B—2007]
       (National Assembly—sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
       Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
       proposed amendments, as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 5


       1.   On page 4, in line 42, to omit ‘‘in’’ and to substitute
           ‘‘after’’
       2.   On page 4, in line 42, to omit the words ‘‘National
           Assembly’’and to substitute ‘‘Parliament’’
       3.   On page 4, in line 43, after and to insert ‘‘at least’’
       4.   On page 5. in line 21, to omit the words ‘‘National Assembly’’
           and to substitute ‘‘Parliament’’


2.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
    Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill [B 17B—2007]
      (National Assembly—sec 75), dated 7 November 2007:


       The Select Committee on Education and Recreation considered the
       subject of the Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill [B 17B—2007]
       (National Assembly—sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
       Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
       proposed amendments, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 18

       1.   On page 12, in line 35, to omit ‘‘may’’ and to substitute
           ‘‘must’’.


                                  CLAUSE 21

       1.   On page 13, in line 34, after ‘‘may’’ to insert ‘‘, with the
           concurrence of the Civil Aviation Authority,


                           FRIDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

      (1)   The JTM on 7 November 2007 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
           classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:


           (a)   Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 43—2007] (National
                 Assembly—sec 75)
           (b)   Securities Transfer Tax Administration Bill [B 45—2007]
                 (National Assembly —sec 75).
           (c)   Standards Bill [B 46—2007] (National Assembly—sec 75)


           (d)   National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill
                 [B47—2007] (National Assembly—sec 75).


      (2)   The JTM on 7 November 2007 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
           classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:


           (a)   Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 41—2007] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77)
           (b)   Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 42—2007] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77).
           (c)   Securities Transfer Tax Bill [B 44—2007] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77)


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

   Please note: The following item amends item 1(a) under the entry
   ‘‘Tablings—The Chairperson’’, published on page 2019 of the
   Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 26 October 2007:

   (1)      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration and to the Select Committee on Finance

        (a) Municipal Annual Performance Report for 2005/6 by the MEC for
           Developmental Local Government and Housing in North West.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


   (a)      Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic
        of Mozambique for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
        Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


   (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Republic of
        South Africa and the Republic of Mozambique for the Avoidance of
        Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect
        to Taxes on Income.
   (c)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2007.


   (d)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Securities Transfer Tax Bill,
        2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T071109-insert1 – PAGES 2068-2080



                          MONDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

      Please note: The following item amends item 1(2) in the English
      ‘‘Announcements—Classification of Bills, published on page 2066 of the
      Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 9 November 2007.


      The entry should read as follows:


      (2)   The JTM on 7 November 2007 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
           classified the following Bills as money Bills:


           (a)   Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 41—2007] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77).
           (b)   Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 42—2007] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77).
           (c)   Securities Transfer Tax Bill [B 44—2007] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77).’’


2.    Translations of Bills submitted

      (1)   The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


           (a)   Wysigingswetsontwerp op Plaaslike Regeringswette [W
                 28—2007] (National Assembly—sec 75)
           This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Local
           Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28—2007] (National
           Assembly—sec 75).

National Council of Provinces
1.    Referral to Committees of Papers tabled
      (1)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
           Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


           (a)   Report on the withholding of remuneration ofMrMF Mathe, an
                 additional magistrate at Pinetown, in terms of section
                 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


           (b)   Upliftment of the provisional suspension of a magistrate:
                 Mr M S Makamu, a senior magistrate at Benoni.


           (c)   Report in terms of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates
                 Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993): Suspension of a magistrate:
                 Mr T V D Matyolo.


           (d)   Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in
                 terms of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
                 90 of 1993): Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M F
                 Mathe.


           (e)   Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in
                 terms of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
                 90 of 1993): Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M K
                 Chauke.


           (f)   Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in
                 terms of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
                 90 of 1993): Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr I X
                 Masimini.


           (g)   Report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr T V D
                 Matyolo, in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates
                 Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      (a)   Government Notice No R.1002 published in Government Gazette No
           30393 dated 28 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No
           6/110) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
           of 1964).


      (b)   Government Notice No R.938 published in Government Gazette No
           30356 dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/1/1345) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
           91 of 1964).


      (c)   Government Notice No R.939 published in Government Gazette No
           30356 dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           3/621) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
           of 1964).


      (d)   Government Notice No R.955 published in Government Gazette No
           30370 dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
           3/622) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
           of 1964).


      (e)   Government Notice No R.956 published in Government Gazette No
           30370 dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
           4/307) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
           of 1964).


      (f)   Government Notice No R.957 published in Government Gazette No
           30370 dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 8 (No 8/6)
           in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
           1964).
      (g)   Government Notice No R.958 published in Government Gazette No
           30370 dated 12 October 2007: Amendment issued in terms of
           section 74(3)(a) of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of
           1991).


      (h)   Government Notice No R.959 published in Government Gazette No
           30370 dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Rules (DAR/38) in
           terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


2.    The Minister in The Presidency

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth Commission
           (NYC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2006-
           2007 [RP 184-2007].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

      (a)   Directive in terms of section 139 of the Constitution, to the
           Municipal Councils of the Beaufort West Municipality and the
           Central Karoo District Municipality and assumption of
           responsibility for executive obligation: Non-fulfilment of
           executive obligation following September 2007 floor-crossing.


           Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
           Administration for consideration and report.
2.    The Chairperson
L
CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T071112-insert1 PAGES 2094-2130

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


CREDA INSERT - Insert T071112-insert2 – PAGES 2131-2139

                          TUESDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
    (1)     Housing Development Agency Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister
        of Housing on 12 November 2007. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
        on Housing and the Select Committee on Public Services.

National Council of Provinces
The Chairperson
1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
    respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council

    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
        concurrence on 13 November 2007:
        (a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 41—2007] (National
            Assembly—sec 77).


        (b) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 42—2007] (National Assembly—sec
            77).


        (c) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 43—2007] (National
            Assembly—sec 75).


        (d) Securities Transfer Tax Bill [B 44—2007] (National Assembly—sec
            77).


        (e) Securities Transfer Tax Administration Bill [B 45—2007]
            (National Assembly—sec 75).
    The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of the
    National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:
        (a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24—Department of Safety
            and Security for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements of Vote 24 for 2006-2007
            [RP 199-2007].


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
            Unit (SIU) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 206-
            2007].


        (c) Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
            South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2006-2007, including the
            Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
            2006-2007 [RP 101-2007].

    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
            Centre for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 133-
            2007].

    (3)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the National
            Museum—Bloemfontein for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
        (b) Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2006-2007,
            including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
            Statements for 2006-2007.


        (c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
            Theatre for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 156-
            2007].


        (d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
            South Africa (NAC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
            [RP186-2007].


        (e) Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
            2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 161-2007].

        (f) Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
            Language Board (Pansalb) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
            the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
            [RP 174-2007].


        (g) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
            Gallery for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


        (h) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
            Foundation (NFVF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
            [RP150-2007].


        (i) Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape
            Town for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
            on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


        (j) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31—Department of Science
            and Technology for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 for 2006-
            2007 [RP 200-2007].


        (k) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
            and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2006-2007, including the
            Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
            2006-2007 [RP 131-2007].

    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
            2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
            Biodiversity Institutes (SANBI) for 2006-2007, including the
            Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
            2006-2007.


        (c) Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St LuciaWetland
            Park Authority for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


        (d) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
            Council (ARC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
            [RP168-2006].

    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
            Commission (FFC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
            [RP143-2007].


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
            Service (SARS) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
            [RP205-2007].
        (c) Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
            Development Programme Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report
            of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
            2007 [RP 179-2007].


    (6)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:
        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
            Standards for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2006-2007 [RP 105-2007].


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
            Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2006-2007,
            including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
            Statements and Performance Information for 2006-2007.


        (c) Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
            Development Agency for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
            Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
            Information for 2006-2007.


        (d) Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
            Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2006-2007,
            including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
            Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
        (e) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
            for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
            the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 102-2007].


    (7)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9—Department of Public
            Enterprises for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2006-2007 [RP
            196-2007].


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
            Company Limited (SAFCOL) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
            the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
            2007.


        (c) Report and Financial Statements of the Pebble Bed Modular
            Reactor (Proprietary) Limited for 2006-2007, including the
            Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
            for 2006-2007.


    (8)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life
        and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons:
        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the UmsobomvuYouth Fund (UYF)
            for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
            on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (9)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
            Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2006-2007,
            including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
            Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 93-2007].


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
            Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2006-2007,
            including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
            Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    (10)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
            Agency (NDA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP159-2007].


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
            Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2006-2007, including the Report
            of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
            2006-2007.

    (11)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
            Sector Education and Training Authority (SAS-Seta) for 2006-
            2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 84-2006].

    (12)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

        (a) Report of the National Commissioner of the South African Police
            Service (SAPS) for the period 1 January 2007 to 30 June 2007,
            in terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998
            (Act No 116 of 1998).


        (b) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for July
            2006 to December 2006, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the
            Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).

    (13)    The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring
        Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women
        and the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of
        Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for
        consideration:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1—The Presidency for
            2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
            Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2006-2007 [RP 198-2007].

    (14)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Public Services:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Education
            and Training Authority (CETA) for 2006-2007, including the
            Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
            2006-2007.

    (15)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail
            Commuter Corporation Limited (SARRC) for 2006-2007, including
            the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
            for 2006-2007 [RP 188-2007].
        (b) Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
            for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
            on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
            2006-2007.
        (c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
            Reconstruction and Housing Agency for 2006-2007, including the
            Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
            and Performance Information for 2006-2007.

    (16)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration for consideration and report:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
            Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2006-2007,
            including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
            Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 33-2007].

    (17)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration for consideration and report:

        (a) Government Notice No 522 published in Government Gazette No
            30013 dated 29 June 2007: Exemption for High Capacity
            Municipalities in terms of section 122(2) and (3) of the Local
            Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
            of 2003).

    (18)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs and to the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence:

        (a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 6
            September 2007 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
            Provinces informing Members of the Assembly of the employment
            of the South African National Defence Force in the Central
            African Republic.

    (19)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:

        (a) Government Notice No 809 published in Government Gazette No
            30247 dated 31 August 2007: Determination of interest rate for
            purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of ‘‘official rate
            of interest’’ in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in terms
            of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


        (b) Government Notice No 1062 published in Government Gazette No
            30220 dated 31 August 2007: Rate on the interest on Government
            loans made in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
            (Act No 1 of 1999).


        (c) Government Notice No R.815 published in Government Gazette No
            30254 dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No.1 (No.
            1/1/1342) in terms of the Customs end Excise Act, 1964
        (d) Government Notice No R.816 published in Government Gazette No
            30254 dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No.3 (No.
            3/618) in terms of the Customs end Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
            of 1964).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


    (a)     General Notice No 1301 published in Government Gazette No 30389
         dated 19 October 2007: Nomination for the appointment of suitable
         persons as members on the Board of South African Weather Services
         (SAWS) in terms of the South AfricanWeather Service Act, 2001 (Act
         No 8 of 2001).


    (b)     General Notice No 1024 published in Government Gazette No 30418
         dated 26 October 2007: Notice in terms of section 16 of the Marine
         Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

                         WEDNESDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     General Notice No 1112 published in Government Gazette No 30262
        dated 5 September 2007: Proposed Guideline regarding the
        Determination of Bioregions and the Preparation and Publication of
        Bioregional Plans in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


    (b)     General Notice No 1108 published in Government Gazette No 30269
        dated 6 September 2007: National Norms and Standards for the
        Development of the Biodiversity Management Plans for Species (BMP-S)
        in terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,
        2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

    (c)     General Notice No 1109 published in Government Gazette No 30263
        dated 7 September 2007: Policy for the Development of a Sustainable
        Marine Aquaculture Sector in South Africa, in terms of the Marine
        Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


    (d)     General Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No 30284
        dated 11 September 2007: Notice to establish the National Framework
        in terms of section 7(1) of the National Environmental Management:
        Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


    (e)     General Notice No 1146 published in Government Gazette No 30293
        dated 17 September 2007: Draft alien and invasive species
        regulations 2007, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


    (f)     General Notice No 1147 published in Government Gazette No 30293
        dated 17 September 2007: Draft lists of exempted alien species,
        prohibited alien species and invasive species for which a permit is
        required under certain circumstances, in terms of the National
        Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
        2004).


    (g)     Government Notice No 878 published in Government Gazette No
        30310 dated 21 September 2007: Regulations for the prohibition of
        the use, manufacturing, import and export of asbestos and asbestos
        containing materials, in terms of the Environmental Conservation
        Act, 1089 (Act No 73 of 1989).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T071114-insert1 PAGES 2238-2261

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Rental
   Housing Amendment Bill [B 30B—2007] (National Assembly—sec 76(1)), dated
   14 November 2007:


      The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the subject
      of the Rental Housing Amendment Bill [B 30B—2007] (National
      Assembly—sec 76(1)), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a
      section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

                         THURSDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Message from President

       The Speaker and the Chairperson of the NCOP received the following
       message, dated 14 November 2007, from the President, calling a Joint
       Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
       Provinces:

       CALLING OF A JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
       COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

       In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
       South Africa, 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(a) of the Joint Rules of
       Parliament, I hereby call a joint sitting of Parliament at 14h00 on
       21 November 2007, in order to make an announcement regarding a
       process for the consideration of Presidential Pardons for persons who
       have committed what are alleged to be political offences.
       With kind regards




       Signed
       THABO MBEKI

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services


     (a)    Report of the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons for 2006-2007 [RP
        82-2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    REPORT OF THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE, ON EMPLOYMENT OF
    SANDF TO THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
      The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letter
      from the President on the employment of the South African National
      Defence Force (SANDF) to the Central African Republic, referred to the
      Committee, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
    on the Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill [B15B-2007] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 14 November 2007:


      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs , having
      considered the subject matter of the Criminal Law (Sentencing)
      Amendment Bill [B15B-2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to
      it, reports the Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 1


    1.      On page 3, in line 47, to delete subparagraph (i)
    2.      On page 3, from line,50 to delete subparagraph (iv)
Report to be considered.

2.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS
    ON THE UPLIFTMENT OF THE PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF A MAGISTRATE: MR MS
    MAKAMU, SENIOR MAGISTRATE AT BENONI, DATED 25 OCTOBER 2007:

    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
    considered the report on the upliftment of the provisional suspension of
    a Magistrate, Mr MS Makamu, Senior Magistrate at Benoni, reports as
    follows:


    1.      Background

    1.1     The Select Committee noted from the report tabled by the
        Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development that the
        Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, on 23 November
        2005, provisionally suspended Mr M S Makamu, a Senior Magistrate at
        Benoni, from office. It was done in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the
        Magistrates Act, 1993, (Act No 90 of 1993) on the advice of the
        Magistrates Commission. A report to this effect was subsequently
        tabled in Parliament in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Act. The
        National Assembly, on 21 June 2006, and the National Council of
        Provinces, shortly thereafter, confirmed Mr Makamu’s provisional
        suspension. Mr Makamu’s provisional suspension was based on the
        following:


          Mr Makamu was convicted by the Johannesburg Regional Court of
          fraud and, on 21 June 2005, sentenced to a fine of R10 000.00 or,
          in default of payment, to a period of six months imprisonment,
          all of which were suspended for a period of four years on certain
          conditions. The conviction relates to an incident where he
          allegedly convinced the administration Officer at the Benoni
          Magistrate’s Court to sign an official letter in which he stated
          that he (Mr Makamu) was entitled to an official motor vehicle
          allowance to the amount of R80 973.00 per annum, well knowing
          that in truth and in fact he at the time did not qualify to
          receive such an allowance. Mr Makamu then presented the said
          letter to Bankfin where he applied for an instalment sale
          agreement in order to purchase a new motor vehicle.

    1.2     The Select Committee noted that the Magistrates Commission, on
        31 March 2006 and in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Magistrates
        Act, 1993, determined to withhold Mr Makamu’s remuneration. A report
        to this effect was tabled in Parliament on 7 April, 2006. The
        National Assembly confirmed the Commission’s determination on 21
        June 2006 and the National Council of Provinces shortly thereafter.


    1.3     The Select Committee noted that, after having been provisionally
        suspended from Office, the Magistrates Commission commenced with its
        investigation into Mr Makamu’s fitness to hold Office as a
        Magistrate. After conclusion of the investigation, the Commission
        decided to charge Mr Makamu of misconduct and served a written
        notice to this effect on him on 25 July 2005. However, the inquiry
        into his fitness to hold office was, at his own request, postponed
        sine die on 13 January 2006, pending the outcome of his appeal
        against his conviction in the Regional Court.

    1.4     The Select Committee noted that, on 15 June 2007, the appeal
        against Mr Makamu’s conviction and sentence was finally heard and
        upheld by the High Court in Johannesburg. Accordingly, both his
        conviction and his sentence were set aside. According to the
        Commission, it after having studied the record of the proceedings is
        of the view that it would not, on a balance of probabilities, be
        able to successfully prove the charge of misconduct which was based
        on the incident which formed the basis of the criminal prosecution
        and which led to his provisional suspension, against Mr Makamu.


    1.5     The Select Committee also noted that, accordingly, the
        Commission has decided not to proceed with its inquiry against Mr
        Makamu. Since the misconduct inquiry formed the basis of his
        provisional suspension, his provisional suspension could not be
        sustained and accordingly, his provisional suspension was uplifted
        with immediate effect.


    1.6     The Select Committee also noted that, since the withholding of
        Mr Makamu’s remuneration was based on his provisional suspension,
        the determination to withhold his salary automatically fell away at
        the time when his provisional suspension was uplifted


    1.7     The Select Committee also noted that, since the basis on which
        Mr Makamu was provisionally suspended fell away, there was no reason
        to uphold his provisional suspension. Accordingly, his provisional
        suspension was uplifted with immediate effect.


    1.8     The Select Committee therefore recommends that the Council
        agrees with the decision of the Minister to uplift the provisional
        suspension of a Magistrate, Mr MS Makamu from Benoni, with immediate
        effect.

        Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
    Education Laws Amendment Bill [B33B-2007] (National Assembly – sec 76),
    dated 14 November 2007:

        The Select Committee on Education and Recreation considered the
        subject of the Education Laws Amendment Bill [B33B-2007] (National
        Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B33C-2007].

        Report to be considered.

                          FRIDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2007


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
    on the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
    Amendment Bill [B 25—2007] (National Assembly—sec 75) dated 16 November
    2007:

       The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
       considered the subject of the Cross-Boundary Municipalities Laws
       Repeal and Related Matters Amendment Bill [B 25—2007] (National
       Assembly—sec 75)), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
       Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
    on the Public Service Amendment Bill [B31B—2006] (National Assembly—sec
    76) dated 16 November 2007:

       The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
       considered the subject of the Public Service Amendment Bill
       [B31B—2006] (National Assembly—sec 76) (as amended by the Portfolio
       Committee on Public Service and Administration), referred to it and
       classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill,
       reports the Bill without amendment.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
    (Intervention in Utrecht), dated 9 November 2007:

    1.      BACKGROUND


        In August 2006, the Department of Local Govt. Housing and
        Traditional Affairs received a report containing allegations that
        within the Municipality there were certain activities/practices that
        were being undertaken that were not within the ambit of good
        governance. The MEC was petitioned to initiate an investigation to
        see if these were not of such a serious nature as to warrant a full
        investigation.


        The investigation was conducted by ESP consulting and a report was
        submitted on 14 May 2007. The investigation focused on allegations
        of Mis-Management; Mal-Administration; Fraud and
        Corruption.Subsequent to this, the MEC, on 21 May 2007, wrote a
        letter to the Mayor, Cllr. M E Khoza, notifying him of the
        completion of the investigation and availability of a report.


        The letter required that a Special Council meeting be convened to
        decide what action was going to be taken in respect of the comments;
        observations and recommendations contained in the report. This had
        to be done within 21 days. On 22 August 2007, the MEC notified the
        Municipality of a decision of the Provincial Executive Council,
        taken on the same day, to intervene in terms of section 139 of the
        Constitution. The notification carried the suspensions of Cllr.
        Khoza, the Municipal Manager, Mr V M Khubeka and an employee of the
        Municipality.


        On 23 October 2007, the MEC briefed the Select Committee, in
        Parliament, Cape Town, on the intervention in Utrecht. The visit to
        Utrecht by a four member multi-party delegation, led by the Hon. S
        Shiceka, Chairperson of the committee follows the afore-said
        briefing.

    2.      SELECT COMMITTEE INVESTIGATION

        2.1 Meeting with the Mayor and Councillors

           The delegation comprising of 2 ANC; 1 IFP and 1 DA, met with all
           the Cllrs. of the Utrecht Municipality. The meeting was convened
           in the Council Chambers.


           At the meeting oral submissions were mainly made by Cllr. Mabaso
           (IFP) supported by Cllr. Vundla, on the one hand, while Cllr.
           Msibi supported by Cllrs. Nene and Ntshangase, made the main
           submission. Cllr. Stannard (DA) also made a submission. The
           Cllrs. were divided along party political lines in terms of how
           they saw the intervention.


           The IFP and the DA opposed the intervention although for
           different reasons. In the main the IFP’s Councillor Mabaso
           contended that the intervention was a politically motivated.
           Cllr. Stannard cited amongst other reasons for opposing the
           intervention, the breakdown in service delivery since the
           intervention; vast amounts of money in terms of extra costs.


           The ANC Councillors supported the intervention citing amongst
           other things party biased service delivery, fraud and corruption
           and political interference in the main.


           Documentation was submitted for the committee’s perusal.

        2.2 Meeting with the Mayor and Manager

           This also was convened in the Council Chambers and main
           presentation was done by the Acting Municipal Manager, Mr T
           Tubane.

           In his report to the committee he highlighted the re-examination
           of the structure and functioning of the Administration and
           Council as the main thrust of his responsibility. This, to
           ensure that the Municipality executed its mandate to deliver
           services to the people of Utrecht. He informed the committee
           that the Municipality had only 3 departments viz. Corporate,
           Finance and Technical Services. He also touched on what the
           Municipality needed to do, to respond to challenges.


           He shared with the committee their identification of the issues
           that needed speedy and urgent intervention, citing among others,
           the Audit of Leave; Employment Contracts (no salary details,
           some not signed, expiry of contracts); Payment of incorrect
           salaries; Non-existence of employee files and Payment of a non-
           existent employee.


           With regards to Finances he pointed out that the Development
           Bank of Southern Africa was conducting an assessment which
           revealing that the CFO was not sure about the financial status
           of the Municipality; was not sure of available cash and
           investments balances; deposits and withdrawals, to mention but a
           few. He further reported to the committee that with Technical
           services the challenge was that the department performed
           functions that would otherwise be done by Community services had
           it existed.


        2.3 Meeting with Municipal employees

           The meeting took place in a Town/Community Hall, housing the
           South African Social Security Agency offices. Everyone was
           welcomed by the Mayor, Cllr. Msibi.


           The Hon. Mr Shiceka requested the Hon. Mr Ntuli, member of the
           delegation to outline to the employees the purpose of the
           meeting.


           In his short address to the gathering, the Hon. Mr Ntuli pointed
           out that the visit was occasioned by an intervention by the MEC,
           emphasizing that once an MEC intervened it was the committee’s
           responsibility to verify the matter; to look into whether it was
           necessary; what is needed; whether it was helping and to also
           find out whether there was an improvement since the
           intervention.


           The leader of the delegation gave the employees an opportunity
           to express themselves and share their perspective on the
           intervention. After some hesitation or reluctance by the
           employees and upon their request, the Mayor; the Municipal
           Manager and everyone seen before, were asked to excuse
           themselves from the meeting.


           One gentleman stood up and said he was speaking both in his
           personal and professional capacity. He cited political
           infighting as a cause for the paralysis in the functioning of
           the Municipality. He mentioned, for example, that the Lodge that
           is run by the Municipality had developed new tariffs but that
           these could not be implemented as the Municipality has not met
           to officially endorse them. He concluded by saying that the
           situation was infact worse than before the intervention.


           The majority of the employees spoke in favour of the
           intervention. Their grievances ranged from alleging abuse by
           managers; being forced to drive unroadworthy vehicles; absence
           of skills to why government has been waiting all the time.


           The Hon. Mr S Shiceka responded to some of the issues raised.
           His explanation ranged from the issue of where the Acting
           Municipal Manager was paid from; to an agreement on a skills
           audit; grading of the municipality in relation to wages, raising
           sharply the issue of the wage gap.


           He concluded the meeting by assuring staff that as the committee
           they would give an instruction to the Acting Municipal Manager
           to convene a meeting and address staff on issues affecting
           everyone.


           He concluded the meeting by outlining the process that would
           unfold on returning to parliament mentioning debating the report
           and whether to recommend a continuation of the intervention or
           not. And, a follow up on recommendations by the Acting Mayor and
           the Acting Municipal Manager.


           He assured staff that the committee would make a follow up on
           the implementation of the recommendations. He also expressed the
           hope that the Municipality could run without outside help.

    3.      FINDINGS

        The Committee found that the Emadlangeni Municipality does not have
        the ability to raise its own revenue and operates on a deficit. The
        Municipality is unable to recover its own debts and a sum of about
        R2,9m is owing. The Game Lodge can not implement new tarrifs because
        of the general disfunction of the Municipality.


        It was also found that even though the area has huge potential the
        municipality still depended on grants and it was necessary for other
        spheres of government to assist.


        The Committee found further that the municipality was under-skilled,
        that some staff members were casuals even after 15 to 20 years of
        service, furthermore, that municipal employees are forced to drive
        unroadworthy municipal vehicles.


        The Committee is also concerned about the high degree of bickering
        between and amongst political parties and interference in the smooth
        running of the municipality.

    4.      RECOMMENDATIONS
        The Committee recommends that the Council approve the Intervention
        on the following conditions—

        1.  That the MEC present a comprehensive program of support to the
           Municipality in terms of human and financial resources on short,
           medium areas that impacting on the community.


        2.  That the MEC presents a report on legality of the appointment of
           the Acting Municipal Manager and the allowance paid to the Mayor
           on the month of September.


        3.  That Political Parties in the National Council of Provinces
           assist the Municipality in creating unity and conditions
           conducive for service delivery.


        4.  That the Municipal Manager should embark on and initiate a
           financial recovery strategy including broadening the tax base.


        5.  That the MEC should engage the District Council on the water
           services provision for the Emadlangeni Municipal area.


        6.  That monthly reports on progress must be presented to the
           National Council of Provinces.


        7.  That the MEC must indicate the time-frame for the Intervention.
           Report to be considered

                          MONDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Housing Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill [B 6B – 2007
         (Reprint)] – Act No 17 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President
         on 12 November 2007).


      2) National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2006] – Act
         No 18 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 12 November
         2007).

      3) Banks Amendment Bill [B 12B – 2007] – Act No 20 of 2007 (assented
         to and signed by President on 12 November 2007).

      4) Prohibition of Mercenary Activities and Regulation of Certain
         Activities in Country of Armed Conflict Bill [B 42B – 2005] – Act
         No 27 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 12 November
         2007).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 15 November 2007 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
         classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Bill [B 48 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National
             Treasury for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2006-2007
             [RP 139-2007].

         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Auditor-General for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 134-2007].

         (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Reserve Bank for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.

         (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
             Board (FSB) 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 91-
             2007].

         (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud
             for Financial Services Providers for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.

         (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
             Regulatory Board for Auditors for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.


    2.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
             Communications Authority of South Africa for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 155-2007].


         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
             Office Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.

         (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
             Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of Vote 7 for 2006-2007 [RP 194-2007].

         (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development
             and Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.

         (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

         (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment
             Insurance Fund (UIF) for 2006-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 162-2007].

    3.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Social Services for consideration and report:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
             Schemes for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 75-
             2007].

    4.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services for consideration and report:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
             Foundation for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.

         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing
             Finance Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.

         (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund
             (RAF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 112-
             2007].

         (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company
             South Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.

         (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

         (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety
             Regulator (RSR) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             94-2007].

         (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
             Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 146-2007].

         (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Search and Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2006-2007.

         (i)      Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company
             of South Africa and Air Navigation Services Company for 2006-
             2007.


    5.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation:

         (a)      Government Notice No 496 published in Government Gazette
             No 29979 dated 8 June 2007: Appointment of ministerial
             committee on schools that work, in term of the provisions of
             regulations 20, Part 8, of the Treasury Regulations for
             Department, Trading Entities, Constitutional Institutions and
             Public Entities, issued in terms of the Public Finance
             Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).
    6.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty)
             Ltd for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust
             Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 210-
             2007].


    7.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

         (a)      Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2006-
             2007 [RP 123-2007].

         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
             Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007 [RP 132-2007].

    8.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of
             Arts and Culture for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for
             2006-2007.

         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences
             Research Council (HSRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 128-2007].

         (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Council for Natural Scientific Professions 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

         (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
             Foundation (NRF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    9.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
         the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration:

         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service
             Sector Education and Training Authority (PSeta) for 2006-2007
             [RP 73-2007].


    10.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:
         (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Empowerment Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.

         (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
             Geoscience (CGE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             116-2007].

         (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Nuclear Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 96-2007].

         (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
             Group of Companies (CEF) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group of
             Companies for 2006-2007 [RP 189-2007].

         (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Diamond Board Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             111-2007].

         (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
             Regulator (NNR) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             95-2007].

         (g)      Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology
             (Mintek) for 2006-2007, including the Report f the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 109-
             2007].

         (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and
             Safety Council for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             26-2007].

    11.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs:

         (a)      Government Notice No 517 published in Government Gazette
             No 30003 dated 21 June 2007: Repeal Part 1 of the Regulations
             published by Government Notice No. R2362 of 18 November 1977
             in terms of the Trade Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).



         (b)      Government Notice No R.544 published in Government Gazette
             No 30023 dated 6 July 2007: Compulsory specification for
             cement in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of
             1993).

         (c)      Government Notice No R.545 published in Government Gazette
             No 30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the
             payment of levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to
             compulsory specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards
             Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

         (d)      Government Notice No R.546 published in Government Gazette
             No 30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the
             payment of levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to
             compulsory specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards
             Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

         (e)      Government Notice No R.547 published in Government Gazette
             No 30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the
             payment of levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to
             compulsory specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards
             Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

         (f)      Government Notice No R.580 published in Government Gazette
             No 30050 dated 13 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

         (g)      Government Notice No R.581 published in Government Gazette
             No 30050 dated 13 July 2007: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Revere
             International Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973
             (Act No 61 of 1973).


         (h)      Government Notice No R.582 published in Government Gazette
             No 30050 dated 13 July 2007: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Delburne
             Holdings Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No
             61 of 1973).

         (i)      Government Notice No 643 published in Government Gazette
             No 30074 dated 20 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

         (j)      Government Notice No 644 published in Government Gazette
             No 30074 dated 20 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

         (k)      Government Notice No 648 published in Government Gazette
             No 30092 dated 20 July 2007: Companies and Intellectual
             Property Registration Office (CIPRO) – Intellectual Property
             Division: Notice in terms of regulations 3(7) in terms of the
             Copyright Act, 1978 (Act No 98 of 1978).

         (l)      Government Notice No 649 published in Government Gazette
             No 30074 dated 20 July 2007: Repeal of Government Notice No
             1322 of 1 September 1995 and publishing of regulations in
             terms of the Trade Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).

         (m)      Government Notice No 698 published in Government Gazette
             No 30144 dated 10 August 2007: Standards matters in terms of
             the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

         (n)      Government Notice No 741 published in Government Gazette
             No 30189 dated 17 August 2007: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Kotze
             Investments (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973
             (Act No 61 of 1973).


         (o)      Government Notice No 781 published in Government Gazette
             No 30225 dated 28 August 2007: Rules for the conduct of
             matters  before the National Consumer Tribunal in terms of the
             National Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).

         (p)      Government Notice No 819 published in Government Gazette
             No 30254 dated 7 September 2007: Proposed amendment of the
             Compulsory Specification for Vehicles of Category 03 and 04,
             in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


    12.    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration:

         (a)      Government Notice No 824 published in Government Gazette
             No 30264 dated 7 September 2007: Notice of allocations per
             municipality for Schedule 7 local government conditional
             grants, in accordance with sections 8(3) and 22(1)(a) of the
             Division of Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No 1 of 2007).


    13.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:

         (a)      Agreement Establishing the Collaborative Africa Budget
             Reform Initiative (CABRI), tabled in terms of section 231(2)
             of the Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement Establishing the
             Collaborative Africa Budget Reform Initiative (CABRI).


    14.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

         (a)      Report on the recommendation for the determination of
             salaries and allowances of magistrates.

         (b)      Report on the recommendation for the determination of
             remuneration of Constitutional Court Judges and Judges.

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
   on the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2007], (National
   Assembly - sec 74), dated 16 November 2007:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the subject of the Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill
      [B 24 – 2007], (National Assembly- sec 74), referred to it, reports
      that is has agreed to the Bill without amendments.


2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
   on the Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2006/2007 of the
   Department of Safety and Security, dated 13 November 2007:

       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
       been briefed by the Department of Safety and Security on its Annual
       Report and Financial Statements on Vote 22 for 2006-2007, including
       the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
       Vote 22 for 2006-2007, referred to it, reports that it has concluded
       its deliberations thereon.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
   on the Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2006/2007 of the
   Department Justice and Constitutional Development, dated 14 November
   2007:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      been briefed by the Department of Justice and Constitutional
      Development on its Annual Report and Financial Statements on Vote 23
      for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
      Financial Statements of Vote 23 for 2006-2007, referred to it, reports
      that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


4.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
   Affairs on the Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2006/2007 of
   the Department of Correctional Services, dated 8 November 2007:

       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
       been briefed by the Department of Correctional Services on its
       Annual Report and Financial Statements on Vote 20 for 2006-2007,
       including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of Vote 20 for 2006-2007, referred to it, reports that it
       has concluded its deliberations thereon.

5.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS
   ON THE REMOVAL FROM OFFICE AND WITHHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF MR T V D
   MATYOLO, AN ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT PORT ELIZABETH, DATED 6 NOVEMBER
   2007.
 
      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the report on the suspension/removal from office of Mr
      Matyolo and the withholding of his remuneration,  tabled by the
      Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development in terms of
      section 13(4)(b) and 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of
      1993), respectively, reports as follows:
 
           1.    The Committee noted from the report tabled by the Minister
              for Justice and Constitutional Development that the
              Magistrates Commission on 23 August 2007 and 29 October 2007,
              respectively, resolved to recommend the removal from office
              of Mr Matyolo in terms of section 13(4)(a)(i) of the
              Magistrates Act, 1993 and determined to withhold his
              remuneration in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Act.
 
           2.    The Committee noted that the Minister for Justice and
              Constitutional Development has, in terms of section 13(4)(a)
              of the Magistrates Act, 1993, suspended Mr Matyolo from
              office on 27 September 2007.
 
           3.    The  Committee further noted that Mr Matyolo has been
              absent from office since 5 June 2007 without leave or any
              other valid reason and that in terms of regulation 34(1) of
              the Regulations for Judicial Officers in the Lower Courts he,
              in the circumstances, is deemed to have absconded and as such
              he made himself guilty of misconduct. All efforts to trace
              him were unsuccessful.
 
           4.    In terms of section 13(4)(c) and 13(4A)(c) of the
              Magistrates Act, 1993, Parliament must, as soon as is
              reasonably possible pass a resolution as to whether or not –

              (a)      the restoration of Mr Matyolo to his office is
                   recommended; and
              (b)      the determination to withhold Mr Matyolo’s
                   remuneration  is confirmed, either with or without
                   amendment, or set aside.
 
           5.    The Select Committee therefore recommends that the Council
              resolves –


              (a)      not to restore Mr Matyolo to his office in terms of
                   section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993; and (b)to
                   confirm the determination by the Magistrates Commission
                   to withhold Mr Matyolo's remuneration in terms of section
                   13(4A)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

Report to be considered


                          TUESDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 20 November
         2007:


        (a)      Public Service Amendment Bill [B 31B – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).


        (b)      Rental Housing Amendment Bill [B 30B – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).

2.    Bills referred to Mediation Committee

    (1)     Bill, as amended by National Assembly, and rejected by National
        Council of Provinces on 20 November 2007, referred to Mediation
        Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(2)(b):


         (a)      Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19D – 2006 (Reprint)]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council
    1.     Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 20 November 2007:


         (a)      South African Judicial Education Institute Bill [B 4B –
             2007] (National Assembly– sec 75.


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.


          b) Judicial Services Commission Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.


2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled


    1.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:

          a) Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the
             Republic of Mozambique for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
             the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
             Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
             1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the
             Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Mozambique for the
             Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
             Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      1991 Amendments to the Convention on the International
             Maritime Organisation (IMO), 1948, tabled in terms of section
             231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the 1991 Amendments to the
             Convention on the International Maritime Organisation (IMO),
             1948.

        (c)      International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-
             Fouling Systems on Ships, 2001, tabled in terms of section
             231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention on
             the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling Systems on Ships.

COMMITTEE REPORTS



   National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour  and  Public  Enterprises  on
    the Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38B –  2007]  (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 20 November 2007:

       The Select  Committee  on  Labour  and  Public  Enterprises,  having
       considered the subject of the  Electronic  Communications  Amendment
       Bill [B 38B- 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it  and
       classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism  as  a  section  75  Bill,
       reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Children’s
    Amendment Bill [B19D-2006 (Reprint)] (National Council of Provinces –
    sec 76 (2) (including textual corrections), dated 20 November 2007:

       The Select Committee on Social Services considered  the  subject  of
       the Children’s Amendment Bill  [B19D  –  2006  (Reprint)]  (National
       Council of Provinces – sec 76 (2)) (including  textual  corrections)
       referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging  Mechanism  as  a
       section 76 (2) Bill, reports that it has rejected the Bill.

 3. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Adjustment
    Appropriation Bill [B 41 – 2007] (National Assembly sec 77), dated 20
    November 2007:


       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined  the
       Adjustment Appropriation Bill [B 41  – 2007]  (National  Assembly  –
       sec 77), referred  to  it,  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
       Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

 4. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws Amendment
    Bill [B 42 – 2007] (National Assembly sec 77), dated 20 November 2007:


       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined  the
       Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 42  – 2007] (National Assembly –  sec
       77), referred to it, and classified by the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism
       as a Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

 5.   Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws  Second
    Amendment Bill [B 43 – 2007]  (National  Assembly  sec  75),  dated  20
    November 2007:

       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined  the
       Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 43 – 2007] (National  Assembly
       – sec 75), referred to it,  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
       Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill, reports that it has  agreed  to  the
       Bill.

 6.   Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Securities  Transfer
    Bill [B 44 – 2007] (National Assembly sec 77), dated 20 November 2007:


      The Select Committee on Finance, having considered  and  examined  the
      Securities Transfer Bill [B 44 – 2007] (National Assembly –  sec  77),
      referred to it, and classified by the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a
      money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


 7.   Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Securities  Transfer
    Tax Administration Bill [B 45 – 2007] (National Assembly sec 75), dated
    20 November 2007:

       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined  the
       Securities Transfer Tax Administration Bill [B 45 – 2007]  (National
       Assembly – sec 75), referred to it,  and  classified  by  the  Joint
       Tagging Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill, reports that it  has  agreed
       to the Bill.


 8.   Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the  Convention  between
    the Republic of South  Africa  and  the  Republic  Mozambique  for  the
    avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion  with
    respect to taxes on income, dated 20 November 2007:

      The Select Committee on Finance, having  considered  the  request  for
      approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Republic of South
      Africa and the Republic of Mozambique  for  the  Avoidance  of  Double
      Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
      Income, recommends that the Council, in terms of section  231  (2)  of
      the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

Report to be considered.


