---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 20 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-03-20
---

TUESDAY, 20 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                ANNOUNCEMENT

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I hereby wish to
welcome all the Ministers and Deputy Ministers present in the House today.
Please do feel welcome.

I have a request from the Minister of Education that she would like to be
the first to respond to her questions due to other commitments. Thereafter
we shall follow the questions as printed on the Order Paper.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Mr Wenchong Chen)

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Ngiyabonga, Sekela laMgcinisihlalo.
Ngiphakamisa lesishukumiso lesingakabikwa ngaphambili:

  Kutsi leNdlu –


    1) ivakalisa buhlungu bayo kanye nemndeni weliLunga laleNdlu, umhlon Su
       Huei Chen, ngekusishiya kweyise longu-Wenchong Chen lotawufihlwa
       ngalemphelasontfo lelandzelako, mhla tingu 24 March 2007;


    2) icaphela nekutsi umngcwabo utawusukela kaDoves Funeral Parlour, 10
       Jorissen Street, eBraamfontein ngelihora lemfica ekuseni;


    3) inaka nekutsi kutabe kungumsebenti wemndeni bese kutsi umphakatsi
       uvumeleke kutsi ube mdzibi munye nemndeni kusukela ngelihora
       lelishumi kuze kushaye lihora leli-11;


    4) itsi-ke kumndeni wakaChen, netihlobo tabo kanye nalabasedvutane nabo,
       abatfole kucina eGameni leNkhosi kulesikhatsi lesimatima kangaka
       etimphilweni tabo.


   Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Siswati motion of condolence follows.)
[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE  COUNCIL:  Thank  you,  Deputy  Chairperson.  I  move
without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) conveys its sadness at the death of the father of a member of this
       House, Ms Su Huei Chen, Mr Wenchong Chen, who will be buried this
       weekend, on 24 March 2007;


  (2) notes that the funeral will take place at Doves Funeral Parlour, at 10
       Jorissen Street, Braamfontein, at 9:00 am;


  (3) further takes note that this will be a family affair until 10:00 am,
       when the community will be allowed to join until 11:00 am;


  (4) expresses our sympathy to the Chen family, relatives and close friends
       and wishes them peace in the name of the Lord during these sad times
       in their lives.]

Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon Chief
Whip. Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr D A WORTH: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry to rise on that motion, but the
Chief Whip has got it wrong; it’s not Bloemfontein but Braamfontein,
Johannesburg. I think the message got to him incorrectly.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I said Braamfontein.

Mr D A WORTH: You said Bloemfontein!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you. That’s
enough. Is there any objection to the motion?

HON MEMBERS: No!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

             EXTENSION OF THE PROCLAMATION PERIOD IN THE GAZETTE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, now I understand that the
interpretation changed Braamfontein to Bloemfontein. [Laughter.]

Deputy Chairperson, I move that the Council gives its consent that the
President, by proclamation in the Gazette, extend the period of operation
of sections 51 and 52 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, Act 105 of 1997,
in terms of section 53 (2) of the said Act for a further period of two
years, with effect from 1 May 2007. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, Chief
Whip. As there is no speakers’ list we shall now proceed to the voting on
the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr D G MKONO: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr c j Van Rooyen: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: We support.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J TOLO: We agree.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr m a sulliman: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Re ya e amogela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): The number of
provinces who voted in favour is nine. I therefore declare the motion
agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY
                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:

       Compensation for schools using own resources to employ teachers

19.   Ms J F Terblanche asked the Minister of Education:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the fact that some schools  use  their  own
           resources in order to employ extra teachers, she has  considered
           a policy to compensate such schools with fee exemptions; if  so,
           what are the relevant details; if not, why not;

      (2)   whether any steps are being taken to ensure that these schools
           are not negatively affected; if not, what is the position in
           this regard; if so, what steps?              C533E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, in response to part (1) of Question
19 in part 1, I respond as follows: I have directed the Department of
Education to develop a draft policy that would seek to support schools that
encourage the access of the poor. I refer in this way to schools that fall
within those quintiles that currently do not enjoy the status of nonfee-
paying schools.

However, there are such schools which enrol high proportions of nonfee-
paying learners and that may from time to time require support from the
state. I anticipate that this policy would be ready for public consultation
by September.

With respect to the second part of the question, the intention of a no-fee
school is to ensure that, beginning with our poorest parents – parents who
will be relieved of paying school fees – we began with our poorest
quintiles last year. Of course, we have addressed this policy and we seek
to ensure that we do not compromise in any way the adequacy of school
funding.

So, we would hope that we can begin moving towards a situation where no
child whose parents find it difficult to pay financial costs for education
is denied their constitutional right. Current fee-paying schools need to
ensure that they set school fees at levels that are affordable to the
communities that they serve. It is important for us to state that it is not
us as government who determine the fee levels for fee-paying schools. It is
in fact parents, in a properly constituted parent meeting, that should, as
a majority, agree to the fee levels of a particular school.

I would like parents in such meetings to ask that an itemised budget is
provided for them so that they ensure that the fees they pay are not being
utilised for frills, but are actually serving to enhance the educational
opportunity of their children. Thank you.
Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Deputy Chair, I would just like to ask whether the
Minister is aware of any instances where schools that have been declared
fee-free have not had money allocated to them by provinces yet, and are
therefore left without income. If so, were steps taken to resolve the
problem?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, yes, such instances, as I have been
informed by my department, have arisen. In my view it is both a failure of
the provinces to act on agreements that we reached in the Council of
Education Ministers, and, secondly, as the national department we haven’t
put the proper monitoring procedures in place.

However, we have to indicate that provinces freely began the implementation
of the policy in 2007 and therefore it was a small number - 20% of schools
- that had been identified.

The third point that one must make is of course that the budgets that are
provided to schools are for a full financial year and not for a calendar
year. So, hon member, a school should not be running out of money this
December. Funding should be available until the end of the financial year
for all public institutions, which is 31 March.

     Steps to improve school performance in North West and Eastern Cape
                          Departments of Education
20.   Ms D Robinson asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether, in light of the recent statements by the North West and
      Eastern Cape Departments of Education (details furnished), she has had
      any discussions with these departments in order to determine the (a)
      reasons for these low pass rates and (b) steps that can be taken to
      improve school performance; if not, why not; if so, what were the
      outcomes of the discussions? C534E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, with respect to question 20, the
reply is as follows. I’m asked, first of all, what the reasons are for the
low pass rate. Well - this is with respect to the North West and Eastern
Cape provinces - there was a 4% increase in the North West pass rate in
2006. However, it is my view and that of the MEC in the North West province
that there remains much room for improvement.

In January, the department of the North West province held a two-day indaba
reflecting on the performance of their Grade 12 students, and reviewing
departmental strategies which had strangely enough led to an improvement,
but one that is still regarded as not good enough.

The department adopted a number of strategies, one of which importantly
focuses on much closer monitoring and support for underperforming schools;
another focuses on extending the learner participation programme, and there
is a leadership mentoring programme for the leadership of schools in the
province.

The Eastern Cape was also one of the provinces in which we had an
improvement, and again, although the province is one of the weaker
provinces in terms of the education family, we still see some progress. I
did not, as a colleague, members would be aware, approve of the recent
decision by the province to promote learners who had failed the Grade 11
exams. I have made my position perfectly clear on the support that these
learners must get if they are to succeed in their matric year as the
department, I believe, seems to anticipate.

I have not been given any information as to the new strategies for matric
improvement in the Eastern Cape. However, we have had the experience, as
the department, of working very closely in the national intervention with
the Eastern Cape department. There is a new head of department, a new
member of the executive council in place in that province, and I have been
assured that we will see radical improvement in the educational performance
of that department.

As for part (b) of the question, I do place great store on the importance
of principals in improving schools. The department has developed an entry
qualification, as I have indicated to members before, for school
principals. We will begin implementing that particular programme this year.

The programme has a number of modules dealing with school management
matters. One of these modules focuses on failing principals, essentially
those who are not succeeding in academic leadership of their schools. It
allows for redeployment of such persons within the education system. We
have seen this being done in a very positive way in Delmas in Mpumalanga,
where we have seen massive improvement in underperforming schools.

Non-performing principals would be redeployed if they do not improve after
being taken through a support programme. We have of course specified with
them performance targets that we believe they must achieve. We will
continue working closely with them, but we cannot allow a situation where
there is constant mediocrity and underperformance. It is important that we,
as the department, act decisively in such situations and rescue our
children from mediocrity and underperformance.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: The Minister touched on performance targets. I would
just like to know, with regard to schools that have zero matric pass rates,
if specific requirements have been set for this year and what the
consequences will be if those requirements have not been met?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Each province is working on a strategy. I have
indicated that we must all seek to achieve a minimum of 70%, both
nationally and within our schools. I think that an average performance
would be 50%. I think below that it is really unacceptable. It is at that
point that, really, we should begin to take fairly vigorous action as the
various departments.

We are working on a school-to-school basis because the reasons might not
merely lie in the performance. There are other factors, for example we
might not have sufficient numbers of teachers, and textbooks might not have
reached the schools. We have such situations today - those unacceptable
gaps in the administrative performance by provincial departments of
education, and the absence of support by district offices. These need to be
addressed by our senior administrators so that indeed we support our
schools to succeed.

 Policies to encourage use of Further Education and Training institutions as
                      preferred suppliers for training

22.   Mr C J van Rooyen asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether her department has developed any policies to encourage (a)
      national and (b) provincial departments to consider Further Education
      and Training (FET) institutions as their preferred suppliers for
      training; if not, why  not; if so, what are the advantages to the (i)
      FET, (ii) national and (iii) provincial departments?
                                                   C538E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson. Firstly, we have not
developed any specific policy to encourage FET colleges to be utilised as
preferred suppliers for training. However, our provincial and national
departments do use colleges as their preferred suppliers from time to time.
For example, they send their staff to attend our office administration
courses and financial management courses and the tourism department has on
occasion used the tourism programmes for training their staff.

The advantage of the colleges for providing training to national and
provincial government departments, and particularly for offering workplace
opportunities within provincial and national departments, is that our
students are then guaranteed workplace opportunities.

All members would be aware of the difficulties we often have in that we can
do the theoretical training, but the practical workplace experience is not
always available. If this partnership can develop, then our students will
have the opportunity for workplace training. Moreover, if it is government
departments that use our FET colleges, they are then, in partnership, able
to specify the nature and the content of training that they would wish to
receive.

The FET colleges are spread out throughout the country in over 140
campuses. I have provided the NCOP with a list of the various and many
programmes of the FET colleges which can be accessed at the various
colleges and be accessed by members of this House, should they wish to do
some of our very exciting programmes. I have also provided the secretary
with a list of names and addresses and specific particulars of 50 colleges
throughout the country.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Question 42 is from the hon ... That is Question
42 I have. Are we on Question 23?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Yes, Question 23.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I don’t have a Question 23.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mr C J van Rooyen is to ask the
Minister.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Let me see.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon Van Rooyen!

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, that question was actually for a written
reply. I don’t know how it ... [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I actually responded to that question by way of
a written reply.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Sorry, Minister. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I was a little surprised to see it appearing as
a question for oral reply. I have provided the hon member with all the up-
to-date data and I have provided him with statistics of various
institutions, the equity targets and whether or not and how they have been
met. So, I don’t know whether the hon member wishes me to repeat what I
wrote – but my answer is as I wrote it. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Minister. We
apologise for that.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): We then ask you to continue with
Question 42.

   Introduction of uniform standards and norms for regulating tuition fees

42.   Mr T S Setona asked the Minister of Education:
      What progress has been made with regard to introducing uniform
      standards and norms for regulating tuition fees in higher institutions
      of learning?                                                  C559E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson. I proceed therefore to
Question 42 from the hon Setona concerning the introduction of uniform
standards and norms for regulating tuition fees in higher institutions of
learning.

I do remain concerned, as I have said in the National Assembly – the Other
House where a similar question was posed - at the rate by which the fees of
some of our universities are increasing. I have encouraged our vice
chancellors, through their representative body, Hesa, or Higher Education
South Africa, to set fee increases that are moderate and reasonable and to
really consider the rationale for the kinds of increases we’ve seen in the
past few years. However, I must state again that it is the responsibility,
legally, of higher education institutions to determine their own tuition
fees. Therefore, currently no uniform norms and standards are contemplated
by me.

What we have done, as members would be aware following the Budget Speech by
the Minister of Finance, is to significantly improve our funding to higher
education, given that there had been a significant gap between their needs
and the resources that we were providing through the national subsidy. The
change we’ve had of greatly improved financing will, I hope, influence
consideration in a positive manner of the need to really try and control
the level of increases. But, we don’t anticipate regulating at this time.

 Abolition of multigrade schools, and model for the provisioning of teachers
                               to such schools

43.   Mr B J Tolo asked the Minister of Education:

      (1)   Whether she intends abolishing multigrade schools; if  so,  what
           are the relevant details; if not,

      (2)   whether a different model for the provisioning of teachers to
           these schools will be applied; if not, what is the position in
           this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                        C561E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: This is a question from the hon Tolo concerning
multigrade schools and whether we intend abolishing them and applying a
model for provisioning of teachers to these schools - and I would think
other schools are being contemplated. With respect to abolishing such
schools, my answer is: No, I don’t intend to do so at this time, they are
needed in the areas where they are located.

With respect to the post provisioning model, currently I believe that the
model does try to give credence and recognition to multigrade teaching,
which often takes place in very small schools - sometimes with five, seven
or eight children - and it is therefore difficult for us to justify
providing more than one teacher.

The duty of the education departments is to ensure that they can in fact
provide sufficient numbers of teachers to address the broad needs of
children in such schools, but their primary duty is to ensure that we keep
the ratios down in very large schools, which we have a great number of, in
order to ensure that the educator-learner ratios are not excessive. We are
concerned about the larger schools, but in the multigrades scenario we do,
where we have resources, try to ensure that we provide adequate numbers of
teachers.

I am looking at revising the post provisioning norms. I am not happy with
the way the norms work. They were, of course, constructed in an era in
which we didn’t have a national curriculum; so we didn’t have clear
national learning areas, and we didn’t have clear subject domains. We now
do; we have a national curriculum in operation from Grade 1 to Grade 11,
and from next year it will be in the whole school system. Therefore, I
think the time has come to address the revision of the post provisioning
norms, and members will be alerted once we have formulated our policy.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We thank the
Minister for her valuable information given to the House. We know that she
has to leave now because of other commitments. Hon Minister, you are
relieved. Thank you.

         Development and alienation of plot in Bethlehem, Free State

17.   Mr D A Worth asked the Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


      (1)   Whether a certain plot (details furnished) in Bethlehem  in  the
           Free State will be developed; if so, (a) what (i) is the  nature
           of and (ii) amount budgeted for this development  and  (b)  when
           will the development be completed; if not,

      (2)   Whether it will be alienated; if not, what is the position in
           this regard; if so, what are the relevant details? C531E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Deputy Chair, the
answer to question 17 is as follows. The responsibility for control over
the development of the plot referred to falls outside the responsibilities
assigned by law to the Department of Provincial and Local Government and
our Ministry. Section 92 of our Constitution provides that the only
questions the Minister should respond to are those falling within the scope
of the powers and functions assigned by law to the Deputy President and the
Ministry.

Consequently, the hon member is advised to redirect the question to the
appropriate authorities.

      Measures to protect health staff against extremely drug-resistant
                                tuberculosis
18.   Mr A Watson asked the Minister of Health:


      Whether any measures have been taken to protect health staff in public
      hospitals against extremely drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR TB)
      infection; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what
      measures?                                          C532E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Chairperson and members, the answer
is as follows. A number of measures have been taken to protect health staff
against extreme drug-resistant TB infection. Some of these are not specific
to staff only, but are generally meant to avoid infection of both patients
and staff.

All patients who have been identified as having multidrug-resistant TB and
extreme drug-resistant TB are being kept in separate isolated wards. In
those wards, only staff who are experienced in handling TB and extreme drug-
resistant TB are allowed to work there. General infection-control measures
such as proper ventilation, extractor fans and ultraviolet gamma radiation
lights are being put in place.

Staff are being provided with personal protection equipment such as N95
respiratory masks. This applies to all staff who work in high-risk areas,
such as outpatient department examination rooms and isolation wards for TB
patients. Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for that answer. I
am very glad to hear that these systems have been put in place. I would
like to ask the Deputy Minister: We all know that systems only stand and
fall by the way they are implemented and controlled; is anyone specifically
being tasked at the various institutions to ensure that the systems are
properly working and that the equipment issued to staff is being used?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you, hon member, for your concern. I
must state once again that the Minister of Health has instituted a plan
which is called the “TB Crisis Plan”. This plan identifies certain parts of
our country where there is a particular risk in terms of an increase in TB
cases.

In relation to the outbreak of extreme drug-resistant TB, extraordinary
measures are being taken in support of our programme in conjunction with
the WHO. Right now, we are fine-tuning our activities and indeed we are
watching this very closely as the national Ministry of Health.

A week ago, the Acting Minister was being briefed about what is happening
in each and every one of those areas that have reported an increase in the
number of extreme drug-resistant TB cases. We are keeping a regular record
of what is happening. Are there any new cases? Are they responding to
treatment? Are the patients sticking to treatment? This is an issue that is
on the radar screen and we are making sure that we are doing everything to
support all the hospitals to make sure that they put these plans in place
and implement them.

      Average length of short-term expanded public works projects, and
        effectiveness thereof iro skills development and job creation

21.   Ms D Robinson asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   What is the average length of  the  short-term  expanded  public
           works projects mentioned in his recent interview with a  certain
           newspaper on 17 February 2007 (copy furnished);

      (2)   whether these projects are effective with regard to (a) skills
           development and (b) job creation in the long term; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details?   C535E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, Chairperson. The
reply is as follows. With regard to the first part of the question, the
average duration of work opportunities in the social sector of the Expanded
Public Works Programme, or EPWP, is between 18 and 24 months. This includes
a period of training towards a National Qualifications Framework
certificate.

With regard to 2(a), currently the EPWP in the social sector has focused on
early childhood development and home community-based care as areas in great
need of service provision. The enforcement of quality standards through
accreditation was not strictly applied before. This is now mandatory within
the EPWP, and includes other quality assurance measures. Thus, the work
opportunity also includes a learning period required for someone in the
EPWP to emerge with an accredited training qualification aligned to the
National Qualifications Framework. The short learning period is for skills
training that does not result in a qualification. During the period of
training the learners are paid stipends. Caregivers and early childhood
development workers can continue learning and training to become nurses and
teachers.

With regard to the second part of the question, which is about job creation
in the long term, a process is under way to identify some EPWP jobs that
could be made into permanent work opportunities, such as jobs for
caregivers and early childhood development workers.

The social sector is one of the few EPWP work sectors that hold the
potential to create sustainable work opportunities. Several studies
undertaken by or on behalf of the sector attest to this potential. But, as
I’ve said, the process is still under way to identify which of these jobs
could become permanent work opportunities.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Thank you, Chairperson. While job creation is intended
in the long run and the process is still under way, I would like to know in
the meantime: Has the Minister presented the basic income grant as an
alternative to the short-term expanded public works projects to any Cabinet
meetings? And what have been the consequences of such presentations,
because I think it could assist when people have actually done the skills
courses and there are no jobs for them available at present if in the
meantime, while they are waiting for job opportunities to open, they get
basic income grants?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Chairperson, the answer
is: No.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Madam Chairperson, if the answer is no, I would like to
know why. If they can basically support people who have no other income
with the basic income grant and help them live above the breadline, why
hasn’t it been presented to Cabinet?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Chair, I think the hon
member is entitled to her opinion. But that remains an opinion. The basic
income grant is something that has not been considered by Cabinet at this
stage. It doesn’t mean that it won’t be considered at any future stage, but
as she herself has heard in the state of the nation address, there is a
whole range of options that are being investigated for people with no
income and even for people with income.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Madam Chair, I know I am entitled to my own opinion but
I would like the Minister to ask why it wasn’t addressed. I know there are
different things that the President has addressed in his state of the
nation address, but why didn’t this department address the issue of the
basic income grant?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Madam Deputy Chairperson, on a point
of order: From my reading of the initial question, it does appear that the
question of the basic income grant is a completely new question. The hon
member has no right to present it as completely independent and separate
from the initial one. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Chairperson, I would agree
with the hon member, but I really don’t see the point of a member of the
opposition asking why we are not addressing something when in fact, as I
said, we are addressing a range of issues. People are receiving grants.
Government as a whole is not at this stage intending to give everybody a
basic income grant, but there is a whole package of services.

So, we are opting for something, and I think that as government it is
within our rights to opt for certain policy options and not for others.
Therefore, it doesn’t make sense to me that a member of the opposition is
asking why we haven’t done so. The question is no, we haven’t done so. In
fact, we have considered it and we have opted for a different set of policy
options. It doesn’t mean that we won’t do so in the future. So, I think
that that is the answer. She is not going to get more than that. Thank you.


       Resolution of problems between Bi-Water and Bushbuckridge Water

24.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:

      Whether the problems between Bi-Water and Bushbuckridge Water in
      Mbombela, Mpumalanga, have been resolved; if not, why not; if so, what
      are the relevant details?                                C541E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chairperson, I’ve been asked
to answer this question. I would also just appeal to the members that since
the Department of Social Development is not an expert on water affairs, it
would be difficult for me to answer supplementary questions.

The reply to the question is as follows. The dispute is not between Bi-
Water and Bushbuckridge Water. It is rather between Bushbuckridge Water
Board and Mbombela Local Municipality, the latter being the water services
authority in the area, and it relates to the termination of a contract of
water services provision that existed between Bushbuckridge Water and
Mbombela Local Municipality.

Bushbuckridge Water Board took the matter to court and the court ordered
that the status quo be maintained and effectively instructed the parties to
find a solution outside of court.

Bushbuckridge Water Board is continuing to deliver water services in the
area.

Since then the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has met with the
parties more than once and has been playing a mediation role with a view to
finding an amicable solution. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, as a disciplined member of this House, I
would adhere to the request by my hon Minister that I must not shoot any
follow-up questions because she might not be able to go any further in
response to those follow-up questions. But I would give notice that I will
submit the question in another form. I know that the Minister would be
there to respond to those questions because there would be a lot in the
answer. Thank you very much.

   Municipalities in Mpumalanga without permanent Chief Financial Officers
25.   Ms F Nyanda asked the Minister for Provincial and Local Government:

      (a) How many municipalities in Mpumalanga (i) are without a Chief
      Financial Officer (CFO) and (ii) have acting CFOs and (b) when will
      permanent CFOs be appointed?                             C542E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: The answer to
Question 25 is that this Question was published in the Internal Question
Paper on 12 March 2007. Thus far, the department has been given very little
time to procure the required information.

However, all the municipalities in Mpumalanga have been requested to
provide us with updated information on this matter. Upon receipt of the
information, it will be passed on to the hon member. Thank you.

Mr Z C NTULI: Hon Deputy Minister, we are having a problem, generally, in
the country with the chief financial officers, or CFOs. We want to find out
why we have so many acting chief financial officers. Can we have just one
reason why whenever we go to these municipalities we find that there is a
different person who is acting? Can we find out what the core reason is?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: As I said towards
the end of my reply, as soon as we have this information we will forward it
to the hon member.
What is taking place at local government level is that there is a lack of
capacity in terms of particularly senior management, and that is why we
actually embarked on Project Consolidate to try and rectify the scenario at
local government level.

What we are also saying is that it is not only the chief executive officers
- CEOs - but we have municipal managers who are also acting and we are
trying very hard as provincial and local government to rectify all those
situations. As I said earlier on, we will forward the information as soon
as it is available to the hon member.

Mr A WATSON: Is the Deputy Minister telling us that despite the fact that
there should be regular management meetings - interactions between the
Minister and the MECs - her department does not, from time to time, become
aware of the situation at municipalities with regard to senior staff,
thereby not being able to reply to that question?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: I’ll accept the
advice. Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: No, I object. That was not an answer. The Minister is treating
this House with absolute contempt. I’ll ask the question and you’ll allow
the question. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Watson, can I
call you to order, please! She has answered ... [Interjections.]

I am in the Chair. Thank you, Mr Krumbock!

Mr A WATSON: On a point of order: The Minister didn’t answer. She said she
would accept my advice. I didn’t give her any advice. I am not paid to give
her advice. I’m paid to do oversight.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Watson, will you
please sit down! The Minister has answered your question. Her answer was
whether she’ll take your advice or not. [Interjections.]

Mr Krumbock, I’m not going to allow you to get into that. Thank you very
much. Will you please sit down? Will you please sit down!

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: On a point of order: The Minister has not answered the
question. You are misdirecting yourself. Is there no democracy in this
House?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Will you please sit
down for the last time?

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: On a point of order: The member in this House is
allowed, according to the Rules, to raise a point of order and you’ve just
told the member from the DA to sit down and he couldn’t raise a point of
order, and that is not ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): He has already
raised his point of order, and I’m not going to argue with you again. Will
you please sit down? I think I’m in the Chair. Thank you very much.
[Interjections.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I know that you are the Chairperson. But who is allowed
to rise on a point of order?

   Review of Government’s position on allowing officials to participate in
                             Bargaining Council

26.   Mr A J L Moseki asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      Whether the Government will review its position to allow officials
      from departments such as the Department of Correctional Services to
      participate in the Bargaining Council; if not, why not; if so, when?
                                              C543E
The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson and
members of this House, in relation to the particular question, I would like
to indicate that there are different levels and structures of bargaining in
the Public Service.

At the national level is the Public Service Co-ordinating Bargaining
Council. At the sectoral level, we have the Education Labour Relations
Council, the Safety and Security Bargaining Council, the Public Health and
Welfare Sector Bargaining Council, and the General Public Service Sector
Bargaining Council.

Then, at a third level, which is the departmental level, we have
departmental chambers. There is a chamber for each national department, and
each province. At a national level, the employer team is led by the
Department of Public Service and Administration, and this team is assisted
by representatives from all provinces, from national departments
representing various sectors and from other national departments in terms
of numbers such as Correctional Services and the SA National Defence Force.

At a sectoral level, there is of course, according to the various sectors,
the employer side being led by the relevant national department.

As far as the National Bargaining Chamber is concerned, at that level, as I
indicated earlier, we lead the negotiations – that’s the Department of
Public Service and Administration – with representatives from provinces and
the two other departments that are indicated.

It would not be feasible or practical to include representatives from all
departments in the employer’s negotiating teams either in the PSCBC or the
GPSSBC, as it would entail negotiating teams in excess of 100
representatives. Thanks.

Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for that response. I
just want to indicate that, last November, we were doing oversight work in
the North West province and our interaction with officials from that
department is referred to in the question. A complaint or grievance that we
came across was that these officials feel that they have been misplaced in
terms of the Bargaining Council. That’s what they said to us as a
committee. They are treated like any other civil servants in the
government.

Their feeling is that they should be placed in the relevant bargaining
council, which is the Safety and Security Bargaining Council. This is the
view that they expressed. We probed further as they raised that matter.
They said that one of the reasons that they are losing so many officials in
that department is because they are not placed in the relevant bargaining
council. It became a concern to the committee.

I heard the response that you gave. Will the Minister, at a national level,
consider that the Correctional Services officials should be placed in the
relevant bargaining council? Thank you very much.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I
would actually have come up with a different reason for loss of officials
in that particular department. I cannot see it linked to the bargaining
council in any way whatsoever.

If you look at the representation in the general Public Service Co-
ordinating Bargaining Council, when we go into bargaining, we take into
account the specifics of every sector. When you look at the security sector
bargaining council, in many instances one would argue that the sectoral
bargaining council’s positions are drawn on from the central bargaining
chamber in any event.

I think those of us who have a broader appreciation of the importance of
centrality and decentralisation in instances would argue that if you are in
the central one, your ability to engage and bargain is even greater than
when you go to the sectoral chamber, because you are able to influence
particular bargaining positions at a central level.

I would want to repeat, once again, that I don’t think the loss of
officials has got anything to do with the Bargaining Council. I could give
a list of other reasons, but that is an issue for a different debate on a
different day. Thanks.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I would like to find out from the Minister
whether, if we were using a single Public Service, they would be any
different than what Mr Moseki has mentioned.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: That’s a very
interesting question, and it’s an issue of interest for every trade
unionist in this country, in particular those at local government level. I
am not going to make assumptions around any lobbying going on at any level.

I do want to say that we will still retain sectoral bargaining chambers,
because as we talk about a single Public Service, we are not talking about
a uniformity that will preclude the need for flexibility when you look at
various sectors. What we are looking at is standardisation that is
required, but when we come to bargaining, we will indeed continue with
sectoral bargaining chamber arrangements because each sector does have
particular peculiarities of an occupational nature that will need to be
taken into consideration. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, arising from the Minister’s reply, based
on the experience of many of the officials who were serving in these
departments under question, immediately when they leave these departments
to join the SA Police Service, for example, they become senior to their
equals who remained in the Correctional Services department. Their actions
are based again on the reason that the salaries of SAPS officials, for
example, are higher than those in Correctional Services. Will the Minister
review or consider their desire or request to be taken back to the security
bargaining council, as it is their desire, their wish and their request?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I
think we should just recall that if we look at the last financial year,
there was a special dispensation that was created for the SA Police
Service. This dispensation was one that was referred to by the President in
the state of the nation address when he said that we would review the
remuneration of the SA Police Service. That particular increase was an
increase that was over and above that which was agreed to in the general
bargaining chamber.

At this particular point in time, we are looking at the overall
remuneration and conditions of service of the Department of Correctional
Services. I think that, indeed, there may well be a future consideration of
what’s considered quite logical in terms of the location of corrections in
the Safety and Security Sector Bargaining Council.

But, as I earlier cautioned members, we should not see that particular
dispensation and conflate it with what could be considered as
dissatisfaction or loss of officials in a particular department or sector.
One is noting the kinds of concerns that are being raised. Thanks.

     Review of practice of outsourcing recruitment of departmental staff

32.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:


      Whether her department will review or discourage the practice of some
      departments to outsource the recruitment of staff to private entities;
      if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                               C549E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much, Chairperson. In terms of the particular question that has been asked,
I should state first and foremost that in terms of the Public Service Act
of 1994 the appointment of any person, or the promotion of any employee in
the employ of a department must be made by the relevant executing authority
or by an employee to whom the said authority has been delegated.

Very clearly, recruitment of personnel to the Public Service is based on
the principle of open competition, equitable access and merit-based
appointments, the requirement of representivity notwithstanding.
Open competition requires that posts are appropriately advertised and
publicised to ensure that candidates from the broadest pool are afforded
the opportunity to apply for posts in the service of the state. The Public
Service Regulations of 2001, as amended, enable an executing authority to
utilise an appropriate agency to identify candidates for posts as long as
the advertising and selection procedures comply with regulations 7(c) and
(d). These regulations, inter alia, require that a selection committee be
used to make recommendations on the appointments to posts and it’s
mandatory that the chairperson of the selection committee be an employee.

Furthermore, before making a decision on an appointment or filling of a
post, an executing authority must satisfy himself or herself that the
candidate qualifies in all respects for the post and that his or her claims
in his or her application for the post have been verified, and record in
writing that verification.

In short, we don’t encourage the practice of headhunting, but it is one
measure that can be used following the correct criteria. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister. Just before I take a
follow-up question, an announcement has been made that the Minister
requested to deal with all her questions because of other engagements.

In future, can I just indicate that before we take such a decision we’ll
have to talk to other Ministers as well, because they might also have other
engagements. So we’ll formalise this thing before we give such permission.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, arising from my eloquent Minister’s reply,
based on what we were told by some departments in the peace and security
cluster, they have considered the exercise to be an expensive one. As they
have said, it was a pilot project as far as they were concerned.

Is this not implying that as government we’re unable to train our own
officials who can efficiently recruit, advertise and select qualified
people to be employed in the service to save the money that departments
acceded to, as they have agreed that what they were doing now, by involving
these agencies, was very expensive? Can’t we consider that, hon Minister?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Yes, thank you,
Chairperson, I do want to say that using headhunting companies is the
exception rather than the rule, because indeed it is an expensive exercise
and you’ve got to present a special motivation to indicate why you need to
use a headhunting company when it comes to appointments to particular
posts. The general practice occurs in instances at the level of senior
management or specialist positions where it is not easy to obtain such
candidates through the open market.

I do want to say, once again, that at the end of the day the actual
appointment process is done by officials and the executing authority. In
instances where the executing authority is not involved, it happens
according to the delegation of that particular authority, but it is not the
rule, and I would indeed be interested to pursue and appreciate the context
which is being referred to today. Thank you.

Mr B J TOLO: Thank you, Chair. You will rule me out of order if you think
the follow-up question I’m going to ask is out of order, but Chair, it is
suggested that it takes about eight months for a government department to
actually advertise and appoint a person in the Public Service.

Is this because there is no capacity in the departments to do this within a
short space of time, or is it because of this outsourcing? Because this
also affects not only highly skilled people, but ordinary people, even
matriculants sometimes who are just loitering in the street. We are
employing them within eight months. Why is it taking such a long time for
government to do this when we are saying as government that we want to
fight poverty, we are fighting unemployment, but it takes the government
departments eight months to employ? I think it is a very long time. Thank
you.
The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you,
Chairperson, I would agree with the hon member that it is an inordinately
long time and it is unacceptably long, because the prescripts and
regulatory framework indicate you should not take that long. That means
that there is a problem in the human resource and corporate management
section of that department. I don’t think we must find other excuses. It’s
got nothing to do with what’s called outsourcing. There is nothing like
outsourcing appointments in government. It is just not done.

I had indicated that in certain instances headhunting companies may be used
to assist in the process of appointments in one department where there has
been a particular problem because of the extent of the problem and the need
to, within a short space of time, fill an inordinate number of vacancies.
That’s where we are looking at some collaboration with a human resource
company, but that’s because of extraordinary circumstances. It’s a
department where there’s been a serious problem. There’s been an
investigation and an identification of the problem, and indeed in the area
of human resource management and corporate services this problem was
identified and pointed out, but that is being done under the leadership of
the management of that department or the interim management and under the
guidance of the executing authority. But I do want to say it is not the
norm to take a period of eight months. There is a management problem when
that does happen.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA : Arising from the Minister’s reply, can we be assured
that from now onwards we’ll see some change?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, you
can’t see change when the practice is not part of the regulatory
environment. You can only see a change if there is a trend and I have tried
to persuade members of this House that outsourcing is not the norm and that
where it may have happened - and I would not even have used the term
“outsourcing” - it’s been the exception rather than the rule, and I really
don’t see how we change the exception.

     Monitoring of adherence by public servants to Batho Pele principles

33.   Mr N J Mack asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      Whether her department is able to monitor whether public servants in
      all departments adhere to the Government’s Batho Pele principle; if
      not, (a) what is the position in this regard and (b) when will her
      department be able to do so; if so, how effective is this monitoring?
                                              C550

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Chairperson,
the Department of Public Service and Administration is able to monitor
whether or not public servants adhere to the government’s Batho Pele
principles and various processes and initiatives that have been put in
place to ensure effective service delivery.

Since 1994, as a democratic government, we have targeted the acceleration
of service delivery to communities in order to eradicate the inequalities
of the past. As a matter of fact, the original White Paper on Transforming
Public Service Delivery of 1 October 1997 - if members could go back to it
- states clearly that a guiding principle for the Public Service in South
Africa is that of service to the people.

In terms of an earnest part of the mandate of the Department of Public
Service and Administration, a survey was conducted in June 2004 to
determine the extent to which departments implement Batho Pele. All
national and provincial departments were requested to give an account of
the implementation and promotion of Batho Pele against the backdrop of
their respective mandates and the services that they provide.

Specific areas have been identified as the eight principles of Batho Pele –
and for easy reference I’d want to refer to them: consultation, service
standards, access, courtesy, information, openness and transparency,
redress and value for money. We have found, from the feedback that we have
received, that aspects that impact on the effective implementation of Batho
Pele include the lack of back-office systems, processes and activities that
include human resources - which was referred to in a question asked earlier
- organisational development, finance and procurement, leadership style,
organisational culture and ethics, monitoring and evaluation, amongst
others.

Based on the survey’s findings, Cabinet actually took a decision to
intensify the implementation of Batho Pele through a range of other
initiatives that include the service delivery watch or unannounced site
visits. These visits involve and require members of the executive,
nationally and provincially, to go to service delivery points without
announcing their intention.

Chairperson, you would also be pleased to note that the President does what
he calls Sho’t Left. That means he enters any service delivery point,
whether it is a school or office, en route to any particular activity. In
many instances some of the staff members have said that: “If it wasn’t for
the convoy, we wouldn’t have been sure if it was the President because we
didn’t expect him to come to this point.” This is part of what we call
“unannounced site visits”. In business terms this is referred to as “the
mystery shopper”, but I had better not use that term lest I be accused of
wanting to outsource something. [Laughter.]

There is also the Public Service Focus Week, which includes a programme
called Project Khaedu, where senior officials such as directors-general,
deputy directors-general and chief directors from the national or
provincial head offices are expected to go to the coalface of service
delivery, the frontline offices, to experience service and to assist in
improving service delivery as much as possible. However, in this instance,
they don’t go as chiefs, but as workers under the supervision of the person
in charge in that particular office.

There are various other interventions that we should be implementing. These
are not managed centrally, but belong in an area that should be taken
forward across government and across the respective spheres. Thanks,
Chairperson.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for her response. Minister,
I would like to find out whether there are any disciplinary measures or
punitive measures taken against the officers – when you go to government
offices you don’t get any joy – who just do as they wish and do not adhere
to the principles of Batho Pele?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson,
indeed, I think we don’t only want to look at punitive measures, but also
at the development interventions required where there are problems at a
service delivery point or at the frontline of service delivery.

First and foremost, I think what we need are reports from Members of
Parliament on instances where they have been exposed to service delivery
gaps or weaknesses. This should be communicated to the respective Ministers
and through Premiers to the MECs in order that there are efforts to deal
with the problem in a specific office or service delivery point, etc. Yes,
there are disciplinary procedures. You can ensure, where there is
incompetence in service delivery, that you do institute incompetence
procedures.

The one reality that we face is that there is a view among public servants,
for instance managers, and as may be suggested at a political level, that
it’s not that easy to discipline public servants. That is not true. The
weakness may stem from the fact that human resources personnel and managers
are not willing to take action, as they should, and ensure that they
intervene timeously to improve service delivery, where required, by
instituting corrective or disciplinary measures.

      Effectiveness of izimbizo conducted by Public Service Commission

34.   Mr A T Manyosi asked the Minister for the Public Service and
      Administration:

      How effective are the izimbizo conducted by the Public Service
      Commission?
            C551E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I want
to start off by saying that the Public Service Commission does not conduct
izimbizo. These, I think we know, are conducted by the President, the
Deputy President and the executive to interact with communities on the
government’s programme of action. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, Chairperson. Madam Minister, are the
outreach programmes conducted by the Public Service Commission having any
impact on our government?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Yes, Chairperson,
these are what is called Citizens’ Forums. This was developed as a system
for public representatives and public service institutions rather than the
executive. So, it was a very specific forum. It is thus a valuable tool for
members of this House to engage with communities and to strengthen their
oversight role. I would thus encourage all members to obtain copies of the
CD from the Public Service Commission so that they can consider the
implementation of these programmes in association with representatives from
the various spheres of government. Thank you.

            Measures to improve billing system of municipalities

27.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      Whether his department will put any measures in place to ensure an
      improvement in the billing system of municipalities; if not, why not;
      if so, when?
      C544E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Thank you,
Chairperson. The answer to Question 27 is as follows. In May 2005 the
Department of Provincial and Local Government rolled out an initiative
under the auspices of Project Consolidate that focuses on gaining a better
understanding of municipal billing systems. This initiative was intended to
simultaneously improve the billing systems in the pilot municipalities in
which it was implemented.

The initiative was also intended to capture knowledge and experiences that
could be replicated across the local government sphere in order to
strengthen the financial and economic viability of our municipalities. The
initiative was implemented in 12 pilot municipalities.

The initiative in the pilot municipalities focused primarily on the
following issues: the availability and the condition of service of bulk
infrastructure as well as consumption measurement; infrastructure, that is,
water and electricity meters; the operational processes employed by
municipalities with regard to the provision of quality and reliable
services with special focus on issues relating to meter-reading services;
the management information systems that feed into and generate the
municipal accounts and that assist with decision-making and overall
management in municipalities; and the quality and effectiveness of
interaction with communities, particularly with regard to how the
municipalities communicate their policies and programmes and how they
facilitate feedback from communities and address disputes relating to
municipal accounts.

Generally, the initiative focused on the information technology systems
used by the municipalities and also on broader issues that affect municipal
accounts that are sent to residents. The 12 municipalities selected to be
part of the Project Consolidate municipal building initiative represent a
wide range of municipalities across the country.

The project includes small municipalities still grappling with
establishment issues such as Makhuduthamaga Municipality, which at the
inception of the initiative only had 23 customers on its customer database,
out of a household population of 55 000, medium-sized municipalities such
as Madibeng Municipality with 120 000 households and metros such as the
city of Johannesburg, which has a customer base of approximately 1 million
households.

The rationale for involving this range of municipalities located in every
province was to ensure that we do not only identify working solutions
regarding the value challenges in these municipalities, but that lessons
learnt from these experiences could be shared with other municipalities and
viable solutions replicated.

In the 2007-08 financial year improvements in the 12 municipalities will be
documented and shared and mechanisms through which viable solutions will be
replicated in other municipalities would also be developed. With regard to
other municipalities, it must be said that despite the challenges they
continue to tackle, generally the billing systems are functioning well.

Rre A J L MOSEKI: Modulasetilo, ke dumela gore Motlatsa-Tona o tla
ntlhaloganya gore ka reng. A o tla ntlhaloganya? Ke ne ke re go totobetse
gore go sa ntse go na le mathata mo dimmasepaleng tse di farologaneng ka
mokgwa o wa disuga. [The billing system.] Ke batla go botsa Motlatsa-Tona
gore a go na le se re tlwaetseng go se bitsa “mekgwa ya go-sa-le-gale ya
tsiboso” [Early warning systems.] e e kgonang go lemosa gore mmasepala o o
nang le mathata a mokgwa wa disuga ke ofe? Ke a leboga. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr A J L MOSEKI: Chairperson, I hope that the Deputy Minister will
understand what I am saying. Will you understand? I was saying it is
obvious that there are still problems with the billing system at different
municipalities. I would like to know from the Deputy Minister whether we
have what is known as an “early warning system” that will be able to detect
which municipality has problems with their billing system. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: At the moment, as
I’ve said in my answer, we’ve got a pilot programme. In the year 2007-08
we’ll have a report on these pilot municipalities that have actually
applied these new billing systems. It will be difficult to give you an
answer now, but we’ll do so once we’ve collected all the information on how
the pilot municipalities have fared, and perhaps those kind of things would
also come out.

 Payment of allowances to traditional leaders for attending council sittings

28.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      Whether traditional leaders are being paid (a) sitting and (b)
      travelling allowances for attending the sittings of councils in their
      municipalities; if not; (i) why not and (ii) when will this be done?
                                                                    C545E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, to
the hon Kgoshi Mokoena, this question arises as a result of the provisions
of section 81 of the Local Governments: Municipal Structures Act, Act 117
of 1998, which allows a designated number of traditional leaders to
participate in the proceedings of certain categories of municipal councils.
The term “participate” entails that the relevant traditional leaders do not
become members of the municipal councils as a result of their
participation.

The existing law makes no provision for payment of a sitting allowance to
those traditional leaders who are participating in municipal councils. This
is so because they are not members and they also continue to hold their
positions as traditional leaders.

For remuneration purposes such participation is regarded as falling within
the broad definition of the current role of a traditional leader in our
country. Consequently, traditional leaders continue to receive remuneration
and allowances due to them as traditional leaders in terms of section 5 of
the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Act, Act 20 of 1998.

It must also be pointed out that the existing law recognises that
traditional leaders may incur expenses as a result of their participation.
Thus, section 81(5)(b) of the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act
makes provision for the payment of out-of-pocket expenses in respect of
such participation. These expenses are in the budget of the municipality in
question and include travelling expenses.

Finally, I’m not aware of any traditional leader who has not received
payment for out-of-pocket expenses from any municipal council.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I thank the hon Deputy Minister for her
constructive response. Based on our interaction with the departments in the
Budget briefing last year, it was confirmed that traditional leaders are
supposed to be paid travelling and sitting allowances. That was said in a
formal meeting. The records were submitted to the department before this
question was printed.

Now, I do not know who is fooling who. Can we find out exactly who is
fooling who because the departments told us in the formal sitting what they
are doing? They were even surprised when members questioned them and said
that the President is encouraging them to participate in municipalities
because they are given travelling allowances and the department confirmed
that yes, they are supposed to do that; if it is not done it means that
there is some negligence by some municipalities. So, I must just say that
we got a different story from the department last year.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Thank you,
Chairperson. Hon member, as I have said in my answer, this responsibility
lies entirely with a particular municipality and not with the provincial
local government. I am not so sure about this meeting, I do not recollect
and I do not think that I was there in that meeting for the sake of record.


But I have said here that they are being paid stipends for sitting and
travelling expenses. The municipality must pay them. And if there is a
municipality that does not pay them you can report it to us so that we can
take it up with the municipality. But it is their responsibility for them
to be given this allowance for travelling and other expenses but not
necessarily for sitting in council. If there is a particular municipality
that is not doing that we would welcome that information so that we can
interact with that given municipality.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, in fact I would like to say that this is not a
question but just a follow-up. We had some complaints, particularly in
KwaZulu–Natal. They were saying that the traditional leaders who fall under
the metro are better off because when they attend these meetings they get
some money. They receive about R3 000 just to attend and the others who are
just outside the boundaries of the metro are saying that they are not
getting anything or they get small fees. Maybe we just need to look at it
to rectify the situation.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I do not think, Minister, that you have to
respond to that unless you have a response, but I think that is a question
dealing with standardisation.
Can you please switch off the cellphones? I am hearing this cellphone now
ring for the second time.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Yes Chairperson,
as I said, we welcome this information so that we can take it up with the
necessary municipality or even the MEC himself if it is in KZN. So if you
can provide us with the information as to which municipality is involved,
we will take it up.

               Number of councillors also serving as teachers

29.   Mr A T Manyosi asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      How many councillors are serving as such while keeping their positions
      as teachers?
      C546E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chair, the answer
to this question from the hon Manyosi is as follows. The information which
the hon member requires is not readily available within the department. The
provincial departments of local government are, in terms of the law, the
repositories of such information. They have been requested to furnish us
with the details. The information will be passed on to the hon members as
soon as it is received.

I must, however, take this opportunity to indicate that teachers are
allowed by the Constitution to make themselves available for election as
councillors. In this regard, I refer the hon member to the provisions of
section 158(1)(b) of the Constitution as read with section 21 of the
Municipal Structures Act of 1998:

  Once elected, a teacher may resign from his or her post to focus on
  municipal work. However, the teacher is also free to assume the position
  of a councillor on a part-time basis whilst at the same time continuing to
  work as a teacher.

What I would like to say to the hon member is that the onus is on the
various political parties as to whether they would allow teachers to stand
for election as councillors, not the municipality or government. Political
parties must decide whether they would allow teachers to contest elections
at the local government level or not.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I would like to find out from the Deputy
Minister whether in future we would do away with the part-time councillors,
because I think there are many loopholes. For example, you find that people
who are PCO administrators are councillors and they work for the government
either way, so I wanted to check whether we will do away with this part-
time thing or not. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Hon member, it
would be very difficult for me to stand here and say yes, we will do so in
future, but it can actually be looked at in future. As I said earlier on,
it depends on your conscience as an individual, whether we are going to
neglect the children at school - the future leaders of this country who are
still at school - and concentrate on the council, or perhaps work part-time
with the council.

I think we can surely say that in future it can be reviewed to see what is
best for the country. At the moment the focus is mainly at the local
government level. That is the coalface of all the problems of our
communities. The local government level will be the focus in future.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, I am confused. The Minister must please help us. She
said correctly that the Constitution allows people who qualify in terms of
the constitutional provisions to stand as candidates. But certain
categories of candidates, once elected, cannot continue unless they resign
from their positions - like teachers - or get permission.

Now the Minister said that they can choose to be part-time councillors and
remain as teachers. The information we were given at the previous election
was that yes, they can be elected and they can decide to resign, but if
they decide to stay on, they need to get the permission of the institution
where they are employed as teachers. Now the answer given by the Deputy
Minister differs from that; maybe she can enlighten us.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Hon member, I
think we are barking up the wrong tree, because this matter belongs to
Education and not to Provincial and Local Government. Education must take
charge of that, but as I said, I articulated what the Constitution ...
[Interjections.] Can you shut up and listen!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order!

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chair, I object. The Minister cannot tell me to shut up!
That is unparliamentary and I will not allow it!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order! I have heard that. Deputy
Minister, could you please withdraw that?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
withdraw.

As I said, it is a matter that Education needs to look at, because it
affects education. It affects the future of the children. It is not for
Provincial and Local Government to decide whether one is going to be a
councillor or not, but Education should actually take that decision and
decide about their staff, the teachers of this country, and whether they
can serve as councillors or not. But the Constitution again protects them.
If one individual decides that they want to be a part-time councillor and
want to work as a teacher, the Constitution protects them 100%.

    Measures to ensure that municipalities do not receive qualified audit
                                   reports

31.   Mr Z C Ntuli asked the Minister for Provincial and Local Government:

      (1)   Whether his department has put any measures in place  to  ensure
           that municipalities do not receive qualified audit  reports;  if
           not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what measures;

      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?
      C548E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, the
answer to Question 31 asked by hon Ntuli is as follows. The National
Treasury and the Department for Provincial and Local Government continue to
provide support to municipalities on a variety of issues. The nature of our
support, however, must be understood within the current constitutional and
legal framework.

Firstly, the national government cannot encroach on the functions and
institutional integrity of government in other spheres. Secondly, a
municipality has the right to govern, on its own initiative, the local
government affairs of its community. Lastly, the national government may
not compromise or impede a municipality’s ability or right to exercise its
power or perform its functions. It is within these constitutional
injunctions that the government response needs to be understood.

There are six main problematic areas which have given rise to qualified
reports by the Auditor-General. These are: failure to submit financial
statements within prescribed timeframes; inadequate internal control
mechanisms; inability to manage the asset register properly; failure
associated with debt collection; inadequate risk management measures and
failure to provide in the budget for bad debts.

Through the introduction of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
Management Act of 2003, government introduced norms and standards to which
all municipalities must conform. Secondly, through Project Consolidate,
experienced financial officers were seconded to assist municipalities
lacking in capacity.

Thirdly, through the Municipal Assistance Grant, the national government
assists towards strengthening internal systems and the building of in-house
human capacity within municipalities.
Lastly, in April 2004, introducing a support project the department focused
on annual financial statements. Other partners in this project are
municipalities, the Institute of Municipal Finance Officers and
PricewaterhouseCoopers. Since 2004 this project has led to significant
improvements in 82 municipalities regarding the quality of financial
statements and the observance of deadlines.

Mr Z C NTULI: I would like to find out from the Deputy Minister as to
whether those municipalities who are under Project Consolidate also got
qualified audits?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Yes, they did.
Hence, we have invited all these financial experts so that we can deploy
them to various municipalities that fall under Project Consolidate. Not
only financial experts, but other expertise as well has been deployed to
these various municipalities. Many of them fall under Project Consolidate.

We need to satisfy ourselves that those particular municipalities can now
run on their own because they would have gained the necessary skills, etc.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Let me thank the Deputy Minister and the department for
the initiatives in trying to assist our municipalities. Chairperson, I hope
you are aware that immediately after the sitting four of us in this Chamber
who are in this local government committee will be flying back to the
Eastern Cape to join our colleagues who are there, as we speak, with the
finance committee.

The reason we are going there is the very same question that was raised
here by my colleague, namely qualified reports from our municipalities.
Having thanked the Minister for their initiatives, what can we do to
capacitate our municipalities to avoid these kinds of abnormalities in our
municipalities because it affects service delivery?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: I couldn’t agree
more with the hon member in terms of the struggling municipalities, hence
we came up with these initiatives as to what can be done because it was
after some research that the Department for Provincial and Local Government
came up with this initiative and took up the initiative of Project
Consolidate to assist those struggling municipalities.

What we have done under Project Consolidate, after undertaking that
research, was to identify where the blockages are in those municipalities
that fall under Project Consolidate. We know exactly where the blockages
are, hence we actually deployed those experts to go and assist
municipalities.

I think it is a joint effort by all of us - all three spheres of government
- to assist these struggling municipalities because that is where the real
delivery takes place, at the coalface at municipal level.

I think we need to assist each other and appreciate the information that we
have just received that there is a team from the NCOP that has gone down to
the Eastern Cape.

          Establishment of one national archives unit per province

35.   Ms N M Madlala-Magubane asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:

      Whether his department succeeded in establishing one national archives
      unit per province; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
      details?                                                      C552E

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, the answer is: No. According
to Schedule 5 of the Constitution, Act 108 of 1996 as amended, archives
other than the national ones are an exclusive provincial legislative
competence. Therefore the national Department of Arts and Culture does not
have the constitutional mandate to establish archives in provinces.

However, the department has transferred the following archive repositories
with associated staff infrastructure and assets, which it inherited from
the previous dispensation, to the provinces listed as follows. Firstly, the
Port Elizabeth records centre was transferred to the Eastern Cape province.
That was done on 1 April 2000. Secondly, Pietermaritzburg and Durban
archive repositories and record centres were transferred to the KZN
province, which was done on 1 April 2001. Thirdly, the Bloemfontein archive
repository and record centre was transferred to the Free State province on
1 April 2004. Fourthly, the Cape Town archive repository and record centre
was transferred to the Western Cape province on 1 April 2006. Thank you.

Nk N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Sihlalo, ngabe sekuyiyona leyo imininingwane?
Bengifuna ukuthola nokuthi ikuphi inqubekela-phambili eMnyangweni. Yingakho-
ke ngithanda ukwazi ukuthi ngabe lezi ezinye izifunda ezisilele ngaphandle
zona azinazo yini izizinda zokukhweza ulwazi na. Ngithanda nokwazi ukuthi
ngabe izitshudeni zethu noma izingane zesikole zizisebenza ngokuphelele
yini na lezi zizinda zokukhweza ulwazi. Okunye engifuna ukukwazi ukuthi
ngabe kuyakhokhwa yini. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chairperson, is that the only information
available? I wanted to find out about the progress in the department. That
is why I want to know whether the provinces that are left outside have
archive repositories and record centres. I would also like to know whether
our students or pupils are making full use of archive repositories and
record centres. The other thing that I would like to know is whether there
is any admission fee to these archive repositories. Thank you.]

UMPHATISWA WEZENKCUBEKO NAMASIKO: Ukuphendula ndingathi ke, okokuqala, ezo
ndawo ndingazibalanga zazingenazo iindawo ekuthiwa zi-archives eziphethwe
ngulo rhulumente kazwelonke. Ngamanye amazwi ke ndizama ukuchaza into
yokuba ezi sasiziphethe nathi saye sazinikezela emaphondweni. Okwesibini,
ke abafundi bonke bayazisebenzisa ezi archives.

Eyokuba bazisebenzisa luhlobo luni andinakukuchazela, ngoba andinalo ulwazi
malunga naleyo indawo. Okwesithathu, ke kule yokuba kuyabhatalwa na, hayi
akubhatalwa njeng alo naliphi na ithala leencwadi okanye i-library ekhoyo
apha eMzantsi Afrika, inkoliso yazo kungenwa felefele akubhatalwa, kodwa
ukuba kukho izinto ezithile ozifunayo mhlawumbi amaxwebhu okanye
iidokhumenti othi uzicele ukuba uzikotshelwe uya kuyibhatalela ke leyo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: To answer I can say, firstly, the areas
that I did not mention did not have archives that fall under this national
government. In other words, I am trying to explain that we have transferred
those that were under our control to the provinces.

Secondly, all scholars are making use of these archives. I can not explain
how they utilise them, because I am not well informed about that.

Thirdly, with regard to the issue of payment, there is no payment, as is
the case at all libraries in South Africa. At most of them entrance is
free, but if there are certain items that you need, like documents which
you ask to be photocopied, you have to pay for that service.]

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe, ngithanda  ukwazi  mayelana  nalokhu:
Laphaya  ePitoli  kukhona  ihhovisi  lapho  kukhona  isizinda   sikazwelonke
sokukhweza ulwazi, uma ungena  ngaphansi.  Kuthiwa  leso  sizinda  silingana
namakhilomitha angasuka lapha eKapa aze afike le eMessina. Ngabe-ke  yiluphi
ulwazi olugcinwe lapho ngoba ngikuzwe uthi isifunda ngesifunda sine  sizinda
saso, futhi lolo lwazi olugcinwe laphaya ePitoli olunjani lona?  Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, I  would  like  to  know
the following with regard to this. In Pretoria there is a  national  archive
repository and record centre. It is on  the  ground  floor.  They  say  that
centre is equal to the distance between Cape Town and Messina.  My  question
therefore is what kind of information is preserved  there  because  I  heard
you saying each province has its own  archive  repository,  and  also,  what
difference is there  between  the  information  kept  in  Pretoria  and  the
information kept in provinces? Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Le kaloku isePitoli yile iphantsi kwethu,
yekazwelonke okanye yile kuthiwa yi-national archives. Yeyona igcina zonke
iirecords zoMzantsi Afrika. [The one in Pretoria is the one that is under
our control. It is the one referred to as the national archives. It is the
one that keeps all the South African records.]

                 Progress in placement of artists in schools

36.   Ms N M Madlala-Magubane asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:


      In view of the fact that his department  has  had  artists  placed  in
      schools based in the Free State, Limpopo, KwaZulu-Natal  and  Gauteng,
      what progress has his department made  in  placing  artists  in  other
      provinces?                                   C553E


The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, the placement of artists in
schools in the four provinces as listed in the question took place in the
context of the South African-Flemish bilateral projects in arts and culture
education and training, which ran from 2003 to 2005. The purpose of the
project was to research, develop and design arts and culture education and
training modules that were piloted in Gauteng in 2003 to 2005 and rolled
out in the three provinces of Limpopo, Free State and KwaZulu-Natal in 2005
until today.

The following are the three arts and culture education and training models
that were developed within the South African-Flemish bilateral agreement:
artists in schools and community centres, and with regard to culture,
skills development and culture investment projects aimed at community arts
practitioners. Upon completion of the capacity-building programme these
arts practitioners are placed in schools to assist arts and culture
learning as educators in the delivery of quality arts and culture in the
classroom. There is an advanced education certificate in arts and culture
in-service programme aimed at the arts and culture learning area educators;
and a train the trainer capacity-building programme aimed at arts and
culture learning area district officials.

The roll-out of arts and culture education and training models, including
the placement of arts practitioners in schools outside the four provinces
of Limpopo, Free State, KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng, is scheduled to take
place in 2007 to 2008, starting in Mpumalanga and the Western Cape. It
should be noted that the roll-out of any one of the arts and culture
education and training models as mentioned in paragraph 1 above is preceded
by a long process of consultation with the provincial stakeholders and
building the necessary capacity with the identified service providers who
would eventually facilitate the actual implementation.

The 2008-09 and 2009-10 financial years will see the implementation of arts
and culture education and training models in the last three provinces,
thereby completing the national roll-out of arts and culture education and
training programmes in all nine provinces of the Republic of South Africa.
Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: MaMadlala, do you have any follow-up question?

Nk N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Yebo, Sihlalo. Ngiyabonga kuNgqongqoshe ngencazelo
asinike yona. Ngethemba ukuthi uMnyango uzokwenza izinto ngokukhulu
ukuphazima kweso ngani ngoba siyazidinga lezi zindawo ezifana nalezo
ezibhekela ezobuciko. Izingane zethu zinamakhono noma amathalente
azifihlile kuzona, noma-ke enye ingane iyantengantenga ekufundeni izincwadi
kodwa uma sekuza emakhonweni leyo ngane ibe ngekhaliphile.

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo, bengithanda ukubuza kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi ngabe
uzokhuluma noNgqongqoshe Wezemfundo yini ukuze izindaba zobuciko zibe
yingxenye ye-National Curriculum Statement? (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Yes, Chairperson, I thank the Minister for the
response he has given. I just hope that the department will be quick to act
on these things because we need these centres where arts education will be
given. Our children have different skills and talents that are hidden in
them, for example one may find that a child who is struggling academically
may excel in arts.

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, I would like to know from the Minister
whether he is going to speak to the Minister of Education so that these
arts issues could become part of the National Curriculum Statement.]

MPHATISWA WEZENKCUBEKO NAMASIKO: Ewe, sisebenzisana kakhulu noMphathiswa
wezeMfundo, ingxaki ke phofu ibanye, ibasekubeni uMphathiswa yena
ukuzwelonke, nangona abona bantu benza umsebenzi bephaya emaphondweni.
uMphathiswa yena akanamandla okuphatha izikolo ezisemaphondweni. Amandla
akhe asekwenzeni umthetho okanye ipolisi kuphela. Sisebenzisana naye ke
apha kwinqanaba likazwelonke, kodwa axakwe ke ngoku xa thina sobabini sithe
sanesigqibo ukuba siyakwenziwa na eso sigqibo phaya ezantsi ephondweni.
Siyancedisana kakhulu ke naye uMphathiswa lo. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Yes, we are co-operating a lot with the
Minister of Education, but there is one problem, and that is that the
Minister is at the national level, while the actual people who are doing
the work are in the provinces. The Minister has no powers to control
schools in the provinces. The powers of the Minister are to promulgate a
law or a policy only. We work together at national level, but encounter a
problem after the two of us have an agreement as to whether the agreement
will be implemented down there in the provinces. We are greatly assisting
each other, with regard to the Minister.]

                 Progress made since launch of dictionaries

37.   Ms N M Madlala-Magubane asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:

      Whether any progress has been made since the launch of (a) Natural
      Science and Technology for Grades 4 to 6, (b) Parliamentary/Political
      Terminology and (c) ICT Terminology; if not, why not; if so, what
      progress?                         C554E

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, the launch of the
dictionaries in September 2005 was part of a continuing process of raising
awareness to alert stakeholders to the availability of terminologies in all
the 11 official languages, particularly in the technical domains like
information and communications technology, natural sciences and
mathematics.

The department launched, amongst others, the mathematics dictionary for
Grades R to 6 in 2003, which was distributed to primary schools across
South Africa.

Regarding question (b), I would like to reiterate the fact that since the
information and communications technology project was initiated by the
Department of Communications, it was handed over to them on the same day as
the launch.

Although the Department of Communications had in mind their own
stakeholders for the project, the Department of Arts and Culture made the
ICT terminology dictionary available to its own stakeholders as well.

Besides the Department of Communications’ stakeholders, there are a number
of the Department of Arts and Culture stakeholders who have received copies
of the ICT terminology dictionaries, including the provincial government
departments dealing with arts and culture; provincial legislatures; a
number of national government departments, particularly the National
Language Forum; the university community; local government units dealing
with language development, and various other stakeholders who have
interacted with the National Language Service regarding these dictionaries.


Plans are under way to post these dictionaries on the departmental website
so that all citizens can have access to them via the Internet.

With regard to (c), it also was distributed to various stakeholders in the
same way as the ICT terminology dictionary, and the natural sciences and
technology terminology dictionaries as well as the parliamentary/political
terminology dictionaries.

My department maintains a national terminology databank that is ever-
expanding as it continues to record and update terminologies for all the 11
official languages.

Regarding (d), further copies of the terminology dictionaries continue to
be distributed to all the relevant provincial stakeholders through the
language research and development centres. To enhance the quality of the
terminology dictionaries and their usefulness, my department continues to
conduct surveys with all the users at various times. Feedback from these is
important for improving later versions of the said dictionaries. Thank you.


Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chairperson, no, there is no follow-up question.
The only thing I am asking is that the Minister should provide us with the
answer.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Magubane. If you are
the person who asked the question, it does not preclude the other members
of the House from asking questions. If there are no questions from other
hon members, I will take it there are no further follow-up questions.

I think, Minister, you have taken note of the request to make the written
text of your reply available to the hon member.

Hon members, I have been made aware that Questions 39 and 40 asked by hon
Mazibuko will not be responded to in this question session, because of the
nonavailability of both the Minister and the Deputy Minister who are not
here because of other engagements. So they will stand over for the next
session.

 Progress iro ambulance service improvement and improving the effectiveness
                        of emergency medical services

38.   Ms N F Mazibuko asked the Minister of Health:

      (1)   Whether any progress has been made in respect  of  the  business
           plans for ambulance service improvement and  the  implementation
           thereof in each province; if not, why not; if so, what progress;

      (2)   whether her department has been able to meet its target aimed at
           improving the effectiveness of emergency medical services (EMS)
           in the (a) 2004-05 and (b) 2005-06 financial years; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        C555E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: The answer  to  the  question  asked  by  hon
member Mazibuko to the Minister of Health is as follows. This is the  answer
to part one of the question: Yes, provincial business  plans  for  emergency
medical services have been  submitted  and  are  in  the  process  of  being
reviewed and finalised.  Six  of  our  provinces,  namely  the  Free  State,
KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape and  North  West,  require
further adjustments to the business plan in order to implement  the  optimal
solution.

The answer to the second part of the question is: Yes,  although  there  are
still inherent problems, progress is  being  made  by  all  nine  provinces.
Response times show improvement nationally. All provinces but  the  Northern
Cape have eradicated one-person ambulance  crews,  due  to  staff  shortages
that are currently being addressed by the province.

The number of daily operational ambulances has increased over the  last  two
financial years. However, staff shortages and a lack  of  skilled  personnel
remain a challenge.  The  mid-level  worker  programme  is  currently  being
implemented in provincial emergency medical services  training  colleges  to
address the skilled personnel shortfall. Thank you.

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Phini likaNgqongqoshe, bengithanda ukwazi ukuthi,  njengoba
ukhuluma ngesimo  ezingeni  likazwelonke,  ngabe  unayo  yini  imininingwane
emaqondana nezifunda  noma  ngokwamadolobha  afana  nomaGoli,  oPitoli  nawo
wonke  amanye?  Okwesibili,  izolo  ngifunde  kwiphephandaba  i-Star  ukuthi
kukhona   ilungu   elithe    likhathazekile    ngoba    kukhona    izincingo
ezingaphendulwa uma abahlali beshaya  ucingo.  Ngabe  kuyiqiniso  lokho  na?
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Deputy Minister, I would like to know, as you are  talking
about the situation nationally,  whether  you  have  information  concerning
cities like Johannesburg, Pretoria and all others. The  second  question  is
about what I read in The  Star  yesterday,  namely  that  a  certain  member
expressed her dismay about telephones  not  being  answered  by  staff  when
people phone for emergencies. Is that true?]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I would answer  by  saying  that
we would need more information  on  the  specific  towns  and  cities  where
problems are experienced. My  answer  referred  to  the  business  plans  as
forwarded to us by the provinces. So, in that regard I  would  request  more
information so that we can respond to that particular issue where  she  says
phones were not answered by the officials working in that particular area.

However, in that regard I wish to assure the member that the  department  is
very much aware of the difficulties that some  areas  experience  and  there
are increasingly better services being provided. And,  as  I  said,  we  are
ensuring that where there are staff shortages we are looking into this  area
by training more personnel.

May I also say that, as we prepare for 2010, these are some of the  specific
issues which the Department of Health has been asked to look into so  as  to
ensure that our readiness plans are in order for  2010.  This  is  going  to
have a benefit for the whole country not just for the soccer World Cup.

May I just also share with the members that I  recently  personally  had  an
opportunity to visit our emergency  medical  services  centre  here  in  the
Western Cape, where I saw a very good  service  in  partnership  with  local
government, in terms of the disaster management service where they are  able
to locate the ambulances when there is a request for an ambulance. They  can
look on the screen and see where the ambulances are and in that way be in  a
position to call on the ambulance nearest to where the  accident  has  taken
place.

There is also very good partnership  with  the  private  sector  whereby  in
particular instances when the public sector ambulance is not there  on  time
the private sector ambulance assists us in picking up the patients that  are
being transferred to the public sector hospitals. So, we are indeed  looking
at this matter and aiming to improve our response time. As I  have  said,  I
think the indication is that we  are  moving  in  the  direction  of  better
service to our people.

    Distribution of female condoms and programmes to encourage their use

41.   Ms N F Mazibuko asked the Minister of Health:


      In light of the planned distribution of 3,5 million female condoms by
      the end of 2006, (a) how many female condoms have been distributed to
      date and (b) which programmes have been put in place to encourage
      young women to use the condoms?         C558E

The DEPUTY MINISTER  OF  HEALTH:  Uyasisebenzisa  umam’uMazibuko  namhlanje.
[Uhleko.] Sihlalo, malungu ahloniphekile,  mangiphawule  ukuthi  ngesikhathi
nibiza uMaMadlala ngicishe ngasabela. [Uhleko.]
[The  hon  Mazibuko  is  making  us  work  very  hard   today.   [Laughter.]
Chairperson, hon members, let me say that when you were calling  Madlala,  I
nearly responded. [Laughter.]]

The answer to the question asked by hon member Mazibuko to the  Minister  of
Health is as follows. I shall start with  part  (a)  of  the  question.  The
answer is: At the end of February  2007,  a  total  of  2,6  million  female
condoms had been distributed during the financial year 2006-07.

With regard to part (b) of the  question,  since  the  introduction  of  the
female condom in the country, the Department of Health  has  been  extending
and  strengthening  male  and  female  condom  promotion  as  a   means   of
encouraging barrier method use against sexually transmitted  infections  and
HIV transmission as well as unwanted pregnancy.

However, there is no particular programme for  female  condom  promotion  as
all condom promotion activities are  integrated.  All  health  providers  at
primary health care facilities including youth- friendly services,  formally
the National Adolescent-Friendly Clinic Initiative, are trained  to  promote
and demonstrate the use of and distribute female condoms.

The Department of Health has also designated the second week in February  as
National Sexually Transmitted  Infections  and  Condom  Awareness  Week,  to
increase awareness  of  prevention  and  management  of  STIs  and  unwanted
pregnancies. There  are  also  ongoing  activities  through  the  government
information, education and communication programme – the Khomanani  campaign
- which are aimed at encouraging condom  use  among  both  male  and  female
adults and young people.

Nk  N  F  MAZIBUKO:  Ngiyabonga  Phini  likaNgqongqoshe.  Ngoba  nakhu  uthe
sengathi  alukho  uhlelo  olubhekene  ngqo  nentsha  yamantombazane,   ngabe
uMnyango uzokubhekisisa ngamehlo abukhali yini lokho ukuze  sigweme  ukubona
izingane ezincane zamantombazane zikhulelwa zisesikoleni na? Ngiyabonga.

IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Ngicabanga ukuthi impendulo iye  yakuchaza
ukuthi  asehlukanisi  phakathi  kokufundisa  ngokusetshenziswa   kwekhondomu
yabesifazane nokufundisa ngekhondomu  yabesilisa,  kodwa  sithe  lezi  zinto
siyazihlanganisa,   ngoba   uma   umuntu    umfundisile    ngokusetshenziswa
kwekhondomu yalowo wesilisa, lokho kuzophephisa lo wesifazane.

Kusho ukuthi  esikukhuthazayo  ikakhulukazi  ukuthi  abesilisa  nabesifazane
babambisane kulokho, ngoba uma owesifazane ethi  kowesilisa  akusetshenziswe
ikhondomu ngalokho sisuke sizama ukubabonisa abesilisa ukuthi le nto  iyinto
ebalulekile. Akufuneki bavele bayithathe kancane  nje  bese  beth  i,  “Mina
ngeke ngatshelwa umuntu wesifazane.”

Njengoba ngishilo, izinhlelo zethu siyazama ukuthi sizandise  ukuze  zikwazi
ukufinyelela  kubantwana  abasakhulayo.  Kodwa-ke   ngizogcizelela   ukuthi,
kulokhu, ngibona ukuthi kufuneka sonke sibambisane nabazali  kanye  nabaholi
bomphakathi ngoba sibona kwanda ukukhulelwa kwezingane.  Lokho  kuyakhombisa
ukuthi kukhona  lapho  konakele  khona.  Ngakho-ke,  lungu  elihloniphekile,
ngiyacabanga   ukuthi,   ngokubambisana,   ikakhulukazi   singomama    futhi
siyizinhlangano  zomama  sibe  sibambisene  nohulumeni,   sizokwazi   ukuthi
sikugweme lokho esikubona kwenzeka emphakathini.

NjengoMnyango  Wezempilo,  sibambisene  nezinhlangano  zomphakathi,   sizama
ukwandisa ukuba khona kwezinsiza  zokuhlela  imindeni  ngoba  siyazi  ukuthi
kukhona isikhathi lapho ukuhlelwa  kwemindeni  kade  kwande  kakhulu  khona.
Kodwa njengamanje siyazama futhi ukuthi siphinde sikuvuselele  lokho  ukuthi
abantu abakhulayo basazi isimo sempilo, bazi  ukuthi  umuntu  ukhulelwa  uma
kwenzenjani nokuthi bangazivikela kanjani ukuze bangakhulelwa.

Nk N F  MAZIBUKO:  Ngiyaxolisa  Phini  likaNgqongqoshe  ngokuwugcizelela  lo
mbuzo. Ngiyizwile impendulo yakho lapho uthe khona  izinhlelo  ziyababhekela
abesilisa  nabesifazane  abasakhula.  Kepha   bengithanda   ukwazi   ukuthi,
njengoba kuke kube khona isimo lapho abesilisa  benqaba  khona  ukusebenzisa
amajazi  omkhwenyana,  kungenzeke  yini  na  ukuthi   kuzo   lezi   zinhlelo
enizihlelayo  kube  khona  okwenziwayo?  Noma  ake  ngithi,  njengoba   kuye
kwenzeke ukuthi  sihlangane  sisodwa  singabantu  besifazane  ko-Sawid  noma
ezinhlanganweni zethu njalo njalo,  namantombazane  nawo  futhi  kunezindawo
lapho ehlangana khona njengabantu  besifazane  abasebasha,  kungenzeke  yini
ukuthi siye  kogcizelela  kubona  bebodwa  ngokwenza  izinhlelo  ezibhekiswe
kwabesifazane bebodwa lapho sizofike si  babonise  ngokuthi  yiluphi  ulwazi
okudingeka babe nalo ukuze bakwazi ukusebenzisa ikhondomu  yabesifazane  uma
bezithola besesimweni  lapho  khona  abesilisa  benqaba  ukusebenzisa  ijazi
lomkhwenyana? Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Deputy Minister. Since you said that  it  seems
like you do not have a special programme  aimed  at  female  youth,  is  the
department going to look at this closely so that we can  avoid  young  girls
getting pregnant while they are at school? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: I think the response explained that we  don’t
differentiate between educating about the use of  female  condoms  and  male
condoms, but we said we integrate these things  because  when  you  teach  a
person about the use of a male condom, that will save a female.

This means that what we are encouraging is that males and females must  work
together on that, because when a female says to the male partner  that  they
must use a condom, that female will be indicating to her male  partner  that
this thing is important. And male partners should not take offence and  say,
“I cannot be told by a female.”

As I have said, we are trying to expand our programmes to reach the teens.
However, I am going to emphasise that, with regard to this, I think that we
must all work together, including the parents and the community leadership,
because teen pregnancy seems to be on the increase. This indicates that
there is something wrong somewhere. Therefore, hon member, I think that
through co-operation, particularly between women, women’s organisations and
the government, we will be able to thwart what is happening in the
community.

As the Department of Health, working together with community organisations,
we are trying to increase resources for family planning because we know
that there was a time when family planning was prevalent. However, right
now we are trying to revive that for the teens to be acquainted with the
health issues, and to know under what circumstances a person gets pregnant
and the ways to prevent that.

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: I am sorry, Deputy Minister, for repeating  this  question.
I heard your answer when you said programmes do cater for  young  males  and
females. However, I would like to know  about  cases  where  a  male  person
refuses to use a condom. Is it not possible that in this programme that  you
are planning, or let me say, as we sometimes meet alone as  women  in  Sawid
or in other organisations, to have a platform where  young  girls  meet,  as
young female people, and we go and address them as  females  only  and  give
them information on how to use a  femidom  if  they  find  themselves  in  a
situation where their male partners refuse to use a condom? Thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Deputy Minister,  I  sympathise  with
hon member Mazibuko, but you have spoken about  an  integrated  approach  to
condom use by all sectors of society to ensure that  the  use  of  the  male
condom is by everybody. The young males must take responsibility  to  ensure
that they also educate the others.

So, I think in your response in order to satisfy  the  hon  member,  because
she may have picked up some experiences on  the  ground,  try  to  highlight
certain practical things and if they are not there I think we need  to  know
that they are not there so that we can move forward. It  can  then  only  be
taken as advice to the department and there is nothing wrong with  that,  in
my view. This is because the question keeps on coming in different ways  and
the member seems not to be satisfied.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: I think I do understand the  concerns  raised
by the hon member. The concerns that she is raising  are  issues  of  social
inequality between men and women and these are  issues  of  gender  equality
where indeed women may not have the power to negotiate safe sex  with  their
male partners.

This is an issue that we have integrated into the  National  Strategic  Plan
on the Prevention and Treatment of HIV and Aids  which  very  soon  will  be
announced by our Deputy President after the meeting of the SA National  Aids
Council.

This counts among the social determinants of the  spread  of  the  virus  as
well as other sexually transmitted infections, where women have no power  to
negotiate. Indeed, she is right and this  is  a  matter  which  I  think  we
should take up together with women’s  organisations  and  do  much  more  to
implement what our Constitution says in terms of gender  equality.  In  this
regard therefore the female condom which she was asking about  does  have  a
particular role because it is actually an instrument that women can use.

We are looking at increasing the availability of the female  condom  and  we
are also looking at other suppliers because one of our  major  problems  has
been that we have only one supplier for the female condom and  that  is  why
it is so costly, but recently we have been aware that  there  is  a  generic
version of the condom and it is just as efficient and just as effective  and
we are looking into the issue of  procuring  this  particular  one  so  that
women can have greater power.

May I also take the opportunity here to explain that some  of  the  research
that we are doing, for example into microbicides, is a further way in  which
we are looking at instruments that women can take control  of  in  terms  of
preventing themselves from being infected with HIV. So,  there  are  various
methods that are being used and indeed I appreciate very much  the  concerns
of the member. I think, as I said earlier, working together  we  can  tackle
this problem.

           Methods of dealing with the issue of illegal immigrants
44.   Mr M A Sulliman asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   How  is  her  department  dealing  with  the  issue  of  illegal
           immigrants other than deporting them back  to  their  respective
           countries;

      (2)   whether there is any screening done to determine why the person
           left his/her country; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                                    C563E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson and hon members, the department
is dealing with illegal foreigners in terms of section 32 (1) of the
Immigration Act of 2002. This section specifically states that any illegal
foreigner shall depart unless authorised by the director-general of the
department, in the prescribed manner, to remain in the Republic of South
Africa pending his or her application for status.

In addition, government has, however, also adopted a more proactive
approach to curb illegal migration through several international
engagements at both bilateral and multilateral levels. These include the
recent adoption of the SADC Protocol on the Free Movement of Persons, as
well as a number of country-to-country visa appointments aimed at
encouraging legal migration of persons visiting South Africa.

The department does not have a screening process to determine reasons for
coming into South Africa, as is asked in part (2) of the question, in
relation to undocumented foreign nationals. This is, however, done in
respect of asylum seekers who desire protection and refugee status in South
Africa.

Random interaction and interviews with the deportees, as well as studies by
NGOs such as the SA Migration Project and the league of refugee women and
children, however, shed some light on some of the push factors that make
foreign nationals leave their homes to come into South Africa, sometimes
illegally. Thanks.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Thank you, Chairperson and thank you, hon Minister for
that response. I think that you and your department are trying your best to
pay attention to this particular issue, but we also know that there are
socioeconomic circumstances that attract people to South Africa, for job
opportunities, etc. Do we perhaps have any plans in place with our SADC
countries to assist our neighbouring countries, in order for them to create
jobs for their citizens? I think if we could have such a programme in
place, it would solve our problem to a great extent. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chairperson, and thanks to hon
Sulliman. It is not a plan from the Department of Home Affairs; it is a
plan generally from government. It is a government policy.
You may have noticed that South Africa has tended to have great interest in
resolving some of the conflicts in some of our countries in the continent.

Mr A WATSON: Is it the same with Zimbabwe?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Okay, all right! That’s your view. Zimbabwe,
that’s your view, really. But also, South Africa has tried as much as
possible to assist countries which find themselves in difficulties, such as
the DRC, and you will know that within SADC itself we have been discussing
issues of regional economic integration.

Some of the initiatives which are taken by our President and our government
have more to do with preventing some of the push factors in these countries
because, at the end of the day, people who tend to bear the brunt are is
South Africans. This is because of the pull factors due to the
socioeconomic and political conditions in our country.

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson, and thanks for the response from the
hon Minister. When we were visiting Westville in KwaZulu-Natal, we found
many foreigners who were in jail and when we asked what will happen to
them, they said that seemingly they did not have a clue of what will happen
when they come out of jail. I want to find out whether there is any
strategy to deport them when they come out of jail. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon member and thank you,
Chairperson. It’s not so much a strategy from our department, but what
normally happens is before an inmate is discharged from prison the
Department of Correctional Services gives us a notice. We write letters to
give instructions back with regard to a particular migrant. Even if the
person was already residing in South Africa, in most cases we have taken
the decision that a person from prison should be deported to their country
of origin.

It is difficult to have a strategy unless you know exactly how many people
are convicted every day, where they are and where they are located. But I
must say that the co-operation between the two departments has been very
good, I believe, in all the cases where we’ve had migrants who have served
time in prison. At the point of their discharge from prison, it is the
responsibility of Correctional Services, together with the Department of
Home Affairs, to ensure that those people are deported.

We have people, for instance, in some of the areas, who have been sentenced
for up to 25 years for various crimes such as murder, robbery and so on.
Once Correctional Services has informed us about that, they already know
that at the point of discharge from prison that particular inmate should be
deported to his or her country. Thank you.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I just want to find out from the hon Minister how
prevalent is this phenomenon whereby people are deported today and are back
in the country the following week, or the situation are made to understand
in which some people would actually get themselves arrested on purpose
during the festive season so that they get transportation to their
countries in order to enjoy holidays on the other side and come back
thereafter. How prevalent is this type of situation? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister, you should have
noticed that this question is not being asked for the first time today in
this Chamber, as far as I remember, but you can respond to it.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon Tolo. I must say that there is
indeed this revolving door syndrome of people who get deported and they
come back into the country. I need to also point out that it could be that
it is because of our porous borders, but definitely this is a phenomenon
that does exist.

I, personally, have actually seen the faces of some of the people who had
been deported before, at least in Lindela. What is now important is that
we’ve developed a system of biometrics where people who pass through
Lindela have their fingerprints taken. At some point, I believe, we would
need to develop a policy on repeat offenders, so that people who come into
the country and are deported twice or thrice should get a penalty of some
kind. But definitely, we do have this problem. It is a big problem, but we
also need to note that the whole area of illegal migration has become a
global challenge.

When we discuss issues of illegal migration, we also need to understand
that it doesn’t matter what we do with our porous borders or in
strengthening the system of migration. For as long as the world is unable
to resolve some of these push factors from these different countries of
origin of illegal migrants, we will continue to have this kind of problem,
even here in South Africa. So, this is not unique to South Africa. Thank
you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, hon Minister for the concise response to the
question. Is there no way in which we can minimise the expenditure when
deporting these illegal immigrants? The Mokoena detachment, in conducting
their oversight in North West, went to the police station called
Nietverdiend on the border of Gaborone. There were many illegal immigrants
there who were arrested. Those officials said that they were going to
transport them from the border of Gaborone to Johannesburg.

We went to the far north next to Musina and found some there as well. The
officials there also said that they were transporting them to Johannesburg
in order to be sent back to Zimbabwe.

I think we can find a way of minimising these expenses. Is there no other
method that we can use other than transporting them from the border to
Johannesburg and then back to their countries? If we check the distance we
travel in using our own cars, wear and tear and everything is very
expensive. Can’t we find a better method of doing this thing? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister, before you take the
podium, may I bring to the attention of the members the Rules of this
House, in that only four follow-up questions are allowed, and it is at the
discretion of the officer presiding to allow further questions or not. In
that regard, I want to make a ruling that I want to take Kgoshi Mokoena’s
question as the last of the four supplementary questions and not allow any
further questions. However, hon members who want to pursue certain
pertinent questions are at liberty to write to the Minister and she will
respond.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chairperson and thanks, hon
Mokoena. I’ve noted the comments and the suggestions which have been made,
but I also need to state, for the record, that currently we have one
deportation centre in the country and that deportation centre is Lindela.
Yes, I agree. There is a need to reduce the expenditure for deportations.
The truth of the matter is we are spending a lot of money on deportations,
particularly because these are not only people who are coming from the
neighbouring countries such as Zimbabwe, Mozambique and so on; you also
have a sizeable number of people who are deported on a weekly basis to far
northern countries of the continent. It is an expensive exercise, because
you have to charter an aircraft to take those people home.

Therefore, I agree with you. Perhaps there is a need to, at some point,
look at the policy and see how effective it is, and even to look at the
calls which we’ve had in relation to deportation of people, but it is one
of the major challenging areas for our government.

    Revitalisation programme in Northern Cape, with special reference to
                 hospital in Emthanjeni Municipality, De Aar

45.   Mr M A Sulliman asked the Minister of Health:

      Whether the revitalisation programme has been stopped in the Northern
      Cape because of the 2010 Soccer World Cup programme, especially in
      respect of the hospital in Emthanjeni Municipality, De Aar; if not,
      (a) when will the hospital be completed and (b) how many new jobs will
      be created to enable this hospital to function as a full-time
      institution after its completion; if so, what are the relevant
      details?               C564E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Hon Chair, hon members, the answer to the
question asked by hon member Sulliman to the Minister of Health is as
follows. The hospital revitalisation programme was not stopped because of
the 2010 Soccer World Cup. The allocation received from National Treasury
was sufficient to cover only currently awarded tenders.

The Northern Cape did not have the main hospital contracts approved at the
time when the total allocation became known. The earliest completion date
for these projects is the end of 2010. The number of new jobs to be created
can only be determined when the new organogram has been finalised and
approved. Thank you.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, what is not clear in my mind
is whether we are now saying that for the new financial year, which will
start at the end of March, there are no funds available to continue with
this project or not? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, as I have indicated, the
allocation received from National Treasury was sufficient to cover only
currently awarded tenders. That is the answer. Furthermore, this hospital
will be completed by the end of 2010. So, indeed, it’s building is still
within the planning of our financing protocols.

As I have indicated, I think it is important for members to also understand
that when an application is made for revitalisation or the building of a
new hospital, its success is dependent on the kind of business case people
have put forward. We want to be able to argue, when we go to Treasury as
the Department of Health, that indeed a lot of thought has been put into
the various elements of the plan, because hospital revitalisation or the
building of hospitals is not only about putting up a structure, but also
about who will staff the various wards in that particular hospital and
where all those people will come from. So, all of that is part of the
planning.

As I have said in this regard, the project will go ahead, but in the manner
and at the pace in which it has been put forward. Thank you.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I just wish to make a friendly request to the
Deputy Minister, that if it is possible for me to get this answer in a
written form, it would be highly appreciated. Thank you very much.

  Allocation of social workers to implement Older Persons Act, and increase
                        in salaries of social workers

46.   Ms H Lamoela asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   (a)  What  is  the  optimal  allocation  of  social  workers  to
           implement the Older Persons Act, Act 13 of 2006 and (b) what was
           the actual allocation in this regard as at the latest  specified
           date for which information is available;

      (2)   whether the increase in the salaries of social workers includes
           (a) all social workers or (b) only those working for the state?
                                                                    C566E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chair, the reply to the
question is as follows. There are no social workers earmarked specifically
for the implementation of the Older Persons Act, Act 13 of 2006. However,
there are 11 565 social workers in the country who are employed by both
government and NGOs. These social workers do generic social work, which
includes care and services to older persons.

There are also co-ordinators responsible for older persons in provinces and
at local levels. The functions of these co-ordinators include, amongst
others, the implementation of the Older Persons Act, Act 13 of 2006.

With regard to the further question, the answer is yes, there were
increases in the salaries of social workers employed by government as well
as increases in the subsidies of social work posts for social workers
working in the NGO sector. Thank you.

Ms H LAMOELA: Thank you, Minister, for the answer. I would just like to
know, given that we do have a shortage of social workers, how the
department intends to raise the required number of social workers and
whether it plans to train auxiliary social workers? Do they plan to recruit
some from abroad or do they intend to revise the training period for social
workers? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the answer to that
is yes, there is a shortage of social workers and the department has a
recruitment and retention strategy. Part of that recruitment and retention
strategy is the provision of bursaries to increase the number of learners
who are going to study social work, as well as various marketing exercises
to popularise social work as a career choice.

There are also auxiliary social workers being trained, and recently
increases in the salaries of social workers have improved the working
conditions somewhat. The department is, on an ongoing basis, consulting
with both the training institutions and the SA Council for Social Service
Professionals to address the shortage of social workers and to increase
their numbers in the country. Thank you.

     Allocation of social workers to implement Children’s Amendment Bill
47.   Ms H Lamoela asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (a) What was the optimal allocation of social workers to implement the
      Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2006] and (b) what was the actual
      allocation in this regard as at the latest specified date for which
      information is available?               C567E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, House Chairperson.
The reply is as follows. The costing of the children’s Bill focused on
costing the services envisaged by the comprehensive new child care
legislation, that is the combined section 75 Bill, the Children’s Act, Act
38 of 2005 and the section 76 Bill which is about to go through the
National Council of Provinces or which is being processed at the moment.
According to the costing report, the optimal allocation of social workers
required to implement the new child care legislation as reflected in the
implementation plan – low-cost scenario for the 2006-07 financial year - is
8 744 social workers.

Currently, there is no specific allocation of social workers to implement
the Children’s Amendment Bill. As I’ve said before, services to children
are, just like with older persons, provided by social workers in government
and in the NGO sector. In most provinces social workers render generic
services and do not focus specifically on children. However, the provincial
departments of social development are considering the need for social
workers to specialise in child care and protection services. So, there is
an ongoing investigation. There is a new category of child and youth care
workers and the development of that as a profession. But right at this
moment social workers are rendering generic services and do not
specifically focus on children.

Again, we acknowledge that, considering the total number of social workers
required to implement the new child care legislation and the number of
social workers available - even though there are more social workers than
what the low-cost scenario indicates - very clearly there is a need for
more social workers and, as members are aware, there is a strategy for the
retention and recruitment of social workers, as I have already said. Thank
you.

  Extension of child support grant to all disadvantaged children under the
                               age of 18 years

48.   Ms B L Matlhoahela asked the Minister of Social Development:

      Whether the child support grant will be extended to all disadvantaged
      children under the age of 18 years; if not, why not; if so, what are
      the relevant details?                        C572E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, Chairperson. The
answer to this question is that Cabinet has approved that the social
cluster investigate measures to respond to the needs of vulnerable children
between the ages of 14 and 18 years. During this investigation, the social
sector cluster will endeavour to identify all the needs of these children.

It is anticipated that all children in need will be provided with a range
of supportive services in an integrated and holistic manner that will
effectively alleviate their plight. We are in the early stages of
investigating these policy options on assistance to these children, and
wish to indicate that the interventions may or may not necessarily include
income support. We cannot at this early stage of the investigation be
specific about the outcomes and potential of the policy recommendations.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 16:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            MONDAY, 19 MARCH 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

    (a)    Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration and Good
         Laboratory Practice Bill [B 29B – 2006] – Act No 19 of 2006
         (assented to and signed by President on 12 March 2007).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

    Strategic Business Plan for the Department of Defence for the financial
   years 2007-
    2008 and 2009-2010 [RP 25-2007].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Government Notice No R. 194 published in Government Gazette No
         29670 dated 09 March 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 ( No
         1/1/1331), made in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
         Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (b)    Government Notice No R. 195 published in Government Gazette No
         29670 dated 09 March 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 ( No
         1/1/1332), made in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
         Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (c)    Government Notice No R. 196 published in Government Gazette No
         29670 dated 09 March 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 ( No 2/283),
         made in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
         (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)    Government Notice No 212 published in Government Gazette No
         29658 dated 23 March 2007: Draft Municipal Regulations on Minimum
         Competency Levels made in terms of section 168(1) of the Municipal
         Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (e)    Government Notice No 189 published in Government Gazette No
         29683 dated 01 March 2007: Determination of interest rates for
         purposes of Paragraph (a) of the Definition of “Official Rate of
         Interest” in Paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the Income Tax
         Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (f)    Government Notice No 187 published in Government Gazette No
         29669 dated 09 March 2007: Listing and delisting of Public
         Entities, made in terms of section 47 and 48 of the Public Finance
         Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


                           TUESDAY, 20 MARCH 2007

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
    Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, dated 20
    March 2007:

    The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having considered
    the request for approval by Parliament of the Convention on the Physical
    Protection of Nuclear Material, referred to it, recommends that the
    Council, in terms of Section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the
    said Convention.

   Report to be considered.


