---
title: 'National Assembly - 23 August 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-08-23
---

THURSDAY, 23 AUGUST 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, I, hereby, give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the DA:

   That this House debates the influx of Zimbabwean refugees into South
   Africa as a consequence of the political and economic situation in
   Zimbabwe.

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC I shall move:

   That the House debates the need to realise sustainable human settlements
   with access to livelihoods, proper recreation, education, health, arts
   and culture as well as basic services such as sanitation, clean running
   water and electricity so that the dignity of our people is restored.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC I shall move:

   That the House debates the issue of social cohesion and the challenges we
   need to confront as part of the construction of a cohesive nation in the
   building of a national democratic society.

                            ACHIEVEMENTS OF INDIA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that 15 August marks India’s independence from Great Britain
        after two centuries of remorseless colonial exploitation and
        oppression;


     2) remembers that India was one of the first colonies to break free of
        British rule after the Second World War and that its independence
        marked the beginning of the decolonisation process all over the
        world;


     3) further remembers that India played a very significant role in the
        struggle against apartheid and strongly campaigned in the United
        Nations for the isolation of and imposition of sanctions against
        apartheid South Africa; and


     4) recalls that India, Brazil and South Africa have formed a troika
        known as IBSA and that the main aim of this formation is to develop
        a common vision for enhanced South-South co-operation and the
        realisation of the development agenda of the South during the 21st
        century; and

     5) extends its best wishes to the government and peoples of India for
        their achievements over the last six decades of freedom and
        independence.

Motion agreed to.

                       LEGACY OF CHIEF ALBERT LUTHULI

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that 21 July 2007 marked the 40th anniversary of the death of
        chief Albert John Mvumbi Luthuli;


     2) further notes that Chief, as he was affectionately known, chose a
        life of hardship and persecution when he demanded of the colonial
        apartheid rule to “Let my people go” and that in doing so, he taught
        us a very important lesson: That true leaders are those who are
        prepared to sacrifice all to ensure freedom and justice;


     3) recalls that the Luthuli name has become a colossal symbol of peace
        and unity far beyond the borders of South Africa;


     4) recognises that Chief Albert Luthuli was the first African to be
        awarded the Nobel Prize, a well-deserved compliment to his deep
        commitment to peace and justice for all;


     5) acknowledges that Chief Albert Luthuli had cherished the
        establishment of a society based on the ideals of equality,
        nonracialism, nonsexism and democracy and  that this is part of the
        legacy that he bequeathed to our country and people; and


     6) calls on South Africans to preserve and celebrate the legacy of
        Chief Albert Luthuli through committing ourselves to the lifelong
        and noble effort to create a better life for all.


Motion agreed to.

                         WELCOMING MRS SONIA GANDHI

                               (Announcement)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Before we proceed with the further
business of the House, it is my honour and privilege, on behalf of the
National Assembly of the Parliament of South Africa to recognise in the
gallery a distinguished guest and her delegation: the leader of the
Congress Party of India, Mrs Sonia Gandhi. We welcome her and wish her a
fruitful visit to our Parliament and to our country. [Applause.]

                          20TH ANNIVERSARY OF SAYCO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M JOHNSON (ANC): Chairperson, 20 years ago a bombshell, a boomerang, a
catalyst of our revolution called Sayco was established on 28 March 1987 at
the University of the Western Cape here in Cape Town.

Under the nose of the apartheid, racist security establishments - some of
whose representatives or the children of those people are among us here –
Sayco was formed with a slogan: “Freedom or death! Victory is certain!”

Guided by its adoption of the Freedom Charter as its policy guide to
freedom and democracy, Sayco declared: “Better die to a man than let the
enemy pass.”

It was at a Cosas May 1982 congress that it all started, guided by one of
the resolutions that sought to accommodate the out-of-school youth,
militant and revolutionary youth and students into a congress home called
Sayco. This was a combination of mass disciplined and militant students and
armed youth of uMkhonto weSizwe, all dedicated and selflessly focused on
overthrowing the apartheid government.

This followed the legacy of the 1944 youth of yesteryear: disciplined,
dedicated and death-defying, proclaiming in its Youth League Manifesto:
  Youth is laying its service at the disposal of the national liberation
  movement, the ANC, in the firm belief, knowledge and conviction that the
  cause of Africa must and will triumph.

As we celebrate 20 years of Sayco, we shall remember those of us who are no
more, but who were in the forefront of its establishment: Tlhabano
Mogashoa, Nhunhu Kheswa, Ivan Parage, Peter Mokaba, Ephraim Mogale, Eddy
Mabitse, Parks Mankahlana, Ashley Kriel, among others.

We want to assure your families, your comrades, your friends and enemies
alike, that it was not in vain. The youth of today have you as role models.
Emulate these martyrs and join the progressive forces that seek to conclude
the mission that you and those before you have started, of bringing about a
nonracial, nonsexist and democratic society. Freedom or death! [Applause.]

        PROBLEMS IN REACHING TARGETS FOR LAND RESTITUTION AND REFORM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK (DA):  Thank you, Chairman.

Dit is ’n feit dat die Departement van Grondsake sukkel om teikens vir
restitusie en grondhervorming te bereik. Elke jaar verhoog die aantal
hektare wat nodig is om die teiken van 30% teen 2014 te bereik omdat die
jaarteikens nie bereik word nie. Die afhandeling van restitusie eise is ook
al reeds uitgestel tot 2008. Die onsekerheid van beide grondeienaars en
eisers oor hulle regte, word verleng met ’n gepaardgaande opbou van
frustrasie. Hierdie probleme word veroorsaak deur lomp administratiewe
stelsels en ’n gebrek aan kapasiteit in die department.

Dit is dus met verbasing dat ons by die DA kennis geneem het van die nuwe
plan, om vyf miljoen hektaar grond te bekom vir die gebruik van
plaaswerkers. Grondhervorming moet veral plaaswerkers bevoordeel, maar dit
kan slegs slaag as die boerderygemeenskap hierin geken word. Die nuwe plan,
aangekondig sonder dat ander belanghebbendes geraadpleeg is, lyk al te veel
na ’n verkiesingsfoefie vir die volgende algemene verkiesing in 2009.
Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[It is a fact that the Department of Land Affairs is struggling to cope
with targets for restitution and land reform. Every year the hectares
required to meet the target of 30% set for 2014, are increasing as the
annual targets are not attained. The finalisation of restitution claims has
also been postponed to 2008. This uncertainty of both the landowners and
claimants regarding their rights is prolonged with the concomitant build-up
of frustration. These problems are caused by inept administrative systems
and a lack of capacity in the department.

We in the DA were therefore surprised at the new plan to acquire five
million hectares of land for use by farmworkers. Land reform should
particularly benefit farmworkers. However, this can only succeed if the
farming community is consulted. The new plan, announced without other role-
players being consulted, certainly looks like an election ploy for the next
general election in 2009. Thank you.]

                FREEDOM OF SPEECH VERSUS THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Ngiyabonga Somlomo. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

The IFP has closely followed the debate among South Africans regarding the
Minister of Health, Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang. The president of the IFP,
Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi MP, has pointed out that the raging debate
fills him with disquiet as it borders on a witch-hunt against the Minister.
The IFP, therefore, wants to reiterate Prince Buthelezi’s stance that there
is a need to maintain the dividing line between the Minister’s public
accountability and the person’s private life.

The IFP believes that we should rather weigh the Minister in terms of her
performance in public life. The IFP has never shied away from criticising
the Minister of Health when we disagree with her, or her policies or when
they fail the constitutional test. We have, for instance, been vociferous
in our condemnation of the Minister’s role in the government’s failed
HIV/Aids policy. But our criticism has been limited to the Minister’s
public life and performance and has not crossed the line into her private
life. The current debate is dangerously close to blurring the line that
completely disregards one’s private life. I thank you. [Applause.]

           PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN COMPANIES AND GOVERNMENT IN WARD 29

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mme M J J MATSOMELA (ANC): Puso ye e eteletsweng pele ke ANC e itemogela go
tswelela e dirisanammogo le ditlamo, baagi le bogosi ka kakaretso go
tsweletsa tlhabololo le go tlhola ditiro go fedisa lehuma, gonne Setswana
sa re sedikwa-ke-ntjapedi ga se thata e bile mabogo-dinku a thebana. Seno
se tsweletswa ke baagi ba Mokgalwaneng, Maatlametlo, Disake mo Ward 29 ka
tshwaraganommogo le ba setlamo sa PPC kwa Dwaalboom.

Ba gaPPC ba ntshitse madi a ka naka R48 million go dira tsela ya sekontiri.
Ba tshwaraganemmogo le ba puso ya Bokone-Bophirima le Masepala wa Moses
Kotane. Tsela e e tla tlhola ditiro go baagi ba metse e umakilweng. Baagi
ba tla thapiwa go ya ka foramo ya ditiro e leng teng mo Ward 29.

Kwa ntle ga tsela e, go na le diprojeke tseo di leng teng tsa namolo-leuba
ka tshwaragano le ba PPC. Dikonteraka tse di thapile badiri ba e leng baagi
ba Ward 29 ba le sekete. Seno se senolwa ke seo dipholisi tsa rona di
ikaelelang go se dira go bona batho ba rona ba tswelela mo bophelong. Seno
se konotelelwa gape ke Charter ya Kgololosego. ANC e tshegetsa se. Ke a
leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana member’s statement follows.)

[Ms M J J MATSOMELA (ANC): The ANC-led government has established an
ongoing partnership with companies, communities and chiefs to bring
developments and to create jobs in order to eradicate poverty. There is a
Setswana saying which says that a problem becomes simple when you work
together with others and therefore people must help each other. This is
what the residents of Mokgalwaneng, Maatlametlo, Disake in Ward 29 do in
partnership with PPC Company in Dwaalboom.

PPC together with the North West government and Moses Kotane Municipality
donated about R48 million to construct a tarred road. This road will create
jobs for residents of the villages stated above, and they will be employed
according to the employment forum which is present in Ward 29.

Besides the construction of this road, there are also other poverty
eradicating projects available in partnership with PPC. These contractors
employ 1000 residents of Ward 29. This is a reflection of what our policies
want to achieve in order to improve the lives of our people. This is also
endorsed by the Freedom Charter. The ANC supports this initiative. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

                  HEALTH A VICTIM OF POLITICAL GAMESMANSHIP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM expresses its deep concern over
the ever deepening crisis that is playing itself out with regard to the
Ministry of Health.

What has started with the sudden and seemingly hectic step of removing the
Deputy Minister of Health has now escalated into a national scandal.
Indeed, we must accept that certain allegations against the Minister of
Health are just there as allegations. But these and other uncertain matters
should all be simple for the President to establish.

It is simply incomprehensible how the President can fire a Deputy Minister
who has been widely respected among health stakeholders and openly credited
for repairing fractured relationships between civil society and government.
The message seems to be that independent thinkers who care about the plight
of the people will not be tolerated, whilst those who are loyal to certain
individuals will be protected, irrespective of how badly their actions
might reflect on government or how negatively it affects that portfolio.

The health of South Africans is not some light matter. It is a
constitutional right that is becoming the victim of political gamesmanship.
Thank you, Chairperson.

                   ALLEGATION OF CORRUPTION IN PARLIAMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (FF PLUS): Chairperson, Parliament and the taxpayers of South
Africa have once again been defrauded. I have information that serious
fraud, theft and corruption have been committed by senior officials of
Parliament and other individuals with the awarding and implementation of
the access control and security system of Parliament.

At the centre of this row is a company called ASAP – African Strategic
Asset Protection (Pty) Limited.

For the purposes of this contract, 67% of the shares in this company were
transferred to Thobile Mtwazi, the late husband of the hon ANC MP, Ncumisa
Kondlo, who subsequently became the intestate beneficiary of 67%
controlling shares in ASAP.

Parliament has been overcharged on a continuous basis, while grey, imported
equipment of inferior quality was sold to Parliament.

Die Parlement is uitgebuit op deurlopende basis terwyl grys produkte van
swak kwaliteit ingevoer en aan die Parlement verkoop is. [Parliament has
been exploited on a continuous basis while grey products of poor quality
were imported and sold to Parliament.]
Subsequently, ASAP has been involved in a further contract with a number of
other institutions.

The FF Plus is going to request the Public Protector, as well as the
Scorpions, to investigate each and every contract of this company and all
of its subsidiaries that deal with taxpayers’ money.
I thank you, Chairperson.

                     COMMEMORATION OF WANKIE AND SIPOLIO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr O E MONARENG (ANC): This year, 2007, marks the 40th anniversary of the
start of the Wankie and Sipolio campaigns during which the combatants of
uMkhonto weSizwe and the Zimbabwe People’s Revolutionary Army, Zipra,
crossed into the then Rhodesia and took on the military might of white
domination in fierce combat symbolising the real and concrete solidarity of
the people of Zimbabwe and giving expression to the ANC’s Pan-Africanism
and internationalism.

The units of Zipra and uMkhonto weSizwe forces were not only physically
prepared, but also thoroughly politically prepared and they were very
developed with the understanding of the need to forge a strong relationship
between the forces of uMkhonto weSizwe and Zipra in what we call the Zipra
and uMkhonto Alliance.

The spirit of cohesion and unity between us and Zimbabwe African People’s
Union, Zapu, was magnificent. We were working together as one unit
consulting and discussing together. The biggest legacy of the Luthuli
Detachment at Wankie was of absolute commitment of our fighters to the
revolution to the extent where to them things like hunger and thirst were
not primary. It is this spirit of unity and cohesion and absolute
commitment displayed by the Luthuli Detachment that our country and our
people need. Amandla! [Power!]

                        INFLUX OF ZIMBABWEANS INTO SA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Chairperson, there is great concern about the
influx of people from Zimbabwe flooding our country and others in the
Southern African Development Region. The issue is not so much about their
fleeing from the land of hunger and unemployment, but more about how we in
South Africa respond to them. Different delegations from, among others,
politicians, civil society, committees of Parliament and even those from
the public service such as the police and custom officials from the South
African Revenue Service have had interactions with these people, but each
group has their own views on the matter.

The matter has become so serious that it looks like government is heading
to a point of raising its hands in helplessness. This comes to mind when
one takes into account that on occasions when questions have been fielded
in this House, the President has said that these people come and go and at
times present themselves to be repatriated so that they may go back home
and come again when it suits them.

Of great concern is that all these groups have no common response regarding
how to treat these Zimbabweans. Some politicians argue that farmers may not
effect arrests on these people and others say that in terms of some
statutes farmers are acting within their rights to effect a citizen’s
arrest while the police argue that arresting them violates their right to
freedom of movement.

The country has to come up with a common response regardless of who comes
across the illegal immigrants. The time has come that as South Africans we
sing from a common score when we deal with such issues, to avoid speaking
at variance with one another and thereby sending contradictory messages.
Thank you.

                              ELECTIONS IN KZN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. [Thank you,
Chairperson.]

Yesterday the DA won two by-elections in KwaZulu-Natal, significantly
increasing its percentage of votes. The results constitute yet further
evidence that the DA is the only viable and growing alternative to the ANC.
In the Scottburgh by-election the DA won with 886 votes, or you may say 58%
of all votes cast. This is 5% more than what the DA got in 2006. The ANC
was beaten to second place with 36%.

In the Pennington by-election the DA won with 860 votes, or you may say 63%
of all votes cast; 6% more than what the DA received in 2006. Again, the
ANC was beaten into second place with 24% of the votes.

It is still some time before the 2009 general election, but already we can
see that the DA is starting to build up some momentum as it strengthens its
position as the second largest party in South Africa, and more and more
people endorse its alternative vision of an open-opportunity society for
all South Africans and reject the ANC’s closed patronising society that
only ever benefits an elite few.  Thank you. [Applause.]

                     CONVICTION OF SHOBASHOBANE KILLERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E MBILI(ANC): The ANC in the lower South Coast region where I come
from would like to welcome the conviction of the Shobashobane killers of
Comrade Zakhele Cele who was gunned down after winning in the last local
government election in March last year. Comrade Zakhele was killed together
with his three comrades, who are Comrade Mandla Cele, Moses Gambushe and
Nkosingiphile Mavundla. We further would like to extend our appreciation to
the police in the area for work well done, assuring the successful
conviction of the murderers who got four life sentences for their crimes.
Those who were convicted were Mkhishwa Amos Khawula and Fananobani Ndovela.
That’s an interesting name. We are saying that Fananobani Ndovela ...

... uzozibona ukuthi ufana nobani ejele, edonsa izigwebo ezine. [... will
realise when he is in prison serving four life sentences who he really
looks like.]

The collaboration between the police and the prosecuting authority resulted
in the successful conclusion of this very complicated case on Tuesday, 21
August at Ramsgate Court. We trust and hope that this will send a very
clear message to the criminals out there that any form of violence, be it
political or otherwise, cannot and will not be tolerated by this
government.

We pray that this sentence will be the beginning of a long route to healing
the wounds of those who lost their loved ones. Thank you. [Applause.]

                   PEOPLE TAKING LAW INTO THEIR OWN HANDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Chairperson, four men have appeared in the
Mpumalanga Court in connection with the murder of a man who is alleged to
have committed crimes, including rape, in the Matateng village in
Bushbuckridge.

Maphanga, wa malembe ya 29, u biwile a khandliwa hi maribye na ku biwa hi
swigiya a kala a fa. Hina va IFP ha swi twisisa leswaku timhaka ka nawu ti
famba hi ku nonoka lero vaaka-tiko ku fika laha va xurhaka hi ku hlundzuka
ivi va teka nawu va wu veka emavokweni ya vona, va endla leswi nawu wu nga
swi laveki. Ha swi twisisa leswaku swi endliwa hi yini sweswo kambe a swi
fanelangi leswaku vanhu va teka nawu va wu veka emavokweni ya vona ku fika
laha va dlayaka hi ku va mudlayi a dlayile.

Swi fanerile leswaku va tirhisana swin’we na maphorisa na vaaka-tiko ku
khomisa swigevenga hinkwaso ka swona leswaku nawu wu famba hi ndlela leyi
huvo na Vumbiwa swi vulaka swona.

Ha nkhensa loko va swi kotile ku khoma lava va khomeke. Ha tshemba leswaku
van’wana va ta swi kota ku hlayisa nawu na ku khoma makhamba hinkwawo.
Inkomu. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Maphanga, aged 29, was assaulted with knobkierries and stoned to death.
The IFP understands that legal processes are so slow that citizens, in
exasperation, take the law into their own hands. We do understand the
cause, but poeple must not take the law into their own hands to the point
where they kill someone because that person has killed someone else.

It is appropriate for citizens to work together with the police in ensuring
that all criminals are apprehended. This will allow the law to take its
course, which is what is expected in terms of the Constitution and the
courts.

We appreciate the arrests that have been made. We trust that others will
respect the law and aid in the apprehension of all criminals. Thank you.]

                    TOURISM AND ROLE OF WOMEN IN TOURISM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D K MALULEKE (ANC): Chairperson, according to statistics released by
Statistics SA for 2007, this year saw the highest number of recorded
arrivals for the first five months of this year since 1998.

The increase in arrivals from across all the regions of the world and in
particular air markets reflects not only the growing awareness of South
Africa as a tourism destination but also the success of the Airlift
strategy passed by the Cabinet last year. That resulted in increased access
to the South African market for foreign carriers. International tourists
are important but local tourists are just as important and, therefore, we
need to nurture our domestic market.

During the special dinner to celebrate women’s month and saluting women in
tourism, Minister Van Schalkwyk said, “This is the inspiration for our
gathering this evening as we celebrate women’s month and salute women in
tourism on the eve of a national tourism month”.

The empowerment of women has been at the forefront of our national
liberation struggle. During national women’s month, we remember the
integral role that women played in the struggle to rid our country of the
injustices of the past and we celebrate the role that they continue to play
in the entrenchment of democracy in our society today. Through our social
responsibility programme, we have created 7 511 job opportunities for women
in tourism-related projects over the past three years. In total, through
the help of tourism enterprise programmes, 911 ...

I, therefore, wish to salute the women of South Africa and the world! [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                            PROBLEMS IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): Chairperson, “The problems in Zimbabwe must be solved by
Zimbabweans.” This was what hon Minister Trevor Manuel’s answer was to the
Zimbabwean crisis that threatens to overwhelm a once prosperous country and
subject millions of people to starvation and abuse by their leaders.

His answer, it would appear, is that we should do nothing, but sit by and
idly watch as an entire country and its people are robbed of their dignity,
their freedom and their most basic rights to food, shelter and clean water.


Only a right-wing person could do nothing. Of course, all Manuel is doing,
is to mimic our President who has made no progress whatsoever in his
mediation in the Zimbabwean crisis and seems quite content to treat the
dictator of Harare as a hero.

The hon Minister has also conveniently forgotten that during the terrible
80s the ANC didn’t even support the policy of constructive engagement which
has been pursued by some of our countries, believing that the only option
was the armed struggle.

The hon Minister has also conveniently forgotten that he is a former member
of the UDF. That organisation was subjected to the same brutal tactics that
the MDC is being subjected to, today, by the Mugabe regime.

Hon Minister, I believe that you owe the suffering masses in Zimbabwe an
apology for this heartless point of view that you have adopted. [Applause.]

            IMPROVED SERVICE DELIVERY IN WARD 100 IN JOHANNESBURG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN (ANC): Chairperson, in the local government elections of
2006, the residents of Ward 100 in Johannesburg overwhelmingly voted for
the ANC to govern the ward. The ward had experienced the uncaring rule of
the DA in the previous five years during which time no delivery had taken
place.

Since March 2006 delivery has started to roll out, which has had a positive
impact on the lives of the residents. In the informal settlement of
Zandspruit internal roads are being constructed; solar powered streetlights
have been installed; high-mast lighting has been erected; piped water has
been installed; an improved refuse collection system is being rolled out;
processes for the purchase of additional land are under way and the
construction of 500 housing units is due to start in the current financial
year.

Residents throughout the ward have expressed both their satisfaction and
confidence in the ANC. The progress made in Ward 100 since March 2006
clearly indicates that the ANC’s election commitment of, and I quote, “A
plan to make local government work better for you” is, indeed, being
implemented. I thank you.

 DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORT AND PUBLIC WORKS WORKING TOGETHER ON LEARNERSHIPS
                     AND EXPANDED PUBLIC WORKS PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J CHALMERS (ANC): Chair, 130 job opportunities for the youth and women
have been created at Jansenville and Klipplaat, as well as the surrounding
areas through an Expanded Public Works Programme.

The Departments of Public Works and Transport are busy constructing the
road between Jansenville and Klipplaat. This EPWP programme also included a
learnership; 68 learners were recruited and have just completed NQF1 on
Road Construction. NQF2 will commence in due course. The project progresses
very well with manageable challenges.

The Public Service Commission, in consultation with the Departments of
Transport and Public Works, were able to identify the best learner and the
learner was seconded for her studies in a Civil Engineering Construction
National Diploma.

Noting that these communities are poverty-stricken, we appreciate this
learnership programme and we hope it will go a long way to improve our
communities. I personally will appreciate the new road. Thank you, Chair.

                   COLLECTIVE RESPONSIBILITY OF EXECUTIVE
                              ZIMBABWEAN ISSUE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, let me deal with a few issues,
starting with the statements by the hon V B Ndlovu and the hon Nkabinde and
then coming to those raised by hon Mfundisi and hon Trent. Let me start
with the hon Nkabinde ... when I have her attention, Chair ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Nkabinde, there’s a response
to your statement.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: We serve in Cabinet, and I have done so for the
past 13-odd years. We serve as a matter of choice and we serve in the
letter and spirit of the Constitution. We take an oath of office and we
respect the Constitution and one of the things in the Constitution, in
section 91(2), is the right of the President to appoint and dismiss members
of the executive. It is there.

We have no other legal protection - we serve at his pleasure and part of
serving at his pleasure means we accept collective responsibility. There is
no place in any Cabinet anywhere in the world for people who won’t accept
the collective responsibility.

So, to try and convert those who refuse to accept discipline into heroes,
is to destroy democracy anywhere. And I would ask you, hon Nkabinde, be
careful of what you wish for.

And in the same spirit, I would like to express my fullest appreciation for
the statement by the hon Ndlovu because, indeed, we must be judged on the
service we render and we ask that the private lives of individuals be
excluded. That is the letter and spirit of democracy; it applies almost
anywhere and people who seek to undermine that, seek to undermine
democracy.

Turning to the issues in relation to Zimbabwe, the hon Mfundisi says
different government departments deal with people differently. Yesterday, I
heard the Minister of Safety and Security deal at length with the question
of the right to citizen’s arrests and the right to the protection of
private property. We can’t treat people as a group, because their entry
into South Africa is different, their conduct is different and I think that
we must allow time and circumstance to deal with the issue.

In respect of that which has been raised by the hon Trent, I say without
fear of contradiction that I and a number of my colleagues have been in
more meetings with both the ZANU-PF and the MDC trying to resolve issues
than anybody in the DA could ever dream to be. We have a commitment to the
resolution, but that commitment is something that must be expressed by
Zimbabweans as and when they are ready.

I don’t need to apologise. I will stand by the right of Zimbabweans to
elect their democratic government and what you have in Zimbabwe is an
elected government, elected on universal franchise by all the people of
Zimbabwe. [Interjections.] That is a fact. [Interjections.] Anybody who
seeks to distort that has never read anything, doesn’t understand democracy
and refuses to listen. [Interjections.] There is no point in trying to
convince them otherwise anyway. [Interjections.] Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr E W TRENT: Chair, will the hon Minister take a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): No, you had your chance. You made
a statement.

Mr E W TRENT: Yes, but now I want to ask him a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): And Questions were yesterday.
Sorry, Mr Trent, take your seat.

                       PERFORMANCE OF TOURISM INDUSTRY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, I would
like to thank the hon member Maluleke for his motion. Yes, the first five
months of this year were, from a tourism point of view, the best five
months we have had since 1998 and there are basically two major factors in
that performance. The first one is very targeted, focused marketing, which
is going well from that point of view, and the second one is the new
Airlift strategy that Cabinet adopted.

With regard to the markets, from the US, we have grown by 5% - it is good
growth from that market – and from India, growth is over 10%. But then also
from Africa there is a very encouraging trend; from Nigeria there is 22%
growth and from Kenya we’ve seen 12% growth. We are doing well in our
traditional markets as well. From France we had over 11% growth. So we are
quite satisfied.

With regard to airlines announcing that they will be flying to South
Africa, a number of airlines announced that they will now be flying to
South Africa. Delta airlines, Thai Airways and a number of others have
announced that they are increasing their flights; Air France, Lufthansa,
and so forth.

So, just from an international perspective, we are looking, again, at
another very, very good year for tourism in this country.

With regard to the issues around women’s empowerment, this year we have
allocated R65 million to the Tourism Enterprise Programme and next year it
will be R70 million. A huge percentage of that money will specifically go
to women and women-owned businesses. That is our contribution in line with
government policy. Thank you.

                      CELEBRATING THE ROLE OF OUR YOUTH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, I would like to respond to the
statement made about the exploits and achievements of the youth of our
country in the past, both at Wankie and Sipolio as well as Sayco, by saying
that we must celebrate in memory of those youth. We must celebrate the fact
that the youth of our country has since heeded the call for national
reconciliation, that the youth of our country, black and white, young men
and young women, are filling-up the ranks of the SA National Defence Force
today, joining in a common cause to defend our democracy and our nation.

We must celebrate the fact of their dedication with which they carry out
peace missions in sister countries like Burundi, the DRC, Darfur in the
Sudan, Mozambique, etc., in order to bring stability to these countries
and, therefore, lay the foundations for development.

Our government and the leaders of our respective political parties must
continue every effort to nurture the unity of all young people as a
foundation for the cultivation of a united South African nation. Therefore,
we call on all our people to unite behind the youth that will represent the
Republic of South Africa at the coming Rugby World Cup tournament in
France. Thank you.

                      CELEBRATING WOMEN’S CONTRIBUTION
                      CO-OPERATION WITH FARMERS’ UNIONS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, let me first
salute the women of South Africa during this, the women’s month. I also
want to congratulate the women of South Africa on their achievements in
tourism and business, particularly women in the rural areas, women in
finance and women in agriculture. We have gone a long way since 1994 in
terms of developing and empowering our women in South Africa and I’m sure
we’ll hear more about this during the Women’s Parliament, next week.

I would like to respond to the hon Nel that, indeed, the syllabus has left
him behind. We are working together with the farmers. A week ago we had a
meeting with the three farmers’ unions, including AgriSA and National
African Farmers’ Union, and we agreed that we are going to work together on
various issues including food security strategies, evictions and land
reform, which includes our restitution programme.

I want to reassure the hon member that indeed, the farmers have agreed to
work with us in this area and mobilise their constituency to ensure that we
fast-track land reform and meet our targets on land restitution. It is in
all of our interest to fast-track this programme, in particular
restitution, so that we can get started with the programme of nation
building and reconciliation in South Africa.

On the matter of Mrs Nkabinde, it is quite clear that she is not an
independent thinker; she has simply regurgitated all the propaganda that
she has read in the press and is simply reading it out to us, without doing
her own independent research and assessment of what really happened.

I also want to say, “Viva” to the heroes and heroines who launched the
South African National Civic Organisation, Sanco, and built the youth
movement of South Africa. [Applause.]

 CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON OPERATIONAL PROBLEMS
                        IN OFFICE OF PUBLIC PROTECTOR

Prof A K ASMAL: This is a kiss of death. [Laughter.] Mr Chairperson and hon
members, the report before the House today brings to a conclusion a rather
unique exercise in which the National Assembly and this committee have been
engaged over the past 12 months, investigating operational problems being
experienced in the office of the Public Protector and recommending
appropriate solutions.

This office plays a vital role in strengthening our constitutional
democracy in that it provides an accessible mechanism for citizens to
obtain redress in the event of improprieties in the public administration
that affect the constitutionally entrenched rights. For that reason, this
office is identified in the Constitution as one of the state institutions
that is independent of other arms of government. Furthermore, other organs
of state are enjoined to assist and protect the office to ensure its
independence, its impartiality, its dignity and its effectiveness and they
may not interfere with its functioning.

The office is, however, accountable directly to the National Assembly, and
this House, in addition, recommends people for appointment as Public
Protector and Deputy Public Protector and it may effect their removal from
office on the specific grounds of misconduct, incapacity, or incompetence.

Against this background, hon members will be aware that what gave rise to
this special intervention by the National Assembly was a rather unseemly,
unhappy and undignified public spat that developed between the Public
Protector and his deputy involving allegations and counter-allegations,
which led the Public Protector to turn to this National Assembly for
assistance.

The ad hoc committee, which was then set up by the House, was tasked to
inquire into operational problems, which were experienced in the office of
the Public Protector as reported to the Speaker, by the Public Protector.

In the first report by this committee of 5 September 2006, the committee
identified a range of operational problems in the office that negatively
impacted on its ability to function optimally. The committee reported that
some of the identified problems existed prior to the appointment of the
Deputy Public Protector and contributed to the tensions resulting in the
breakdown of relations between them.

The committee, accordingly, made a number of recommendations in a rather
lengthy report and submitted it to the National Assembly. These were aimed
at strengthening the office and resolving the specific problems. These
recommendations were adopted by the House on 7 September 2006.

The committee was subsequently reconvened by the House on 27 March 2007, in
accordance with the earlier decision of this House in September 2006 and
its purpose was to assess progress made with the implementation of the
recommendations and to determine any further action that may be required.
The committee saw it as its main task to establish whether it was satisfied
with what had been done to implement the recommendations and whether good
relations had been restored between the Public Protector and his deputy.

We then looked at the implementation of the recommendations. In response to
an invitation by the committee, the Public Protector and his deputy
submitted a report co-signed by them, detailing the measures that had been
taken, or were in the process of being taken, to give effect to the
recommendations adopted by the Assembly in order to resolve the identified
problems.

These steps included the formal observance of the lines of authority within
the office and between the office and other organs of state as identified
by the committee and a document setting out the delegated powers of the
Deputy Public Protector was also submitted, on which the committee, at the
invitation of the Public Protector, gave further guidance, because the
powers delegated were, in fact, too extensive and the committee stressed
the need to ensure that the delegated parts related specifically to the
core functions of the office.

It was also reported that key senior posts in the office, including the
chief executive and the chief finance officer had been filled, and this
came about because of the intervention of the National Assembly. The
committee is satisfied that these developments establish an adequate
foundation for the effective functioning of this office.

The Public Protector did report a concern relating to the practical
interaction between his office, the National Treasury and the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development on financial and administrative
matters and the committee recommends that the House refer these inputs to
the ad hoc committee specifically appointed to review these issues.

Well, the ad hoc committee on the Chapter 9 institutions reported to the
House yesterday, therefore completing its business. This report was written
before the legal report was submitted to the House.

Now we conclude by looking at the status of the working relations between
the Public Protector and his deputy. As I’ve said on behalf of the
committee, the committee indicated in its first report that the operational
problems in the office arose, partly, from the breakdown in relations
between the Public Protector and his deputy.

It was also reported that as at 5 September 2006, a legal action between
the Public Protector and his deputy was still pending and in the
committee’s view, it was undesirable that such action should remain in the
public domain and unresolved, as it would unavoidably impede the best
functioning of the office.

Both the Public Protector and his deputy in their engagement with the
committee on 6 May 2007, assured the committee that with the implementation
of the recommendations and the confidence-building measures, amicable
working relations between them had been restored, and they met regularly on
operational issues.

In the light of these assurances, the committee notes with concern that the
Public Protector and his deputy had not specifically met to discuss the
committee’s report, after its adoption by this House in September 2006.
Moreover, the committee must report, more in sorrow than in anger, that
despite the clear concerns expressed in the first report, no attempt has
been made by either party to settle the differences and the legal action by
the Public Protector and a counter-claim by his deputy are still being
proceeded with.

At the suggestion of the committee, I as the Chairperson, made a further
attempt to encourage a settlement, but was unsuccessful. They view the
court action as being of a personal nature and each intends clearing his or
her name, but the committee remains of the view that responsibility for the
optimal functioning of the office in our democratic dispensation must rank
as of paramount importance. In the circumstances the continuing legal
action between these two appointed senior office bearers, is inconceivable
as it will unavoidably impact on the dignity, authority and effective
functioning of the office.

When the committee says these things it is with regret, as we respect the
independence of these bodies; we respect the need to ensure their dignity;
and it is with this in mind that the committee made these recommendations.

It is hoped that the Public Protector and his deputy will reassess their
options in the interests of the vital institution they serve and its
critical role in our democracy. A clear message from the National Assembly
is necessary, in order to protect the dignity of this institution.

Mr Chairperson, the report is commended for your attention. Siyabonga.
[Thank you.] [Applause.]

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                            BANKS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, the Banks Amendment Bill
seeks to substantially announce a regulatory framework for banks in this
country. Furthermore, it seeks to effect the latest international standards
published as the Revised Framework on International Convergence of Capital
Measurement and Capital Standards, better known as Basel II or the New
Capital Accord.

The aim of Basel II is to enhance financial stability in the system by
ensuring that banks keep sufficient capital to cover various risks
associated with their business. Basel II does this by requiring banks to
risk weight all their assets and to hold minimum capital to back any loss
associated with those assets. This is important since these assets, which
are dominated by loans and advances, are predominantly funded by deposits
from the public.

Basel II, as broadly incorporated in the Bill, before the House today,
seeks to achieve this by introducing three pillars to the banking
regulatory framework. The first pillar deals with capital requirement; the
second pillar deals with the supervisory review process and the third
pillar deals with market discipline.

The incorporation of the three-pillar framework into the legislation will
ensure, firstly, that enhanced regulation of all relevant banks and banking
groups is on a consolidated basis; secondly, clearly defined roles and
responsibilities of consolidating and host supervisors; thirdly, the co-
operation and sharing of information between supervisors; fourthly,
clarifications of the responsibilities of banks, banking groups, boards of
directors of banking groups; fifthly, improved disclosure requirements for
banks and banking groups; sixthly, risk-sensitive minimum capital
requirement in respect of credit, market and operational risk exposures;
and seventhly, an enhanced supervisory review process in order to, among
other things, assess the capital adequacy and control environment of both
banks and banking groups.

The National Treasury also undertook an extensive economic impact study of
the implementation of Basel II in South Africa. The result of this study
indicates that while the potential direct impact on the bank capital
requirements, bank pricing and the macro economy is expected to be
negligible, the potential longer-term economic impact is considered to be
significantly positive, given that Basel II is expected to lead to improved
international competitiveness, enhanced financial stability and more
efficient allocation of economic capital.

The Banks Amendment Bill of 2007 has gone through very extensive
consultation. The passing of this Bill into an Act this year will ensure
that South Africa fulfils its commitment to implement Basel II on 1 January
2008, which will put South Africa in the leading group of countries that
have introduced this measure of international best practices. The passing
of the Bill will also send a clear message that the confidence that
international and local investors have in entrusting their monies with our
banks is well placed.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Registrar of Banks for
all the efforts in assisting with the Bill. I would also like to thank the
Deputy Minister, Jabu Moleketi, the Director-General of National Treasury
and his team, and more importantly, the Portfolio Committee on Finance,
under the able chairpersonship of Mr Nhlanhla Nene.

I, hereby, table the Banks Amendment Bill for consideration and debate now.
Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson and hon members, the South African economy and its
financial services under the stewardship of the ANC have risen to occupy a
position which is the envy of many in developing and developed economies
alike.

Pre-1994 we would not be in a position to discuss our position, because we
had an illegitimate government that was isolated from the rest of the world
and only catered for the needs of the few to the total exclusion of the
vast majority of the people.

The financial services sector and particularly the banking industry has
continued to be an anchor of macroeconomic stability through keeping pace
with global developments as this Bill clearly demonstrates.

The objects of this Bill, as the Minister has already indicated, are to
facilitate the implementation of Basel II and to align the Act to the
changing supervisory policy and market developments.

This Bill primarily contains amendments to the Act necessitated by the
Revised Framework on International Convergence of Capital Measurement and
Capital Standards published by the International Basel Committee on 26 June
2004. These Basel II amendments are intended to create a robust regulatory
environment that will enable the registrar to properly discharge his or her
respective roles and responsibilities in respect of banks, controlling
companies and banking groups on a single, cross-border or consolidated
basis.

It is further strengthened in the following areas. To avoid repeating the
areas that the Minister has mentioned, I’ll just run through them quite
quickly, also taking advantage that some of the people were listening:
regulation of all relevant banks and banking groups on a consolidated
basis; stating the respective roles and responsibilities of consolidating
and host supervisors; provision for co-operation and sharing of information
between supervisors – currently the Act does not make specific provision
for this co-operation; clarification of the responsibilities of banks,
banking groups and boards of directors of banks and banking groups, which
otherwise was not adequately provided for in the current legislation;
increased reporting requirements and comprehensive disclosure requirements
for banks and banking groups; facilitation of the various options available
to banks and banking groups in calculating minimum capital requirements in
respect of credit risk exposure, market risk exposure and operational risk
exposure; and elaboration of the supervisory review process in order to,
among other things, assess the capital adequacy and control environment of
banks and banking groups.

In addition, the Bill also clarifies and strengthens the powers of the
registrar to ensure compliance with the Act. He or she is empowered to
issue circulars, guidance notes and directives to request information from
relevant institutions and to impose administrative penalties. The
registrar’s power to object to the appointment of directors is also
clarified.

Currently, the regulatory authority of the registrar is limited to banks,
and this Bill extends it to divisions and controlling companies of banks in
certain respects.

This Bill also imposes an obligation on the registrar to keep a register of
registered controlling companies, branches, eligible institutions,
representative offices of foreign institutions or the subsidiaries and
branches of banks.

The other amendments are of a more technical nature and I would not want to
bore the House with those.

The committee held public hearings on this Bill and based on the responses
received we are satisfied that the Bill is acceptable to the industry and
that it is in the interests of all South Africans.

According to the note on assessment of the economic impact of Basel II by
National Treasury, SMEs are not going to be adversely affected by the
regulatory capital requirements introduced by Basel II. We are assured that
capital requirements for lending to retail SMEs are actually expected to
decrease under Basel II, which will in turn have a positive effect on SMEs’
access to finance. We are also assured that the introduction of Basel II
requirements will not change the banks’ commitment in terms of the
Financial Services Charter and BEE financing.

The commitment of the ANC-led government to the total emancipation of our
people from all kinds of bondage, including economic bondage, is at the
heart of this legislation. The ANC supports this Bill.

Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, because this is my maiden speech as DA
Finance spokesperson, I assume that the hon Minister of Finance and the
rest of the House will listen in the respectful silence normally accorded
to maidens. [Laughter.]

Perhaps you will allow me to start by saying that I have been happy serving
on the Portfolio Committee on Finance for the last two months. The hon Mr
Nhlanhla Nene is an exemplary chairman and he and his members have made me
feel very welcome and at home and I’d like to thank them for that. You’ll
be glad to know, Chairperson, that I will not detain you for very long this
afternoon.

There are just two points I would like to make: The first is to say that
South Africa’s banking structure forms part of a globalised economy. It is
absolutely right that we should shoulder the responsibilities and make the
most of the opportunities that arise. Basel II requires measures to
strengthen the soundness and stability of the international banking system
and we, through this amending Bill, seek to strengthen the South African
banking system.

The second point that I wish to make is that the subject of bank stability
is very topical and relevant, given the events of the last week and the
consequent turmoil on international markets. These were stabilised by
unexpected action by the US Federal Reserve. The loss of confidence in
certain US financial institutions resulted from what are euphemistically
called subprime loans. What they really are, are loans that had inadequate
security and borrowers who could not afford to repay them - that’s what
they really were.

The good news is that there was and is no banking crisis in South Africa.
There was no run on any South African bank and we know that if there had
been the Reserve Bank would have been ready, willing and able to step in
immediately to help. We as a party might have reservations about the extent
of bank fees and charges and we also might have greater ambitions about
more of our people being able to join the modern economy by having access
to banking services, but one thing is certain and that is that South Africa
has a modern banking system on par with the best in the world. It is
reliable and it is a positive factor in making our country able to compete
for investment funds, locally and internationally. The DA supports this
Bill.

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, it’s not every day that I follow on the hon
Gibson and particularly not when he is delivering his maiden speech in this
House. I had the privilege that he had to listen and was forced to listen
to my maiden speech in 1981 in the old Transvaal Provincial Council. We
served there together for five years, but I think he will make a worthwhile
contribution over here and in the spirit of that we wish to welcome him,
particularly as a new maiden to this particular setup. [Laughter.]

The Banks Amendment Bill is really a Bill that is based on a convention, on
a conference and that type of thing and it is very, very positive what has
happened there and that South Africa can be part of this Basel II
convention. The amending Bill introduces a plethora of new concepts in the
definition sections of the Banks Act and to be in line with the spirit of
the revised international framework known as Basel II.

The Basel II framework is based on a three-pronged structure comprising of
minimum capital requirements, the supervisory review process and market
discipline. The IFP hopes that this Bill has captured most of the important
recommendations of the Basel II framework and that the banks will over time
derive positive benefits for compliance and, therefore, the IFP will
definitely support this Bill.

Although Fidentia is not a bank, it has been masquerading in terms of
certain of its investments and it has wilfully and meaningfully misled the
organisations that are investing monies with banks and I think this is also
an aspect that the Reserve Bank, via the Financial Services Board could
take up and be sanctioned in terms of certain of these things. We support
and thank you for the opportunity. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, this Bill brings about a regulatory framework.
It defines certain expressions of the Banks Act of 1990 and other related
matters of controlling and consolidating the banking industry through
various statutory bodies and individually controlled bodies, and deals with
an accord implementation forum, the regulatory framework subcommittee, the
register, managers, supervisors, as well as organised sharing of valuable
information and technology.

The Bill, if passed, will facilitate the implementation of a capital
framework for banks, the International Convergence of Capital Measurement
and Capital Standards, a revised framework known as Basel II. As stated in
the Bill, this will strengthen the soundness and stability of international
banking systems by the adoption of stronger risk management practices by
the banking industry.

The PAC of Azania has taken a principled position, as far as the total
liberation of Africans is concerned. It will support all measures that are
intended to develop a full potential human being. The PAC of Azania will
devise all reasonable security measures in protecting the economic treasure
of the Africans and the human kingdom all over the globe.

The PAC welcomes this Bill and gives a thumbs up for other processes to be
put in place with the full roll-out of Basel II in January 2008. The PAC
firmly believes in equitable distribution of wealth, which must be state
driven. The PAC supports the Bill.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, Basel II is set to bring more sound and stable
banking to the South African banking arena. We support the Bill’s
deliberation on the registrar functions, duties and parameters that
certainly cater for clarity in this regard and steer away from any
autonomy.

Banking fraud is indeed undoubtedly a great concern and we hope that the
new system will make it impossible for crimes of this nature to be
committed.

While extended banking hours makes banking more accessible, the MF calls
for the banks to explore methods of making finance for small and medium
entrepreneurs possible with minimal risk and charges.

Technology has facilitated banking via telephone and Internet, meaning that
we do not have to leave our homes to manage our funds. However, exorbitant
bank charges eat at our funds and the MF calls for a revision of bank
charges to reduce them to a minimum.

We wish all banks well in the implementation of Basel II, but we would like
to see an oversight of the efficacy of this implementation to secure
intent.

The MF will support the Bill.

Ms J L FUBBS: Chairperson, hon members, the Banks Amendment Bill before
this House today, is yet another step in the economic and social
transformation that this country has undergone since an ANC-led government
took over.

Our ANC-led government is currently grappling with legislation that would
allow for new tiers of banking such as savings and loan banks.

This Bill based on, or informed by Basel II, enables the current highly
concentrated banking sector to be opened to the lower middle-income
consumer. This is a statutory instrument to implement the new capital
accord which will further strengthen the credibility and stability of the
international banking system of which South Africa is a sound member.

Some of the highlights which we have already heard today, which I want to
ensure that I have time to mention, are that, while improvements and risk
management systems as well as human resource training may contribute to
some degree to the cost of regulatory compliance, they would also result in
lower capital charges.

This is extremely pertinent to South Africa where the smaller banks with
limited capacity will now be able to avoid higher charges and this is
certainly going to be done through this Bill once it is enacted, by
targeting more standardised approaches which are similar to the existing
requirements of Basel I.

One of the things which, I think, we have learnt as a country and an
international banking community, is that Basel I gave us a first
opportunity to address capital requirement and risk management. But what is
particularly important is that through its implementation and application,
we began to realise, particularly South Africa and other developing
countries - but of course our banking system is on a par with the First
World - that you cannot go with a ``one-size-fits-all’’ financial system.
You need not only to strengthen the credibility and stability but you also
need to ensure that there is a lot more flexibility. And this is now being
done.

The three-pillar concept, which we all heard the Minister and others allude
to, has enabled this much broader approach to the banking system so that
“Pillar 1”, the capital requirements, “Pillar 2” the supervisory review
process, and the market discipline in “Pillar 3”, enable us to address
three interrelated but different challenges facing banking in our country.

The other fact which I think we can’t ignore is that over the past 20 years
or so, there has been, without a doubt, a significant change in the
environment that we face whereas prior to this we know that physical
geography used to be an impediment. Today it is absolutely no impediment to
the movement of money and the growth in our cross-border trade, finance and
investment, has accelerated beyond our expectations.

Perhaps another significant aspect which this Bill will address within the
Basel II framework is the technological advances that have been made - the
computing power, the storage, the networks, the communications. Of course,
there is capacity now to do what we perhaps could not have done some 20, 15
or 10 years ago - which was to develop highly sophisticated and complex
products with the advances in financial engineering.

Another aspect that I just want to touch on is that there is often a view
or perception that if we address, maintain and meet some of the
international standards required in this instance by the banking system, we
may in fact overlook the challenges facing our own country.

However, the flexible approaches that Basil II offers as options to each
country looking at it enable us to address economic groupings, financial
investments and so on, that stretch from your macro international financial
investments right down to your small and micro enterprises and so on. I
think that is very important.

Another very useful aspect of this Bill, and a very constructive aspect, is
the whole approach to the supervisory element. Rather than simply a
stickler approach, there is a home network and regulatory framework and
support process that enables the bank itself to offer far more support,
especially to fledgling financial investment institutions and the smaller
banks. Under this Bill they will be able, once it has been enacted, to
intervene at much earlier stages to prevent capital falling below minimum
levels.

Various other criteria have been identified peculiar to each country’s
financial system. Particularly important in our country, is the fact that
transparency has received a fresh sense of support. Here the enhanced
disclosure which we didn’t have before, will improve our ability to engage
and interact with the banks and will also provide incentives to avoid bank
failure and prevent it.

I think, the poorly managed banks will become more and more a thing of the
past and will no longer happen by accident because there will be all of the
capacitating.

The last point that I wish to make is that the expanded risk measures in
respect of both capital requirements and operational risk management will
lead, I believe, to more efficient allocation of resources within the banks
and improved international competitiveness while at the same time expanding
access to finance to the broader population which after all is the goal of
our ANC-led government.

The ANC supports this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, clearly it’s uncontroversial because
it is a step forward but, in expressing appreciation for the various
comments made and the detail made in the interventions by members across
the floor, let me just remind us of a few issues.

The first of these is in respect of what is raised by the hon Bhoola in
particular. Banks intermediate, and there’s a rationale that it has to
intermediate, between people who deposit and people who borrow, and if
there are fewer depositors than borrowers, then banks will charge. It’s a
rationale of intermediation. I think it’s one of the issues that we must
always be mindful of. Banks don’t generate money in and of themselves,
unless there’s a crisis and you have central bank intervention as you have
seen in the last two weeks or so.

One of the things about South Africa is just the amount of change that we
have lived through over the past 13 years. The Revised Framework on
International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards,
known as Basel II, comes at a particular point, but I think the changes are
manifest across the entire banking sector including the issues of access.

There are now three million or so South Africans who have access to banking
services that previously they didn’t have. It might still be elementary at
the level of Mzansi accounts and so on, but it is important that first-
level access is there and is part of this general change.

Also, in respect of that which banks report on and the respective Financial
Services Charter obligations, they have to report on access lending to
small business enterprise development and a series of other changes that
are now there.

I hope the hon Gibson will remain an active part of the Portfolio Committee
on Finance. Within the next few weeks, I imagine Mr Godongwana, on behalf
of the Financial Sector Charter Council, will report to the committee. It’s
very important that Parliament engages with the progress that we can
measure there.

In respect of the financial crisis, I want to comment on a very good
article in one of the newspapers, yesterday. It started with the story:
``Now I have less in my pension fund because the white boys in Albuquerque
were lending to ninjas, no income, no job and no assets’’.

When you don’t have adequate banking supervision you have that kind of
problem, where some institutions have been able to take horrible loans -
unsecured loans - package them as something else, get them triple–A rated
by rating agencies and then sell them onto derivative funds. What you’ve
seen over the past two weeks has been a knock-on effect. So, part of the
Basel II, and part of the changes we are talking of ensure that banks must
hold capital against risk.

That first pillar is so important because it’s by that introduction,
hopefully, that the largest economy in the world, the United States, will
get to the point where they, too, implement Basel II at some time in the
not too distant future, because what we’ve seen is the contagion effect of
poor supervision in some of these institutions.

Here we’d like to hold our heads up high and mark this as another important
step forward in the security of the deposits of savers, because that sends
the best possible signals about savings and investment in our economy.

Thank you very much, Chairperson, and thanks to all parties for their
support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The Bill will be sent to the NCOP
for concurrence.

                          DIAMOND EXPORT LEVY BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a first time.

                        DIAMOND EXPORT LEVY BILL AND
                  DIAMOND EXPORT LEVY (ADMINISTRATION) BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Chairperson and hon members.
Chairperson, I hope you noticed that the secretary defied you when you
asked her to read the Bill. She didn’t read the Bill, but she just read its
name. So, there is something wrong on the papers.

The imposition of an export levy on rough diamonds is contained in current
legislation. In fact, the Diamond Act of 1986 contained this provision.
However, given our new constitutional dispensation, amendments to that Act
of 1986 during 2005, resulted in the need for amendment supervisions
relating to the export levy on rough diamonds, hence a need a for a
separate money Bill.

Early in the House, Chair, you recognised the presence of the leader of the
Indian Congress Party, the hon Sonia Gandhi. She shared with us this
morning that India is a country that employs a few million people in the
cutting and polishing of diamonds, though they haven’t countries that have
any diamond resources of their own. She said that the Indian government is
very committed to ensuring that countries like South Africa, that have
considerable diamond resources, will also be able to create employment in
the cutting and polishing.

I think it is very important that we understand the context of the
legislation before us. Part of what we want to do is to ensure that there
is sufficient rough that remains in this country as a source of employment
and also for value addition. It is essentially that the levy must
facilitate and make people who want to export rough, pay. At the same time,
the primary legislation will ensure that those who want to cut and polish
in South Africa would be benefited. That is essentially what the money Bill
sets out to be.

There are a number of relief measures or exemptions covered in the
legislation: firstly, relief for large producers; secondly, for medium
sized producers, the relief there would be if 15% of the producer’s total
annual growth sale is to local diamond beneficiates; and thirdly, some
exemptions for small producers who don’t exceed R20 million a year.

The purpose of the export levy is primarily regulatory in nature. The
import credit and exemption may be limited in order to raise revenue if
deemed necessary. At this time we see no need for this limitation because
the new regulator and all related admin expenses are being fully funded on
the budget. The historical context of the local diamond industry and the
nature of how the local diamond market players operate, indicate that there
is a higher set of local beneficiation requirements on large producers.

Lastly, the diamond export levy will not be deductible for income tax
purposes. It is clear that the export levy can be avoided in full if
producers meet the necessary requirements to supply local cutters and
polishers. Hence, the levy effectively acts as a penalty where producers
fail to meet these local supplier requirements. It is, therefore,
reasonable to argue that given its penalty nature, this levy should not be
considered as being deductible expenses for income tax purposes.

I raised that here because somehow one of the journalists got it wrong and
reported that this would be deductible; but clearly it would be contrary to
the letter and spirit of the Diamond Export Levy Bill itself. Chairperson,
I, hereby, request that this House supports the Diamond Export Levy Bill,
2007. Again, I want to express my appreciation to the usual suspects,
starting with the distinguished chairperson of the portfolio committee, its
members and those involved in the Treasury - in the preparation of this
legislation. I thank you.

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, the usual suspect is back. The Minister wanted to
know if I was back and he called me. Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members,
the Bill before the House is an unequivocal demonstration by the ANC-led
government that the aspirations of the drafters of the Freedom Charter were
not a pipe dream, but a realisable vision that requires a resolute
developmental state that consciously intervenes in the best interest of the
people.

The mineral wealth of this country is at the centre of this intervention -
in an economy that is confronted by a number of challenges that seek to
undermine the enormous gains we have made since the advent of our
democracy. As has already been indicated, the main object of this Bill is
to give effect to the Diamond Act of 1986, that was amended in 1998 and
later in 2005.

The 2005 version creates space for this Parliament to make provision for
the imposition for an export levy on unpolished diamonds and also allows
for offsets with respect to that levy. The 1998 version sought to promote
local beneficiation of rough diamonds by imposing a 15% levy on the ones
exported from the country. This 15% was not able to realise its intended
objective as there are provisions or exemptions that allowed exporting
parties to justify such exports by demonstrating the promotion of local
beneficiation through other means.

This resulted the an unintended consequence that the 15% levy was rarely
applied, if ever. The ANC-led government’s policy is determined by the
needs of the people, particularly those that are vulnerable. In this
instance, the beneficiation is not only an instrument of and for economic
development, but also has the potential of creating jobs locally, through
the development of a diamond beneficiation industry.

As I have already indicated, this Bill gives effect to the Diamond Act of
2005, among other things establishing the state diamond trader with the
intention of ensuring that rough diamonds are retained in the country and
to promote local beneficiation. The state diamond trader, in terms of this
Bill, is intended to purchase 10% of rough diamonds before considering
exporting. The state diamond trader will, in turn, sell these diamonds to
local cutters for polishing and further beneficiation. This process will
create a steady long-term supply for local cutters.

This Bill proposes an export levy of 5%, as has been indicated, to be
levied on all rough diamonds exported and this is triggered by section 69
of the Diamond Act, which states that an unpolished diamond intended for
export, will be subject to this levy. The 5% levy applies to the market
value of exported diamonds as determined by this section.

As a safeguard against undervaluation, this levy will be imposed on the
greater of the two following values: The greater of the value specified by
an exporter on a return, as required by section 69 of the Diamond Act; or a
value assessed by the diamond and precious metals regulator, who in this
case is the government diamond valuator.

After lengthy deliberations on the appropriateness of the reduction of the
levy from 15% to 5%, the committee was satisfied that this rate is high
enough to contribute towards local beneficiation, whilst low enough not to
unduly encourage smuggling. The other point to be borne in mind is that
this levy is not necessarily intended to generate tax revenue, but to
encourage local beneficiation. This piece of legislation fits perfectly
into the government’s strategy informed by the People’s Charter of sharing
in the country’s wealth, in particular, mineral wealth.
The introduction of the levy does not prevent the Minister of Minerals and
Energy from granting exemptions, but to the extent that sufficient measures
exist to ensure that local cutters receive a sufficient and sustainable
supply of unpolished diamonds. In line with our democratic responsibility
of promoting public participation, the committee held public hearings on
this Bill together with the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy. We
were convinced that the stakeholders’ views were adequately canvassed and
where possible, accommodated.

To mention but a few of these: a number of industry players requested that
the definition or threshold for small mines be increased from an annual
turnover of R10 million to R35 million, in line with the threshold as per
the BEE – Black Economic Empowerment - codes used by the Department of
Trade and Industry. It was further felt that the requirement of parcels
consisting of 10 stones was always practical.

These concerns were addressed and the threshold was relaxed, and the
requirement of parcels was dropped. The other concern was that the large
producer monetary threshold of R5 billion was too high and was subsequently
reduced to R3 billion. These were just some of those concerns that were
raised and addressed and those that relate to the Diamond Act were
accordingly referred to the appropriate Ministry and committee for further
discussions.

The Bill is a conscious and deliberate intervention by the developmental
state, with a distinct objective of promoting economic development in a
manner that addresses the dual economy divide without compromising
productivity. It is the committee’s view that the passing of the Bill is
fully supportive of the objectives of the Diamond Act and that, once
passed, the constraints prevailing as a result of the void, will be laid to
rest. The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, the primary objective of the Diamond Export
Levy Bill is to provide for the imposition of an export levy on rough
diamonds and to allow for offsets, or credits, against the levy. The Bill
aims to replace the 15% with a reduced 5% levy on diamonds exclusively
purchased and exported through the Diamond Exchange and Export Centre. It
further aims to disallow local diamond houses and traders as sites for
export sales.

Some proposed relief measures include credits on imported unpolished
diamonds; temporary export for expo and display purposes; and a 5% window
in respect of the threshold requirements. Levels of exemption to local
large, medium and small producers will still be applicable, subject to
different turnover and threshold requirements for local sales and the DEEC
tendering process, where the Minister may waive some of these requirements
for large producers.

The secondary objective is to promote local beneficiation of the polishing
and cutting of rough diamonds. This will be based on the following:
Producers will be obliged to sell a portion of their production to the
state diamond trader, who in turn will resell this to local cutters and
polishers. Diamonds for export from the state diamond trader will not be
exempt from the 5% levy. Exemption will be applicable to the extent that
local cutters and polishers receive a sufficient and sustainable supply of
unpolished diamonds.

The objective of the Diamond Export Levy Administration Bill is to provide
for the administration matters relating to the imposition of the
requirements of the Diamond Export Levy Bill.

The most critical implications of this Bill, among others, is the fact that
all legal persons must be registered with SARS if they want to acquire an
export permit and the fact that the term ``producer’’ will be extended
beyond the holder of the mining rights to other companies within the same
group.

Voorsitter, daar is egter sekere bekommernisse ook geïdentifiseer: Om
kompeterend op die uitvoermarkte te wees, het produsente die vrystelling
van hierdie heffings nodig. Dis ’n kompeterende wêreld daar buite. Hulle is
verplig om hul diamante by die DEEC aan te bied hoewel daar geen beheer is
oor wie hierdie kopers is nie. Krediete teen die heffings kan verdien word
slegs as hulle diamante aan plaaslike bevoordeeldes verkoop word, terwyl
slegs die onverkoopte gedeelte dan uitgevoer kan word.

Ongelukkig is daar tans geen bewyse beskikbaar om die lewensvatbare en
volhoubare kapasiteit te bevestig en om te sien dat die bedryf wel sal
groei en ontwikkel nie.

Die toename in die regulasies vanuit hierdie wetsontwerp mag die nadeel
inhou dat dit verdere vastekapitaalinvestering in die diamantmyn- en die
slyp- en poleerbedrywe kan ontmoedig.

Groot mynhuise kan selfs oorweeg om hulle basisse na ander lande met meer
stimulerende vereistes, te verskuif. Sulke optrede sal ons diamante se
kompeterende voordeel op die wêreldmarkte verswak, met moontlike
werksverliese, wat natuurlik strydig is met die bedoeling van plaaslike
bevoordeling van slypers en poleerders.

Hierdie wetsontwerp gee ook aan die Minister van Finansies die magte om
invoerkrediete aan te pas as ’n inkomstemeganisme.

Ná ’n deeglike evaluering van die inhoud van hierdie wetsontwerp, wat
noodwendig saamgelees moet word met ander diamantverwante wetgewings, is
dit geensins duidelik dat dit in werklikheid tot voordeel van beide die
diamantmyn- asook die diamantslyp- en -poleerbedryf sal strek nie.

Die DA sal daarom nie hierdie wetgewing in sy huidige formaat steun nie. Ek
dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Certain points of concern, however, were also identified. In order to be
competitive on the export markets, producers need exemption from these
levies. It is a competitive world out there. They are obliged to offer
their diamonds at the DEEC, although there is no control over who these
buyers are. Credits against the levies can only be earned if they sell
their diamonds to local beneficiaries, and only the unsold portion can then
be exported.

Unfortunately there is no evidence available at present to confirm the
viable and sustainable capacity and to provide assurance that the industry
will indeed grow and develop.

The increase in regulations resulting from this Bill might have the
disadvantage of discouraging further fixed capital investment in the
diamond mining and cutting and polishing industries.

Large mining houses might even consider moving their bases to other
countries with more stimulating requirements. Such action will weaken the
competitive advantages of our diamonds on the world markets, with possible
job losses, which, of course, is contrary to the objective of benefiting
local cutters and polishers.

This Bill also confers on the Minister of Finance the powers to adjust
import credits as an income mechanism.

After thorough evaluation of the contents of this Bill, that needs to be
read together with other diamond related legislation, it is not at all
clear that it will, in fact, be to the advantage of the diamond mining and
diamond cutting and polishing industries.

For this reason the DA will not be supporting the legislation in its
present format. Thank you.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP wants to reiterate its support
for the diamond levy Bills before us.

As the hon chairperson has said, the proposed diamond levy Bill of 2007
reduces the export levy on rough diamonds to 5%. It replaces the current
15% export levy as provided for in the Diamond Act of 1996.

The aim of the levy under the current Bills is not intended to generate
revenue but rather to encourage the supply of rough diamonds to the local
polishing and cutting industries.

The beneficiation of rough diamonds is seen as important to encourage local
economic development, skills and employment creation. The IFP sincerely
trusts that this will indeed happen.

Furthermore, the Bills are in line with the spirit of the previous
amendments made to the Diamond Act in 2005 and the Diamond Second Amendment
Act 30 of 2005.

For these reasons the IFP has no grounds to object to the passing of these
Bills.

With tongue, in cheek, and also maybe playing devil’s advocate, I heard
that De Beers and others didn’t object about the taxation aspects. I also
think that it was better that they didn’t do so, because apparently they’ve
taken almost a truckload of diamonds out of this country and I don’t know
whether the appropriated levies had been paid at that stage. I’m talking
about prior 1994 and in terms of this it would be perhaps prudent for them
to stay a bit out of the limelight in terms of this particular Act and also
support the Bills. I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Speaker, the matter of mineral resources in the
country has been a contentious issue since the arrival of the European
immigrants in the 16th century in Azania. Diamond, gold, copper and many
other mineral resources were mined at will without any form of regulation
by the aggressors whose belief was to take anything at our disposal and
make us perpetual slaves and keep us in permanent poverty as is the case
today.

The PAC of Azania welcomes efforts such as those contained in this Bill to
regulate the export of unpolished diamond from our country. The 5% levy on
the export of unpolished diamonds will assist in the development of our
underdeveloped country where the majority of the Africans are living in
squalid conditions.

The PAC of Azania firmly believes that this Bill that is tabled, if
controlled, monitored and evaluated accordingly, may produce the required
outcomes of job creation through our local beneficiation.

The involvement of diamond exchange institutions and the diamond export
centre will be a deterrent factor to any form of cheating. The medium and
small diamond producers will benefit from the exemptions of the export levy
and this may go a long way in making sustainable African diamond producers.
The mining industries need an economic revolution that will speedily turn
it into a conveyor belt of world distribution in our country. The PAC
supports the Bill.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Some religious beliefs identify diamonds as the tears of God
– that’s how important they are. Diamond sales are lucrative globally, and
South Africa over the years has supplied the world with many of these
exquisite stones.

We are pleased that this Bill serves to develop a local beneficiation
industry and shall allow new entrants, dealers, cutters and polishers to
participate in the diamond industry. We hope that the identification of a
need for more polishers and cutters would stimulate growth employment and
interest in this arena.

The export levy shall harness control over the export of rough diamonds and
encourage local beneficiation. The MF believes that the state diamond
trader shall further manage and control the industry. We believe that the
Bill has encouraged a fair discharge of the tax burden between role
players.

The MF voices its support to end the trade of blood diamonds globally. We
call on the House to secure the diamond industry from this inhumane and
illegal trade. The MF supports the Diamond Export Levy Bill. I thank you.

Mr S E ASIYA: Mhlalingaphambili, ndiyabulela, ndibhotisa kananjalo. [Thank
you Chairperson and greetings to you all.]

This is the first time that I will be deliberating or standing here in the
absence of my colleague, my friend and a comrade, Comrade Yusuf Bhamjee,
who has been redeployed to KwaZulu-Natal. I hope that he will move from
stride to stride there in KwaZulu-Natal.

Somlomo ohloniphekileyo, baPhathiswa abahloniphekileyo, malungu
ahloniphekileyo nani maqabane. Le ntetho ndiyinikela kubafundi
abangamalungu eCosas beminyaka yama-’70. Aba bafundi bathatha uMqulu
weNkululeko bawenza umkhomba-ndlela wabo. Yaba luxanduva lwabo ukuba baseke
amasebe olutsha kwiilali, iidolophana, iidolophu, iinqila neengingqi
zoMzantsi Afrika jikelele. Loo nkqubo yenza kwaba lula ukusekwa kombutho
owaba ngugalel’ ebhayini, iSayco, eyongamela yonke imibutho yolutsha apha
emhlab’ uhlangene.

Lo mbutho wasekwa ngomnyaka ka-1987 apha eKapa, kwaye wathi wazimanya
nombutho wabahlali i-United Democratic Front. Isikhokelo sayo yonke le
mibutho neenkqubo zayo zazisekelwe kuMqulu weNkululeko. Ndifuna
ukugxininisa kumhlathi othi: “Abantu baya kwabelana ngobuncwane beli
lizwe.”

Elinye lamagunya aqulathwe kuMgaqo-siseko weli lizwe lithi amalungu athe
anyulwa ngabantu, kulilungelo lawo ukuba aphumeze imithetho eya kwenza
inguqu kweli lizwe loMzantsi Afrika. Kwinkongolo ye-ANC eStellenbosch
ngomnyaka ka-2002, lo mbutho wathi waphawula ukuba izimbiwa zeli lizwe
zisaweliswa iilwandle ukuba ziye kugqityezelwa khona, nto leyo ebangela
ukuba abantu beli bangaxhamli kwizimbiwa zeli.

Lo Mthetho uYilwayo uthiwe thaca apha uzama ukulungisa oko. Inkqubo yale
Ndlu ibekekileyo isinika igunya lokuba siwuphumeze lo Mthetho uYilwayo. Lo
Mthetho uYilwayo uthe wahliwa amahlongwane yikomiti, saze savumelana
ngamxhelomnye ngawo. Ngoko sibongoza le Ndlu ibekekileyo ukuba iwamkele.

Lo Mthetho uYilwayo uguzula amasolotya oMthetho ka-1986, uMthetho
onguNombolo 56, kwaye unika igunya lokuba iidayimani ezikrwada ezifumaneka
emhlabeni nakwizimbiwa zeli zilungiswe, zigqityezelwe kweli ukuze
noosomashishini abasakhasayo bakwazi ukuxhamla.

Urhulumente oxhuzula imikhala we-ANC, ugweba indlala kwaye lo Mthetho
uYilwayo uza kuvula amathuba emisebenzi nakwimizi-mveliso esakhasayo ukuze
nayo iphuhle, de ifikelele kwinqanaba loosomashishini ekukudala bexhamla.

Ngokuphumeza kwethu lo Mthetho uYilwayo, liya kuba liphelile ithuba
koongxowa-nkulu ababehlawula ama-50 ekhulwini njengerhafu. Kwaye babe
neendlela abebesithi ngazo bakwazi ukuphepha ukuhlawula ezi rhafu. Ngoku
wonke ubani othi ashishine ngeli litye linomthika uya kuhlawula irhafu
esisihlanu ekhulwini. Liphelile ithuba lokuba athi ubani xa ethe walizuza
eli litye kufuneke ukuba asimbele isinqe aye koo-De Beers, bona bamvuze
ngendlela abathanda ngayo. Loo nto ibibangela ukuba abantu bakuthi
balithubelezise eli litye baye kulithengise kumazwe angaphandle.

Ngoko ke, ngokumisela kwethu lo mthetho, sithi wonke umntu weli lizwe
uvumelekile ukuba axhamle kolu shishino. Kambe, senza isilumkiso kubantu
abaza kuthi gqolo bethengisa eli litye linomthika kumazwe angaphandle
ngelithi baya kudibana neembila zithutha.

Ndimvile umhlekazi obe suka apha esithi oo-De Beers noobani bavumile, kodwa
manditsho ukuba bekungemnandanga, kuba kaloku bebexhamla. Sixambulile
phambi kokuba bavume oo-De Beers, ukuze kube nokuxhamla wonke ummi weli.
Kodwa ke, ngokukhokelwa ngusihlalo wethu, siye savumelana ngamxhelo-mnye
ngalo Mthetho uYilwayo uthiwe thaca apha.

Njengommi nomhlali wephondo loMntla Koloni, ndiziva ndinemincili xa
kusenzeka ezi nguqu. Wagwetywa ndlala!, kuba kuza kuvuleleka amathuba
emisebenzi ze kuphuhle nezakhono. UMphathiswa ebesetshilo ukuba i-Indiya
ithi ikulungele ukuba ithumele amagosa ayo ukuba aze kusifundisa indlela
yokupolisha nokusika, ukugqibelelisa iidayimani zethu.

Kubantu baseKimberley, Barkly West, Richtersveld, Longlands, nabezinyee
iidolophu kwamanye amaphondo, ndithi: Indlala igwetyiwe! Nali ithuba,
masilisebenzise. Umbutho wesizwe, iNkongolo, uyawamkela lo Mthetho uYilwayo
kwaye ubongoza le Ndlu ibekekileyo ukuba nayo yenjenjalo, iwamkele. Camagu!
Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, Ministers, hon members and comrades, I dedicate my speech
to the learners who were members of Cosas of the 1970s. These learners took
the Freedom Charter forward and used it as their guideline. They took it
upon themselves to form new youth organisations in villages, in towns and
cities, in regions and districts all over South Africa. Because of these
initiatives it was very easy to form the umbrella organisation which was
called Sayco, which in turn brought all youth organisations under its
banner in this country.

This organisation was formed in Cape Town in 1987 and it joined forces with
the community organisation called United Democratic Front. The foundation
for all of these organisations was based on the Freedom Charter. I want to
emphasise this phrase: “The people shall share in the country’s wealth.”

One of the key responsibilities contained in the Constitution for the
members who have been elected by the people is to see that they pass laws
which will bring change here in South Africa. At the ANC conference in
Stellenbosch in 2002, the ANC acknowledged that minerals of this country
are still exported in order for beneficiation abroad and this leaves the
people here suffering because they do not benefit anything.

This Bill aims at correcting that. This House gives us the right to pass
this Bill. The committee looked at this Bill thoroughly and we finally
agreed on it. We therefore ask this august House to accept this Bill.

This Bill is an amendment to Act No 56 of 1986 and it gives the right not
to export our raw material so that the small businesses of this country
could benefit.

The ANC-led government is opening doors for growth even to small companies
and this Bill will create business opportunities for small business and
they will also grow their businesses like the other businesses.

When this Bill is working the chances of bigger companies paying 50% will
be over. They also have the chance of not paying the tax. Now everybody who
is dealing with diamonds will pay the same amount of tax which is 5%. De
Beers is no longer going to enjoy the privilege of taking part in diamond
dealing and pay what ever amount to compensate. Because of the heavy burden
of tax people were taking these materials secretly and sending them to
other countries.

Through this Bill everybody is getting a chance to enjoy this trade. We are
warning people against selling these materials to other countries because
they will be in trouble.

I heard the hon member who spoke here earlier on saying that De Beers and
others agreed to the conditions but I must mention that they were not happy
because they had previously always enjoyed the privileges. We did struggle
before De Beers and others agreed to ensure that everybody in this country
enjoys the fruits. Through the leadership of our chairperson we eventually
agreed on the Bill currently being debated.

As a resident of the Northern Province myself, I feel very happy to see all
these changes. There will be no hunger because there will be more job
opportunities and economic growth. The Minister did tell us that India is
willing to send expetts to come and show us how to polish and cut our
diamonds.

To the people of Kimberley, Barkley West, Richterveld, Longlands, and other
towns in other provinces I would like to say: There shall be no more
hunger! Here is our chance, let us use it. The ANC supports the Bill and
asks this House to do so as well. Well done! Thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, this was clearly a very entertaining
debate this afternoon. I liked the way in which the hon Asiya stretched
from youth in 1987 to diamonds. I liked it.

I think it’s necessary to record the fact that the history of this country
has been shaped by the quantum of these stones that have been found. There
is an interesting bit of that history that suggests that the original De
Beers farm where the diamonds were discovered in 1867 was in fact in the
Republic of the Orange Free State, and the border was moved.

All of these are part of our history and, I think, understanding this
issue, understanding the transfer of wealth, understanding the construction
of a South African global monopoly, in fact, in the management of diamonds,
it is important in understanding the context of this legislation.

It surely can’t be correct that all of the wealth can be removed, and
nothing remains – no jobs, no wealth, and so, in the letter and spirit of
the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, we establish natural
patrimony over our mineral rights and so we must use it to the benefit of
all South Africans. That’s the objective of this legislation.
[Interjections.] The hon Bekker says that De Beers removed a truckload of
diamonds!

There are two points to make. I read something, a few weeks ago, in a
Sunday newspaper. The journalist writes, because he doesn’t ask questions,
that a new train line will be constructed to carry diamonds. Now, you need
to find a heck of a lot of these things to construct a train line to carry
diamonds!

The second point to make is: We don’t know what the truckload is worth,
because it could be highly valued gems, or they could be industrial
diamonds, and so, part of managing this is understanding the detail and
ensuring that the diamond trader has the requisite skills and capabilities
in place.

Essentially, I think that the legislative arrangement here must lay the
basis for an ease of administration to ensure that those who extract the
diamonds from the earth either commit to a legitimate business, or they
steal. That, I think, is what we must try and do. I have looked at mineral
legislation from around the world and I am pretty sure that in some of
these areas, we actually are quite tame.

It is a very necessary step forward and as I said earlier, I am very
encouraged by the way in which we are being egged on by the hon Sonia
Gandhi and others from around the world to actually take this up more
seriously.

Against this background, I am concerned that the hon Marais says that the
DA will not support this legislation. It’s fine if people don’t want to
comply. They can leave our diamonds and go away. It’s as simple as that. We
are saying that it’s not a revenue measure. The hon Bekker was clear about
this. It’s not a revenue measure. It’s using our natural resources to
improve the quality of life of more people than just those who happen to
have the licence. If that doesn’t accord with the principles that the DA
supports, well, that’s tough.

I am glad that the majority of parties in this House support it. I think
that it’s a very progressive step, and one that we must support and ensure
that, from time to time, the administrators will come back to Parliament
and report on the progress in respect of this legislation. It’s one of
those things that we want to measure.

In respect of the hon Likotsi, I have a bit of a problem, sir. You spoke
about the mineral wealth of Azania. I have looked again at the Bill. It’s
the Republic of South Africa Diamond Export Levy Bill. So, it only covers
South Africa. It doesn’t cover Azania. Thanks for the support anyway.
Thanks so much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any objections to the Diamond Export Levy
Bill being read a second time? [Interjections.] Do you want us to note your
objections?

Ms S V KALYAN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Will you please record the
objection of the DA?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish you had stood up there longer so that you could
make other members who do not have blazers of their own institution
jealous! [Interjections.]

Diamond Export Levy Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance
dissenting).

Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Bill read a second time.
The House adjourned at 16:02.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS.TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

         (a)     National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2007]
              (National Assembly– proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of
              Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 30142 of 3 August 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days
TABLINGS

National Assembly

1. The Speaker

    (a)     Final Report of the Special Pensions Board, from the Minister
        of Finance, in response to recommendations in the Report of the
        Portfolio Committee on Finance on the progress report from the
        Special Pensions Board on the Implementation of the Special
        Pensions Amendment Act, No 28, 2005, (Act No 69 of 1996, as
        amended), as adopted by the House on 16 November 2006.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance.

