---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 02 November 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-11-02
---

FRIDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at the Pniel Cricket Club in Pniel, Stellenbosch, at 10:41.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                   WELCOMING OF PRESIDENT OF SOUTH AFRICA

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, order! Hon members, order! Order!
There will now be a moment for silent prayer or meditation... May we,
please, be seated? Hon members, may I draw the attention of those who are
not aware of the formal sitting of the National Council of Provinces, to
the fact that we now have a formal sitting and not a public hearing.
Please, everybody must keep quiet. There must be no noise today, unlike
what we had during the course of the week, which was a very good noise. But
today, could you please be quiet and listen?

The President of the country has come here to talk to us. So, from the
back, the middle part there and everybody in this part of the marquee, let
us all be quiet.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the President of the
Republic of South Africa to the sitting of the National Council of
Provinces in Stellenbosch District Municipality, here in Pniel. I am
pleased that the President has graced this occasion to address us. I,
therefore, call upon the President to address us. [Applause.]

      DEEPENING THE DEBATE ON TRANSFORMATION FOR A BETTER LIFE FOR ALL

                            (President’s Address)

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Chairperson,
Premiers, hon members of the NCOP, distinguished guests, people of
Stellenbosch, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for the honour to
address this important annual meeting of the NCOP. I am indeed very happy
that my address to the NCOP takes place once more during your programme of
Taking Parliament to the People so as to engage citizens on matters that
confront them on a daily basis.

I must say, Chairperson, that indeed I am very pleased that you came out
here so that you could listen to what the people are saying in this part of
our country, because we know of some of the problems that face us here. The
problems, for instance, that face the farmworkers, people who live and work
on the farms, the problems of poverty, housing and the problems of people
being chased away from areas where they have lived for so many, many years.

I would hope, Chairperson, that indeed, having listened during the session
of Taking Parliament to the People, we will, all of us as government,
respond to all of the matters that the people will have raised. I would
sincerely like to express my gratitude for this campaign of broadening
participation on parliamentary matters, ensuring that the work of this
important organ of our public representatives is not just confined to the
parliamentary precincts, but also involves dynamic engagements with the
masses of our people in giving real meaning to the galvanising liberation
call that “the people shall govern”.

This year marks the 5th anniversary of the NCOP programme of taking
parliamentary sittings to the people. When we first launched the programme
back in 2002, we expressly stated that it was aimed at ensuring the
advancement of the vision of Parliament, which is

   To build an effective people’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs
   of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better
   quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

Importantly, this programme has also seen active mass participation by
ordinary people, including women and the youth, throughout the provinces
that the NCOP has so far visited. In this way, our people have been able to
share their experiences, both positive and negative, with their elected
representatives. They have also made useful inputs into the improvement of
the systems of governance designed to provide services to communities.

Accordingly, the programme has provided government with an opportunity to
impact positively on the lives of the people by identifying constraints and
weaknesses at the provincial and local levels and to inform the oversight
work of the NCOP.

Hon members, you have chosen a very important theme for this event, which
is: “Deepening the debate on transformation for a better life for all”.
Appropriately, this theme seeks to galvanise all of us, as South Africans –
black and white, urban and rural, and young and old - into an ongoing and
vigorous process of engagement so as to enhance the quality of the national
debate in the process of transforming our country.

In this regard, deepening the debate on transformation throws up a
challenge to all of us to honestly confront key issues that constitute the
background, dynamics and characteristics of our public debate, as well as
assess the breadth and inclusiveness of our national dialogue.
At the same time, engaging and deepening national debate affords us an
opportunity to ask obligatory questions that touch on the ownership,
production and distribution of the means of information, as well as the
consumption patterns of ideas encased in the general rubric we call “the
public debate”.

I am confident that, through our national dialogue, we are motivated by our
shared national interests to promote the vision of a society free of the
crippling divisions of racism and sexism, working to realise the goal of a
better life for all South Africans.

Critically, the key issue of the production, distribution and consumption
patterns of ideas on the national stage is necessarily compounded by the
unique character of our society, which is shaped by the history of
colonialism and apartheid, marked by glaring inequalities in ownership
patterns, literacy, capital and, in many cases, access to information.

Among other things, the repercussions of this historical reality, which, in
turn, has disfigured our shared modern reality, serve to forestall
significant sections of our people from meaningful engagements with certain
forms of media, which are powerful and pervasive, thus further distorting
prevailing currents of thought in the national domain.

Accordingly, for us to deepen the debate on transformation to build a
better life for all also means to pay close attention to the matter of who
frames the public discourse in South Africa; why this has been almost an
exclusive monopoly of certain groups; and whether we have the means and the
will to ensure that the production of ideas is a process that serves the
interests of all South Africans as well as advancing the agenda of
transformation.

This theme is also very relevant to the areas of focus that you identified
for this event, which, as you know, are social transformation in areas such
as education, health, housing, social security, sport and recreation, land
and agriculture, economic transformation - which includes the empowerment
of women and youth - the economic programmes and policies, sharing of
economic opportunities, the implementation of Asgisa, the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative for SA, and Jipsa, the Joint Initiative on
Priority Skills Acquisition, to alleviate poverty, public transport
infrastructure, the Expanded Public Works Programme and job creation.

You have identified safety and security – specifically, community
involvement in fighting crime, domestic violence, strategies for fighting
violent crime, governance and local service delivery, which include the
capacity of local government, strategies to assist local government and
intergovernmental fiscal administration.

For us to be able to deepen the debate on transformation for a better life,
we need, first and foremost, to tell the truth about the focus areas you
have identified and the general reality of South Africa.

I have no doubt that, in your provincial visits, as part of the programme
of Taking Parliament to the People, many of the hon members would have
better understood Amilcar Cabral’s famous assertion, namely “Tell no lies;
claim no easy victories”. Clearly, to avoid telling lies and claiming easy
victories means to know the actual reality and tell the truth as it is.

I am confident that the NCOP embarked on this programme of Taking
Parliament to the People so as to avoid telling lies and claiming easy
victories. You come out to the people to hear for yourselves about the
actual living conditions of the people and whether government programmes
are having any impact on their lives, especially the lives of the poor, and
identify things that need to be changed as well as any additional
programmes that should be put in place with the objective of strengthening
the national effort towards a better life.

Indeed, all spheres of government constantly engage in the izimbizo
campaigns because, among other things, the masses of our people who attend
the various izimbizo, speak truthfully about their conditions, where
progress has been made, weaknesses in government's systems, where and what
to improve.

These masses express their views freely, frankly and in a spirit that shows
they are unencumbered by the so-called stifling of debate from officialdom.
In most instances, these masses address issues, neither in an artificial
manner nor in a sensational way, because to them the resolution of their
living conditions is more critical than melodramatic headlines.

Recently, Statistics SA released the Community Survey 2007 findings which
revealed, among other things, the level of transformation in the lives of
South Africans. Having collated responses from over 230 000 households,
this community survey is the largest and most comprehensive conducted by
Statistics SA outside the census surveys.

The survey which collected information on population size, composition and
distribution, migration, fertility and mortality, disability and social
grants, school attendance and educational attainment, labour force and
income, found that, overall, the conditions of life of the majority of
South Africans have improved markedly since 1996.

Service delivery on all these developmental markers has improved
dramatically since its two previous surveys, underlining the fact that
government has been working tirelessly since 1994 to ensure that it meets
its commitment with regard to the challenge of advancing progressively
towards the achievement of the goal of a better life for all.

The fight against poverty is central to the work of the democratic
government and drives government's programme of action. As hon members
know, government has different programmes that are implemented in an
integrated manner to push back the frontiers of poverty. Among these anti-
poverty programmes, we are working on a comprehensive social security
system to further strengthen the national support system for the poor
people of our country.

According to the Community Survey 2007, over 11 million South Africans now
access the social grant. An overwhelming majority of these make use of the
Child Support Grant, while pensions formed the second biggest grant, with
just over 21% drawing from this fund.

We know as a matter of fact that if we had not intervened in the manner
that we did through the social security system, more than 11 million South
Africans would be living in abject poverty.

Furthermore, since 1994, housing has always been an important aspect of our
reconstruction and development programme. Today, over 70% of South Africans
live in informal houses. The percentage of households living in formal
houses has increased from 64% in 1996 to over 70% in 2007. In addition, the
number of people with no access to any toilet has reduced significantly
since 2001, and now we have improvements. This year 55% have access to
flush toilets, an improvement from 49% in 2001.

However, challenges still remain. While we continue to build more houses
for the homeless, approximately 15% of the population still lives in
informal dwellings.

Another important part of the promise for a better life for all includes
the provision of electricity. Today, 80% of South African households use
electricity as the main source of lighting in their houses. This is indeed
a very dramatic improvement, especially when compared to the 57,6% in 1996.


What is important is the impact that electricity is having, especially on
the rural poor, with more people falling in the provinces that are mainly
rural accessing electricity. You know the figures, Chairperson, for
instance, for Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, Free State, North-
West and Northern Cape.

We have also seen a marked improvement in the area of access to clean
water, with 88,6% of the people in the country having access to clean water
today.

Furthermore, education, which is undoubtedly the most powerful weapon in
our arsenal in the fight against poverty and which, as a result, receives
the second largest portion of our budget, still poses serious challenges.
Overall, the number of South Africans who now receive some form of
education has increased by nine per cent since 1996.

School attendance, which is now compulsory for children aged 7-15 has
ensured that 74% of our youth aged between 5 and 24 now attend school.
Today, 40% of South Africans have some secondary education, which is a six
per cent increase from 1996. Higher education, the source of the much-
needed skills in our country, also reflects notable improvements. On this
front, the survey revealed that 9,1% of our people over the age of 20 have
now completed some form of tertiary education, as opposed to seven per cent
in 1996.

Although these figures indicate important improvements in the number of
people who are now able to access education, without doubt, it is clear
that we must intensify our work to ensure that access to education is
improved and further enhances the quality of our school-leavers and
graduates.

Again, we have seen important improvements in the area of job creation in
the past few years. For instance, between December 2004 and December 2005,
there was a 2,2% increment in employment in the formal non-agricultural
sector.

Recently, between June 2006 and June 2007, the number of employed people
grew by 3%, adding over 200 000 new jobs in the formal, again, non-
agricultural economic sector. The trend of increased employment continues
annually.

We are, of course, the first to admit that we need to substantially
increase these numbers so as to radically reduce our unemployment rate.
This means, among other things, improving the skills of our people,
ensuring more investment in the productive economy and attracting more
domestic and foreign investment into our economy.

All these positive findings confirm our commitment as government to the
pursuit of the goal of a better life for all. Of importance also is that we
are well on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals to which
we committed ourselves.

I have cited these findings of the Community Survey 2007 which communicate
the same message that we get in various izimbizo campaigns that life today
is better than yesterday and tomorrow it will be much better than today. I
have referred to this survey also to say that, to deepen the debate on
transformation for a better life means that we should tell the truth about
the progress we are making as South Africans towards a better life.

That truth must, of course, also reflect on the fact that there are many
things that are still outstanding, as the hon members of the NCOP would
have heard from the local community here at Stellenbosch. But there are
many challenges in respect of all of these issues, whether housing,
electricity, water or jobs, that we must still attend to.

But, those who are so bold as to make outrageous suggestions that the lives
of our people are worse now than during the apartheid period should tell
our people that a shack is more habitable than a house, that the bucket
system is preferable to a flush toilet, that river water is healthier than
clean water and that candles burn brighter than electric globes.
[Applause.]

Hon members, in the past few months, many South Africans would have seen
strong suggestions from sections of the media that the South African
government is bent on destroying media freedom. A few of these have even
attempted to draw comparisons with the repugnant apartheid government which
in 1977 banned a number of publications, including The World and The
Weekend World.

These suggestions arose because of two matters - the consideration of the
Films and Publications Amendment Bill currently before this House, as well
as the theft of medical records of the Minister of Health, which ended up
in the hands of a Sunday newspaper.

As hon members of the NCOP know, with regard to the Films and Publications
Amendment Bill, it is stated that the intention is to amend the Films and
Publications Act of 1996, so as to make further provision for the
prohibition of child pornography; to provide anew for the designation of
the Chairperson of the Review Board; to make certain textual alterations;
to make further provision regarding the classification of films and
publications; to provide for the registration of Internet service
providers; to provide for an obligation to report offences involving child
pornography and to increase penalties for offences involving child
pornography; and to provide for matters connected therewith.

Now, you hon members must still decide how you would deal with this Bill.
The point I would like to make with regard to the debate around this Bill
is that many South Africans who are not in Parliament or have not had the
opportunity to read this Bill, but rely on both our print and electronic
media will be forgiven for thinking that this is a law - where are we going
to put this thing - whose intention is to beat the former apartheid
Minister of Law and Order, Jimmy Kruger, at his game of gagging the media.

In general, not enough has been done to appraise consumers of news of the
main purpose of the Bill, giving the possibility for the media, within this
context, to indicate the areas which in their view may infringe on their
work.

Accordingly, there has been no attempt to deepen the debate on
transformation for a better life. Perhaps government should also accept
that it has not done enough in this regard. This has created the situation
in which the public is fed half-truths and speculations about government
intentions, which have no basis in fact. As a result, our people have been
left that much poorer with regard to their engagement with what is a matter
of national importance.

The government has at all times upheld and defended the Constitution of the
Republic. I would like to reaffirm that we who sacrificed all our adult
lives for this freedom would never trample on this sacred Constitution
which constitutes a pact made by all our people. Our Constitution is
unambiguous on this point. It states that everyone has the right to freedom
of expression, which includes freedom of the press and other media, freedom
to receive or impart information or ideas, freedom of artistic creativity
and academic freedom and freedom of scientific research.

The democratic state has, since 1994, continued to uphold and respect the
letter and spirit of our Constitution, aware that our Constitution is a
historic, legally binding document that marks out the contours of the new
dispensation and its attendant values, separating the new from the
degenerate apartheid state whose legacy we are working to eradicate.

Among the many challenges government faces, as it continues to grapple with
the issues of poverty, access to basic services and sustainable economic
growth, is the critically important matter of moral degeneration.

Our communities are faced with the daily threat of drugs and alcohol abuse
and the evils of child and women abuse and child pornography. It is clear
that those who engage in these immoral activities like child pornography
are using loopholes in our media laws to commit their depraved acts. This
licentiousness is not compatible with the ethical standards our people
would like to see upheld and defended at all times.

Among others, government has the responsibility to ensure that the people
of South Africa enjoy and our children grow up in a society marked by
consistent observation of high moral standards. Therefore, government has
looked at the manner in which we can defend our values of ubuntu and those
of the various faiths in our society, when it re-examined the Films and
Publications Act of 1996.

Ironically, the prevailing interpretation of reality in our public
discourse continues to portray these open and above-board processes as an
act of constitutional violation and a threat to media freedom. Accordingly,
government's announcement that it would seek to amend the Films and
Publications Act of 1996 has suffered distortions by the agents of
interpretative commentary in certain sections of the media which depicts
this act as a thinly disguised attempt at limiting freedom of speech. One
can usefully capture the dilemma contained in these assertions as they play
themselves out in the public arena by citing the English phrase: Damned if
you do, damned if you do not!

Precisely, because we have absolutely no intention to limit press freedom,
while, inter alia, we must deal firmly with the scourge of child
pornography, we are engaged in what has turned into protracted discussions
with representatives of the media. As government, we are interested that
all of us as South Africans should agree on the matters raised in the
amendments to the Films and Publications Act.

Again, a case of theft of medical records is investigated and government is
accused of threatening media freedom. If people steal they must expect the
full brunt of the law, irrespective of their status in society. [Applause.]
Let me state this clearly, it is not necessary for the government and the
President to tell the police to do their work. They know their
responsibility with regard to crime.

The task of undoing the damage of history in our country cannot be
quantified. It is an ongoing task that requires intensified efforts and
firm determination.

I would like to thank the NCOP for continuing to carry out this work
without fail and wish that you grow from strength to strength, discharging
your duties with distinction with each passing year.

In this regard, it is critically important that we continue to listen to
what the people say and understand what they think as you have been doing
this week. The necessary space must be created for the people to
participate in the important process in which the NCOP is involved, the
process of deepening the debate on transformation for a better life for
all!

This is not a debate merely to say that we did talk. It is a debate to
establish the truth about where we are today on our journey towards
achieving the goal of a better life for all and what we need to do further
to accelerate our advance to ensure that tomorrow will be better than
today.

One of the best sources of the truth about these matters is the people
themselves. This is precisely the reason why we applaud the work the NCOP
is doing, directly to interact with the people themselves rather than rely
on the interpretation of our reality by people who have their own agendas.

History has imposed on all of us the onerous responsibility to achieve the
goal of a better life for all our people and indeed we dare not fail. Again
I would like to thank the NCOP for the work that they are doing to make
sure that we do indeed achieve this goal. I thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Sanibonani nonke. Goeiemôre almal. [Good
morning, everyone.]

Ngethemba nijabulile ukuzwa uMongameli wethu ekhuluma nathi namhlanje ngazo
zonke izinto ekade nikhuluma ngazo phakathi neviki. Sizokhuluma-ke singandi
kakhulu nenkulumo bese sizama ukuveza kuthi yini esiyitholile kinina
nokuthi yini esizoyenza.

Ngithanda-ke ukubingelela uMongameli, oNdunankulu bethu, oSomlomo bethu
kanye nabo bonke abantu baseNingizimu Afrika.

Size lapha e-Pniel namhlanje ngoba sizolalela abantu bakithi bekhuluma
nathi ngezinkinga zabo ezibahluphayo. Umsebenzi-ke Womkhandlu Kazwelonke
Wezifundazwe ukuzolalela nokubona ukuthi ngabe lezi zinto esizithola
emphakathini sizokwenzani ngazo ukuze zilungiseke. Asizukugcina ngokulalela
nje kuphela. Nathi sizenzela ucwaningo ngokwethu ngosizo lwe-Hansard yethu.
Ngithanda-ke ukusho, Mongameli, ukuthi sijabule kakhulu ukubalalela abantu
base-Pniel.

Kubalulekile ukuthi amabanga amathathu kahulumeni kufanele asebenzisane
ukuze zonke izinto ezivezwa ngabantu zikwazi ukulandelwa futhi zifezwe.
Uhulumeni omkhulu, owezifundazwe nowasekhaya kufanele basebenze ndawonye.
Akekho uhulumeni oyedwa ozokwazi ukwenza lezi zinto esizifunayo. Uma
kungekho ukusebenzisana phakathi kwethu, sonke sizohluleka ukwenza lezi
zinto ezifunwa yilaba bantu ekade sikhuluma nabo namhlanje. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I am sure you were all happy to listen to our President addressing us here
today, talking about all the issues that you raised earlier in the week. We
will now have a brief discussion in order to put together the issues that
you have raised and then decide what we are going to about them.

I would like to greet the hon President, our hon Ministers, our Speakers
and all the people of South Africa.

We have come to Pniel today to listen to our people talking to us about
their problems. The duty of the NCOP is to listen and to decide what must
be done about the issues that are raised by the public so that they may be
addressed. We will not rely solely on listening to you. We also conduct our
own research, with the assistance of our Hansard. Therefore, I would like
to say, Mr President, that we were very happy to listen to the people of
Pniel.

It is important that the three spheres of government work together so that
all the concerns that are raised by the public are followed up and
addressed. National, provincial and local government must work together. No
single sphere of government is capable of delivering, on its own, all the
things that we want. If there is no co-operation among us, we will all fail
to deliver the services required by all these people who have been talking
to us today.]

Al drie regeringsfere wat ons het, die nasionale, provinsiale en plaaslike
regering, moet saamwerk om hierdie dinge los te maak en om die regte ding
te doen wat die mense van ons vra. Dis die regte ding wat ons moet doen.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[All three spheres of government that we have, the national, provincial and
local government, should work together to solve all these problems and do
as the people ask. It is the right thing to do.]

The one thing that the NCOP is not going to do, is to work from offices and
point fingers. What we are going to do is to continue coming to the people
and work with them on the ground. [Applause.] I must point out that over
the week I have been here, I have been very disappointed. I cannot leave
this podium without expressing my disappointment, which I am going to do
now, in front of the people.

To start with, we have elected people in this country who serve at
national, provincial and local government level. I have been very
disappointed that the MPLs of the Western Cape have not been here regularly
since Monday. [Applause.]

I want to thank those four who were here with us regularly. I want to thank
them very much because they take this programme very seriously. I was very
disappointed that the local councillors who were elected by the people did
not participate in this programme. [Applause.]

On Monday, when we were dealing with local government issues, I counted
less than five of them who were in here. On Thursday, when we were dealing
with issues relating to the distribution of water to the people, there were
no councillors in this House and I was very disappointed. [Applause.]

Ngithanda ukusho-ke namhlanje ukuthi sikhethwe ngabantu. Uma sikhethwe
ngabantu kusho ukuthi sizosebenzela abantu futhi sizobalalela ukuthi
bathini. [I would like to say here, today, we have been elected by the
people. Being elected by the people means that we are going to serve the
people and that we are going to listen to what they say.]

Whether we like what they are saying or not, they are worth listening to
because they elected us. [Applause.] As a leader, when you enjoy your work
and make a positive experience of it, remember that you are doing that not
only for yourself but also for other people. You cannot watch the clock all
the time and say that you have made a contribution. If you do that then you
are not in the right job; you’d better go and find yourself another job.
Uma sesisuka lapha sihamba, ngoMsombuluko kufanele kube nabantu
abazolandela zonke lezi zinto abantu abakhulume ngazo lapha ukuze babone
ukuthi ziyenzakala. Uhulumeni omkhulu akakwazi ukubona ukuthi kungani lo
muntu engakwazanga ukuthola imali yakhe yempesheni izinyanga ezine.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[When we depart on Monday, there should be people who are going to follow
up all the issues that have been raised by the people so that they may be
addressed. National government cannot understand why this person has not
received his pension for four months.]

They cannot trace that. You are here and so you must tell us. Why can’t you
see that?

Abantu abalapha phansi yibona okufanele bazi ukuthi ... [The people on the
ground are the ones who must know that ...]

... there is a toilet blockage in this and that particular house.

Abantu abalapha phansi yibona okufanele bazi ukuthi ... [The people on the
ground are the ones who must know that ...]

... there is a pothole in that road and tell the local government, the
provincial government and the national government about it - which we will
do, because we work very closely with the national Ministers.
I want to thank the MECs who have been here, particularly hon Dyantyi, MEC
for Local Government and Housing. [Applause.] I want to thank the hon Cobus
Dowry, the Western Cape Minister of Agriculture, who was here; the acting
Premier, hon Ramatlakane, who has been constantly interacting with us and
making sure that things are going right; and to the Speaker of the Western
Cape legislature, Shaun Beyneveldt, thank you very much.

Ngoba-ke nina beningekho, nansi into engizoyenza: onke amakomiti oMkhandlu
Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ... [Because you were not present, this is what I
am going to do: All the committees of the NCOP ...]

Chair of chairs, where are you?

Onke amakomidi oMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe kuzofanele ukuthi,
mayelana nalezi zinto eziphakanyiswe abantu lapha kuleli sonto, ... [All
the committees of the NCOP, with regard to all the issues that have been
raised by the public here, this week, will have to ...]

... come and camp here and do the job with the people in the first term of
2008.

My tyd is verstreke. Laat ek net een ding sê. Die mishandeling van
plaaswerkers, plaasuitsetting en onregverdige arbeidspraktyke op plase is
ernstig. Dis ’n groot probleem wat julle nog het hier. Ons vra tog – ons
vra baie lekker vandag en ons vra baie mooi – laat die plase lekker werk
met ons mense op die plase. Hulle het ook regte as werkers op die plase.
Betaal hulle goed as julle geld het om hulle te betaal, want hulle werk
baie hard. Hulle werk baie ure op die plase. Hulle werk, want julle maak
julle produksie so groot dat ons almal kan eet. Betaal hulle ook baie goed,
want hulle werk. [Applous.]

Waar dit moontlik is, gee vir hulle mooi huise op die plase om in te bly.
Waar dit moontlik is, bou skole vir hul kinders om skool toe te gaan,
asseblief. Waar dit moontlik is, laat hulle ook lekker eet soos almal van
ons op die plaas. Hulle is ook die mense. Hulle soek daardie goed, net soos
enigeen wat in die dorp lewe en werk. Julle is die werkskeppers op daardie
plase. Ons vra vir julle baie mooi en ek sê baie dankie vir daardie boere
by wie ons mense regtig lekker werk. Ek sê dankie aan julle. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[My time has expired. Let me just say one more thing. The abuse of
farmworkers, farm evictions and unfair labour practices on farms are
serious. This is a big problem that you still have here. We would like to
ask – we are asking very nicely today – let the farmers treat our people on
the farms decently. They also have rights as labourers on the farms. Pay
them well if you can afford to because they work very hard. They work long
hours on the farms. They work hard because you make your productions so big
so that we can all eat. So, pay them well, because they also work hard.
[Applause.]
Where it is possible, give them nice houses on the farms to live in. Where
it is possible, build schools for their children to go to, please. Where it
is possible, let them also eat well like all of us on the farms. They are
also human beings. They need those things just like anyone living and
working in town. You are the job creators on those farms. We ask this very
nicely and I say thank you very much to those farmers for whom our people
really enjoy working. I say thank you to you.]

We will also make sure that the issue you have raised concerning the lack
of facilities for children is addressed.

I want to come to the issue of ward committees. Ward committees are very
important and they must work together with councillors because we cannot
allow a division between them. When you all go to the meetings, you must
explain the Integrated Development Plans to the people and the priorities
for particular areas.

We cannot allow divisions between ward committees and councillors, and that
has to be addressed in all municipalities, irrespective of the majority
parties therein. All of you must work together for the progress of the
people. We cannot work and make progress in the face of the divisions that
we are experiencing. I want to thank you very much and I will listen to
other people as they debate. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Before I call the next speaker I
would like to make an announcement with regard to interpreting services.
Channel 1 is for English, Channel 2 Afrikaans, Channel 3 IsiXhosa, Channel
4 Tshivenda, Channel 5 Setswana and Channel 6 Siswati.

The ACTING PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Mr L Ramatlakane): Chairperson, hon
President Thabo Mbeki, hon MECs present here today, Premiers and Speakers;
on behalf of the Western Cape government, we would like to express our
gratitude and thanks to the NCOP, the Chairperson, his deputy as well as
the members and delegates for taking time out here in the Western Cape.

You should have seen and learned, firsthand, of the experiences that our
people are faced with in their diversity. Your visit to our province,
particularly to farming, the agricultural sector and the community itself,
demonstrates to us as government that not only is government making
statements about the quest to change the lives of our people, but it is
actually about walking the talk. The NCOP visit to our province continues
to cement the constitutional provision of co-operative governance. It is
sad that other municipalities refused to participate here during your visit
to our province.

Chairperson and hon members, the Western Cape Province has taken many
strides in an effort to build the Western Cape, which is a home for all
that also encompasses all sectors of our society without prejudice. When
Premier Rasool was addressing the opening of the legislature in February
this year, he delegated to us many deliverables, starting with changing the
lives of our people in the province. These deliverables that have been
delegated to us are those that are in fact going to enhance the vision of a
home for all.

Let me briefly sketch how we have come to where we are now and what the
challenges are that we are faced with. The Western Cape is the province
that still laments the impact and the legacy of apartheid, which has not
only left behind the deep economic disparities but also the challenges
faced by the social fabric in this province. The challenges that we face
are therefore not only economic disparities but they include a host of
social anomalies that sometimes hamper the economic prospects of our
people.

Even if there are opportunities at the disposal of our people, sometimes
they will not have the social tools to reclaim their dignity in order to
truly make the province a home for all. Therefore, our challenge as
government is not only about economic redistribution and reparation. Our
challenge is also about redressing the distorted social relations. It is
about restoring dignity and self-respect; it is about freeing the minds of
people from a sense of mental slavery. It is about empowering our community
of farmworkers who are still exploited at the periphery and often suffer in
silence. It is about giving hope; healing acts of delivery. It is
ultimately about making the province a home for all.

We have geared ourselves towards a coherent and focused strategic plan in
overcoming inequalities and dysfunctionalities. We have seen population
growth in the region of 5 million. The increase in temporary migrations for
access to services and opportunities means that the burden on the province
to cater for the needs of temporary migrations also increases. This also
influences our broad unemployment levels in the province, which stand at an
average of 26%, with the recording of 590 000 unemployed people in 2005.

Statistics also indicate that those who are hardest hit by unemployment are
the youth between the ages of 15-24, at a figure of 49% for 2004-2005. The
issue of skills mismatch also affected the employability of our people,
which is exacerbated by the marginalisation of black youth and women - thus
entrenching the levels of inequality.

Our economy is also increasing services which are sector-oriented, which
has seen a decline in our primary sector such as agriculture and fishing.
The skills mismatch is also exacerbated by this shift. The growth and
development priority sectors remained the PVO call centre, oil and gas
services, including boat-building, ship repair, tourism, agriculture,
fishing, and the creative industry and ICT. These are the sectors which
create jobs for our people and are cultivated actively by the provincial
government of the Western Cape.

The call centre industry is a success story - one of the fastest growing
sectors creating jobs for school-leavers. It is therefore clear that we are
dealing with a multiplicity of challenges that require intricate
intervention that will take cognisance of unique challenges and the growth
imperative for our province.

The provincial government of the Western Cape remains committed to
eradicating pathologies of economic and social orientation in our province.
We have enhanced and prioritised social services delivery in order to
immediately alleviate the symptoms of poverty that cause depressions and
disparities.

The Department of Health has 13 million patient contacts per annum on
HIV/Aids, of which 24 449 people are on the programme. We are also the
lowest in infant mortality in the province. At municipal level we have
90,7% access to basic water and 89% access to weekly waste removal.

With regard to education, we have an enrolment rate of 85% of children aged
7 to 9 years, 89% between the ages of 10-12. About 39% of our learners are
getting exemptions from school fees in 656 schools, while 65 000 are
currently in childhood development.

In the social services we have a total of 791 000 people currently
receiving grants in the Western Cape - 139 000 people are getting
disability grants, 455 000 children receive Child Support Grants. This
shows our commitment to serve in the context of a developmental state.

The state of the province in 2007 identifies 11 priorities - human
settlement, climate change, drugs and gangs, focusing on 15 areas, Project
Consolidate, transport, World Cup 2010, property development, the Expanded
Public Works Programme, home for all, the second economy and governance. We
remain on track towards working on the development of these areas that I
have mentioned above.

The social transformation programme focuses on 21 most vulnerable
communities in our province, one of the most critical and meaningful ways
in which we are turning around the lives of the poor people of the
dysfunctional communities in our province through this programme. The
rationale for the social transformation programme is informed by the
housing shortage, service delivery backlog, zone of poverty, prevalence of
gangsterism, substance abuse, violent conduct, crime and 109 vulnerable
schools.

We want to bring about organisational coherence through the establishment
of the intermediary structure that will voice the coherence in these
communities. We have made an investment of R1 billion in policing to
strengthen the fight against crime and we have put rehabilitation
structures in place that are currently accessible to our people. We hope to
achieve the social cohesion outcomes that we are driving in our communities
through the reduction of contact crimes and substance abuse, participatory
democracy, infrastructure development and service delivery.

Our social partners have pledged the commitment of business and voted money
into this. We want to say, Mr President and Chairperson, that Absa has come
forward in this process with R750 000 to the expected human resource to
become available to the structures and to set up the intermediate structure
and more resources are awaited. The social transformation programme is
proof of how the PGDS comes into our lives in taking a holistic approach
towards community development, both economic and social.

I want to say that the Western Cape has become very prominent in the world.
We have seen an upsurge in investor confidence in the country and in the
province as a result of your leadership, Mr President.

The province is well underway with preparations for 2010. Work streams are
hard at work focusing on the long-term legacy of our people. The interest
in the province is currently very high and it continues to bring this
beautiful province and the country as a whole to the attention of the
world.

Last but not least, we thank the NCOP for being the vehicle for service
delivery by having helped us to identify some of the most vulnerable
families in our province. I am also making this particular reference to the
family of Worcester who have special needs and who have no mobility. Lack
of mobility has hampered them moving around. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Due to time constraints, I request that
the hon members on the speakers’ list should take up their positions on the
stage while the speaker before them is addressing the House.

Mr A WATSON: Your Excellency, the President, hon Chairperson, hon Deputy
Chairperson ... agb lede, ander hooggeplaastes, dames en here, goeiemôre.
[... hon members, other dignitaries, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.]
Molweni apha eKapa, ezantsi [Greetings to you all here in the Cape, in the
south].

Die lede van die NRVP is daaraan gewoond dat ek graag groet met die tale
van ons land ... [The members of the NCOP are used to it that I greet them
in all the languages of our country.]

... ngoba emaXhoseni ndithetha isiXhosa, kumaZulu ngikhuluma isiZulu,
basothong ke bua Sesotho, le Setswana, nesiSwati, nesiNdebele le ka Sepedi
[... because amongst the amaXhosa I speak isiXhosa, and amongst amaZulu
people I speak isiZulu, and the same applies when I am amongst the Basotho,
Batswana, amaSwazi, amaNdebele and Bapedi.]

Hier, in die Boland, is ons in Afrikaanse wêreld en daarom gaan ek u, agb
President, vandag in Afrikaans toespreek. Kan ek net begin deur die
Voorsitter te bedank dat hy ook eer gebring het aan die boere van ons land
wat hulle werkers goed behandel, want die Adjunkminister van Landbou het
gister in die Parlement erken dat maar net 2% van die boere hulle werkers
sleg behandel. Ek sê weer dankie vir dié wat mooi kyk na hulle mense.

Die tema vir vandag is die verdieping of verbreding van die debat oor
transformasie vir ’n beter lewe vir almal, maar dit is eintlik ’n skande,
agb President, dat ons na meer as 13 jaar van demokrasie nog praat van
“deepening the debate”. Die tyd vir debat is mos nou lankal verby. Ons moes
vandag kon praat van die baie suksesse van ’n beter lewe vir almal, maar
helaas. Die kinders wat sedert 1994 in skole geleer het van ons nuwe
demokrasie is nou al uit die skool, maar die meeste van hulle kom nog uit
pondokkies van agtergeblewe gebiede en feitlik almal soek werk.
[tussenwerpsels.]

Ja, ek het gedink iemand gaan dit sê. Daar is ’n groot skroef los, maar
daar sê die agb lid dit weer. Dit is my mense en die vorige regering wat
verantwoordelik is en ja, dit is waar. Dit is waar. Natuurlik was apartheid
’n verfoeilike fout en ons is almal bitter jammer daaroor, maar u regering
kan nie vir ewig die verlede blameer nie. Dinge moet verander, mevrou.
Dinge moet regkom, agb President. Ons is nie in opposisie om apartheid
terug te wens of te verdedig nie. Inteendeel, die DA se uitgesproke strewe
is ’n beter lewe vir al die mense deur die daarstelling van ’n oop
geleentheid samelewing waarin elkeen tot sy of haar reg kan kom.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Here in the Boland, we are in an Afrikaans environment and therefore, hon
President, I wish to address you in Afrikaans today. Could I just start by
thanking our hon Chairperson for honouring the farmers who do treat their
farmworkers well, especially since the Deputy Minister for Agriculture
acknowledged in Parliament yesterday that only 2% of farmers ill-treat
their workers. Once again, I want to thank those people who look after
their workers.

The theme for today is the deepening of the debate on transformation for a
better life for all, but it is actually a shame, hon President, that after
more than 13 years of democracy, we still have to talk about “deepening the
debate”. There is no longer time for debating. We need to talk about the
successes of a better life for all today, but, alas. The children who have
been taught in schools since 1994 about our new democracy have since left
school, but most of them are still coming from shacks in the disadvantaged
areas and nearly all of them are looking for jobs. [Interjections.)

Yes, I knew someone was going to say that. There is something terribly
wrong, but the member just said it again. It is supposed to be my people
and the previous government who are responsible, and yes, it is true. It is
true. Apartheid was indeed a terrible mistake and we are all terribly
saddened by it but your government cannot continue to blame the past
forever. Things need to change, Madam Chair. Things need to improve, Mr
President. We are not in the opposition to wish for the return of apartheid
or to defend it. On the contrary, the DA’s ultimate goal is to strive for a
better life for all people by creating an open opportunity society in which
every one can come into his or her own right.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order!

Mr A WATSON: Dit beteken – ja, julle kan maar boe – dat bekwame en bedrewe
lede van ons samelewing die geleentheid moet hê om verandering te dryf en
dit beteken ongelukkig ook ... [It implies – yes, you can boo me as much as
you like – that competent and proficient members of our society need to be
given the opportunity to drive this change but unfortunately, it also means
...]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I would like to
plead with the audience not to boo in the House. This is a formal sitting
of the National Council of Provinces. Please listen and do not boo.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Ek het gesê dit beteken dat bekwame en bedrewe lede van die samelewing die
geleentheid moet hê om verandering te dryf en dit beteken ongelukkig ook
dat die tyd vir beloning aan onbekwame, korrupte comrades nou werklik tot
’n end moet kom.

Tydens die vorige besoek van ons NRVP aan Gauteng, in die debat van die
Adjunkpresident op 16 Maart 2007, het ek verwys na die onbekwame leierskap
in die Mbombela-munisipaliteit in my kiesafdeling en die insident die
vorige week waar die burgemeester deur die raadslede verwerp is in ’n mosie
van wantroue om net weer die volgende dag in ere herstel te word deur die
leierskap van die ANC buite die raad. Die LUK vir Plaaslike Regering van my
provinsie, Mpumalanga, het in hierdie selfde debat gesê dat sy reeds opdrag
gegee het in terme van artikel 106 van die Wet op Plaaslike Regering:
Munisipale Strukture om op te tree.

Ons voorsitter het beaam dat hy reeds op 23 Februarie ’n skrywe ontvang het
van Mpumalanga en die saak deurgegee het na ons gekose komitee. Ek het die
aangeleenthede sedertdien verskeie kere opgeneem met die agb Mahlangu en
selfs insig gehad in briewe wat hy geskryf het omtrent die saak aan ons
provinsie. Tot vandag, bykans ’n jaar later, agb President, is nog net mooi
niks aan die saak gedoen nie - nie in die provinsie nie en ook nie in die
gekose komitee nie.

Intussen het die DA in Mbombela vasgestel dat dieselfde uitvoerende
burgemeester se raad gedurende die afgelope twee jaar ... (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I have said that this implies that competent and proficient members of
society should be given the opportunity to drive change and unfortunately
this means that the time for rewarding incompetent, corrupt comrades needs
to come to an end.

During the previous visit of the NCOP to Gauteng and in the debate of the
Deputy President on 16 March 2007, I referred to the incompetent leadership
in the Mbombela Municipality in my constituency and, in particular, to the
incident the week before where the mayor was rejected during a motion of no
confidence by the councillors, only to be reinstated the following day by
the leadership of the ANC outside of the council. The MEC for local
government in my province, Mpumalanga, said in the same debate that she had
already given orders in terms of section 106 of the Local Government:
Municipal Structures Act, to act in that regard.

Our Chairperson did acknowledge that he had received a letter from
Mpumalanga on 23 February and he passed it on to the select committee. I
have raised the matter several times since then with the hon Mahlangu and I
have even had insight into letters that he had written to the province
regarding this issue. Up till today, nearly a year later, hon President,
nothing has been done about the matter – not in the province and not in the
select committee.

In the meantime, the DA in Mbombela has learned that the council of the
same executive mayor had, for the past two years ...]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order, please, hon
Watson!

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I would like to ask the member a question.

Mr A WATSON: Nee! Jy mors my tyd, man. Sit, jy mors my tyd. [No, you are
wasting my time, man. Sit down. You are wasting my time.]

An HON MEMBER: Jy is bang! [You are scared!]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Watson, you may
continue.

Mr A WATSON: Ek sê, geagte toehoorders, dat die DA in Mbombela, dieselfde
munisipaliteit, vasgestel het dat daardie selfde raad van dieselfde
burgemeester die afgelope twee jaar amper 300 besluite geneem het. [I am
saying, hon audience, that the DA in the Mbombela Municipality has learned
that the council of that same mayor had taken nearly 300 resolutions over
the past two years.]
They took more than 200 resolutions.

Nog nie een van daardie resolusies is uitgevoer nie. Dis mos ’n skande, agb
President – ’n skande wat skrei ten hemele.

Die 2010 voetbalstadion in Mbombela, waarop ons almal so trots is in
Mpumalanga en wat lank voor die geskeduleerde tyd voltooi sou wees, is nou
ook in gedrang omdat ’n onwettige grondtransaksie deur dieselfde raad
geneem is. Pleks van die probleem oplos, soek hulle nou mense om te blameer
vir die saak.

Is dit die debat oor transformasie wat ons moet verdiep of moet ons liewer
dieper kyk, agb President, na die kern van die probleem wat besig is om die
moontlikheid van dienslewering in baie dele van ons land te verongeluk? Ek
sê vir u daar is korttermynoplossings, maar die langtermynoplossing is,
stem vir die DA. Dankie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[None of those resolutions has been executed. It is indeed a shame, hon
President – a shame that shouts to the heavens above.

The 2010 soccer stadium in Mbombela, of which everyone in Mpumalanga is so
proud and which would have been completed far ahead of the scheduled time,
is now also in jeopardy since the same council had bought land illegally.
Instead of solving the problem, they are now trying to find someone to
blame.
Is it the debate on transformation that we need to deepen or do we need to
look deeper, hon President, to the core of the problem that is jeopardising
the possibility of service delivery in many parts of our country. There are
short-term solutions but the long-term solution is to vote for the DA.
Thank you. [Time expired.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Order! Order!

Ek versoek dus die gemeenskappe wat hier teenwoordig is om asseblief nie so
te raas en aan te gaan nie. Dit is ’n volwaardige sitting van die NRVP en u
mag nie deelneem in die debat nie, asseblief. [I request the members of the
community present here to please be quiet and behave. This is a formal
sitting of the NCOP and you are not allowed to participate in the debate.]

Nksz N D NTWANAMBI: Sekela sihlalo, iiNkulumbuso ezilapha, ooSodolophu,
ooCeba abakhoyo, amalungu abekekileyo, amaqabane, kunye noMongameli welizwe
lethu, into ebalulekileyo, emandiqale nemandingagqibeli ngayo yeyokuba
inyaniso iyakrakra ingakumbi kwabo baxhaphe amafutha okucinezela abantu
bakuthi. Kukho abantu abanjengeli lungu lisuka apha, abangoofunzeweni,
nabangenazo iinjongo zokuwakha loo Mzantsi Afrika. Abo banjalo abangoobantu
abamelwe kukuba bangaMalungu ePalamente.

Enye into ke asizanga nkomfeni yaANC okanye yaDA apha namhlanje, kodwa size
ngeenjongo zokuxoxa, sincedise ukusombulula iingxaki zabantu abahluphekayo.
Ngaphezulu koko amalungu eNCOP abanexesha alinikikwayo, lokuya
emaphondweni, nalapho sixoxa izinto zamaphondo ethu. Eli asiloxesha laloo
nto.

Ndibuye ndithi, ewe njengoko uMongameli etshilo iingxaki zona zikhona,
ingakumbi apha emaphandleni apho amakhosikazi amaninzi, nangabasebenzi
baseziifama bahlala benexhala besithi, ‘oh nkosiyam ingaba asizikugxothwa
na?’. Bayafana nje nabantu abangcuchalazayo. Basebenza ngaphezulu kwe-10
leminyaka kwezi fama, kodwa kwakufika ixesha lomhlala-phantsi labo nabayeni
babo babuya bephethe ibhayisekile kuphela oku kwabantu ababuya ezimayini,
besiya emakhaya.

Enye yezinto eziqaphelekayo kukuba abantu abangahlali zidolophini njengathi
– ungayibona le nto xa unokusondela kwisininzi sabantu abalapha – baguga
msinyane. Ndithetha ukuthi ke xa nditshoyo siyazidinga ezinye iindlela
zokuba abantu bakwazi ukuzonwabisa ngaphandle kotywala.

Kwaye, kwakhona loo nto ibiza kubenza ukuba bathi naxa sele lifikile ixesha
lenkamnkam noko ifike besebatsha nabo bengekagugi. Enye yezinto
ezibalulekileyo, nekufuneka ukuba ijongisiswe kukuba intlupheko inendima
enkulu eyidlalayo ekugugiseni abantu bakuthi. Kwakhona ke njengokuba
siseBholani enye into ebalulekileyo kukuba indima edlalwa butywala isafuna
ukuqwalaselwa, ngoba bakhona abaqashi abasabhatala abantu ngethontsi
lotywala. Ziyafuna ukujongisiswa izinto ezinjalo.

Enye ke into esiyiphawulayo xa sizileyo apha kukuba abantu abanzinzi
abasebenza kwezi fama kunye nabantwana babo bathi bazalelwe apha, ngoko ke
ibiza kuba yinto entle kumafama ukuba ebengafundisa abantwana babasebenzi
ngezolimo, nokuveliswa kwezinto eziphuma kwiziqhamo ezo zezolimo zalapha.

Mongameli, ndifuna ukuthi njengoko sisoloko sisithi akukho zakhono- ndifuna
ukuba ndibenguzungula ichele, ndiyikhumshe ke le nto ndithi ... let me be
opportunistic and use this platform and say ... - ibiyakuba ntle into
yokuba ukuqalela ngoku amafama akhoyo apha ebeza kusithatha isindululo
sokuba kulo nyaka uzayo abantwana abaphumelele ibanga le-10 bathi xa besiya
kumaziko emfundo ephakamileyo, basiwe beyokufunda ngezinto ezimalunga
nokusebenza pha ezifama ukuze nabo ngenye imini babengamafama,
babengabanini mhlaba. Ukuze sikwazi ukuthi xa sithetha sithi akuzi kuba
mnandi nje ukuba kumfimfithwe amandla abazali baze athi njenge-olenji
elingasenamanzi balahlwe, bakhatywe njengebhola.

Enye yezinto esiziqapheleyo yeyokuba apho kufuneka sincomile siza kuncoma
ingakumbi kula mbutho uncedisana namakhosikazi esebenzayo apha ezifama.
Ikhona into entle ke eyenziwe liSebe lezoBulungisa ngokuxhasa ngezimali,
nokufundisa amakhosikazi aseziifama ngamalungelo awo. Wonke ummi nomhlali
weloMzantsi Afrika unelungelo elilinganayo. Kwenziwa into entle ke xa
kufundiswa abantu ngezo zinto.

Isikhalwana esikhoyo nje sesokuba apha ngaphandle kwedolophu zinqongophele
iikliniki ngoko abantu abazisebenzisayo ixesha elininzi ngabazisebenzisela
ugonyo nokunceda kwesi sifo sikhulu sofuba –TB, apha phandle. Bekungaba
kuhle ke ukuba xa isibonelelo sokuba kubekho amaziko ezempilo okanye ii-
health centres singaphunyezwa, mhlawumbi kwindawo ethile apho kuza kubakho
nekliniki engavaliyo. Ezo zezinye zezikhalazo esidibene nazo.

Uninzi lwabantu luyakungqinela Mongameli, nabo bathi, unamhlanje akafani
nayizolo kwaye ungomso uza kuba ngcono kakhulu. Bakhona abakhoyo, nasele
bexhamla kule nkululeko, kodwa sifuna ukuba wonke uMzantsi Afrika
ekugqibeleni uxhamle, kwaye wonke ubani angaxhomekeki kwinkongozelo
karhulumente. Abantu mabakwazi ukuzenzela ngokwabo. Amathuba anjalo
ayanqaba emaphandleni.

Mandigqibele ke ngelithi abantu balapha eBholani bayavuya, kwaye
bachulumancile namhlanje, ngoba sithetha ngepalamente yabantu, norhulumente
wabantu. Ngenene bebelapha kwaye ipalamente ivile norhulumente uvile, kodwa
ndiyafuna ukuthi enye yezo mpendulo uQabane uKholeka Mqulwana wenze ukuba
ibe khona namhlanje, ingabi yeyale veki izayo. Yinto ekuthethwe ngayo
ngoLwesibini namhlanje kungoLwesihlanu lo mpendulo sele ibuyile. Nto leyo
ethetha ukuba kuyamanyelwa. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Deputy Chair, Premiers present here, mayors, councillors
present, hon members, comrades, together with the President of our country,
one important thing that I should start with is that the truth is a bitter
pill to swallow, especially to those who are guilty of oppressing our
people. There are people like the hon member who was speaking here who do
not care and also do not have any intention of building this country, South
Africa. People like that are not supposed to be Members of Parliament.

Anyway, we are not in an ANC or DA conference here today, but we are here
with the aim of debating and helping to solve the problems of poor people.
Furthermore, members of the NCOP do get time to go to the provinces where
we debate our provincial issues. This is not the time for that.

Again, let me say that, as the President has said, there are problems,
especially here in the rural areas, where most women who are farmworkers
are always worried and thinking: “Oh my goodness, are we not going to be
chased away.” They are just like refugees. They work for more than 10 years
in these farms, but when the time comes for their and their husbands’
retirement they only get bicycles, just like mineworkers when they go home.


One other thing that I have observed is that people who do not live in
urban areas – you can see that from the majority of people here – age much
quicker. By that I mean that we need other forms of entertainment that do
not involve the drinking of liquor.

Furthermore, having these other options of entertainment would mean that
when people reach pensionable age, they will still be in good health. It is
also worth mentioning that poverty plays a big role in speeding up the
ageing process amongst our people. As we are holding this session in the
Boland, it is important that we highlight the negative role of alcohol in
society, particularly given that there are still farmers who use the “tot
system” to remunerate their farmworkers. Such things need to be considered
carefully.

We also observe that many farmworkers and their children were born on the
farms, and therefore it would be a good thing if the farmers could teach
farmworkers’ children farming skills and how to make fruit products.

President, as we always bemoan the lack of skills in our country, ... let
me be opportunistic and use this platform and say ... that it would be a
good thing if, from now on, farmers were to heed the call that from next
year learners from farms, that pass matric, should be sent to higher
education institutions to be taught subjects related to farming, to prepare
them to be farm owners and landowners in future. It’s unacceptable that the
parents of these children are discarded when they have outlived their
usefulness, like an orange with its juice sucked out, which is kicked
around like a ball.

We will give praise where praise is due, particularly to the organisation
working with women farmworkers. The Department of Justice did a great job
by providing funding and educating women farmworkers about their rights.
Every citizen and resident of South Africa has equal rights. It is good
that people should be educated about such things.

The minor concern we have is that there are very few clinics in rural areas
and that even those that are there are mainly used for vaccinations and
fighting TB. It would be great if health centres could be provided, maybe
in certain areas where there could be clinics that are open 24 hours a day.
Those are some of the concerns that were brought to our attention.

Many people agree with you, President, that today is better than yesterday
and that tomorrow will be better than today. There are those that are
reaping the fruits of our liberty already, but, at the end of the day, we
want the whole of South Africa to benefit and for everyone not to depend on
government charity. People must learn to do things for themselves. However,
such opportunities are scarce in the rural areas.

Let me conclude by saying that people from the Boland are happy, because we
are talking about a people’s Parliament and the government of the people.
Parliament and government have taken note of their concerns and Comrade
Kholeka Mqulwana was able to address some of those concerns immediately,
without having to wait for next week. A concern that was raised on Tuesday
has already been addressed by Friday, which means that people are listened
to. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The PREMIER OF GAUTENG (Mr M Shilowa): Madam Chairperson, hon President of
the Republic, hon Premiers, hon MECs, hon members, the input by hon Watson,
contrary to what he said, confirms the need for deepening the debate on
transformation for a better life for all. His input shows that unless we
have an open debate on what we understand by transformation in our country,
to what extent we have been successful in transforming the economy to
ensure that there is social development and that we have the capacity as a
state, all we do will be merely to postulate.

I think, hon President, it was correct that the NCOP, through you, asked
all of us to continually debate the issues of transformation because we
want, firstly, to be able to say that this new democratic South Africa has
a history, a history that shows that for many years, until 1994, there was
a government whose economic policies, whose social development policies and
whose governance policies were not geared towards serving the majority of
our people. [Applause.]
We want, through that debate on transformation, to show that while 13 years
have not been a long enough period to have made changes, we have been able
to make strides in the economy which for many years was not growing and is
now growing and creating jobs; that we are able to deal with issues of
poverty; that workers now have rights that are enshrined in the Labour
Relations Act, Mine Health and Safety Act, Basic Conditions of Employment
Act and health and safety in general; that many people who had no shelter
now have shelter; that many people who had no water now have water and that
many people who had no electricity now have electricity.

Deepening the debate on transformation, as you correctly said, is also
about us being the first ones to acknowledge that while the economy is
growing and while we are creating jobs, we are not creating sufficient jobs
to be able to absorb many young people who are coming out of schools and
many other people who are being retrenched, and that means we must deal
with those particular issues.

Deepening the debate on transformation means that we need to accept that in
terms of our education, we must be able to improve its quality. I think we
have dealt enough with issues of access to education and to health, but at
least we need to be in a position to say what the quality of that education
is; what the quality of public health is and how we can improve them for
our own people.

Hon Watson needs to understand that when we want to debate issues of
health, we are correct in saying that before 1994, many of our areas had no
clinics; that now we do have more clinics; that many of our clinics opened
for limited hours and now they open for longer hours; that before 1994 many
of our clinics did not have the requisite medicine but now, even though we
have this, we still need to be able to have further debates on these
issues.

As we discuss these issues, hon President, I would briefly want us also to
focus on the following three issues: Firstly, in terms of social
development, how we ensure that targeted social development moves beyond
talking about poverty in Gauteng and saying that, in this area of Gauteng,
these are the number of people who are poor. How do they live? How do they
survive? Are there skills? What is it that we can do to try and move these
people out of poverty so that over a particular period, whether it be 12 or
18 months, we have been able to track those people, and we can, with
confidence, say we are making changes?

Secondly, I think to be able to deal with issues in a number of provinces,
including Gauteng, the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, we should ascertain
how we should deal with issues of rapid urbanisation, issues of
immigration, not in a manner that says there should be no urbanisation,
there should be no migration, but that says how we should manage this
migration because, for instance, we benefit as Gauteng on issues of
migration while other provinces may suffer on those particular issues.

So, migration does have its own benefits. In some areas when you advertise
a post in government it takes longer to get people because they are
prepared to go to the Western Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng. How do we
deal with these matters because we want both rural and urban development to
go side by side?

Lastly, we should be able, in addition to the twinning that we normally
have with provinces, to look at sharing experiences amongst ourselves as
provinces. For example, hon President, in Gauteng we have agreed that the
three metropolitan areas must each twin with three districts. So, we have
twinned the Johannesburg Metropolitan Council with the West Rand District
Municipality, the Tshwane Metropolitan Council with Metsweding District
Municipality and the Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Council with the Sedibeng
District Municipality. The idea is that we do not want Johannesburg to
develop on its own. We want it to be able to develop with the rest of those
metropolitises.

So, as I sit down, hon President, I want to once more say that our approach
to the need for debate is not merely to pontificate but to say how we reach
national consensus on progress made so that when we say the economy is
growing, anyone who says it is not growing must be able to show us the
facts; when we say we are making inroads into poverty, anyone who says we
are not making inroads must be able to show us the facts; when we say
social development is moving away from social welfare to the total
development of our people, anyone who holds the contrary view must be able
to show us the facts. Unless they are able to do so, they must not
therefore raise those kinds of issues.

But equally, on our side, we want to be able to say we are not merely
making political statements about changes that are happening, that this is
backed by people on the ground who at any point will be the first ones to
acknowledge that while some of them still live in poverty, are still
unemployed, do not have water, electricity and sanitation, that indeed they
have seen changes happening in a number of areas, that if change happens in
one area in Soweto it means change will happen in another area in Alexandra
the following day.

Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

Cllr C JOHNSON (Salga): Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Chairperson,
President Mbeki, Cabinet Ministers, Premiers, MECs, members of the
different legislatures, mayors and councillors, on behalf of the national
leadership and in particular Mayor Masondo, the Chairperson of Salga, the
SA Local Government Association, I convey comradely greetings and our
gratitude for the opportunity to share some thoughts at this sitting of
Parliament.

We would like to express our sincerest gratitude to the Chairperson of the
NCOP and his very competent team for putting together a truly excellent
event here in Pniel. Incidentally, the meaning of Pniel is “face of God”.

We are also reminded that 200 years ago slaves were freed and settled in
this village. Furthermore, a few years ago, not very far from here, former
President Mandela walked to freedom from the Victor Verster prison.
[Applause.]

Yes, we have to deepen the debate, but also note that we are an area with
the highest incidence of farm evictions - 350 in total. If people say to
us: “We have become refugees in the land of our birth, sitting on the
roadside”, then we as government, need to act and need to act swiftly.

We are particularly grateful to the Chairperson of the NCOP for having
taken the time to personally visit and invite Salga to participate actively
in all aspects of this truly remarkable programme. This increases oversight
by Parliament at the local level and, in our view, contributes to the
ongoing battle to sharpen and sophisticate intergovernmental relations and
co-operation.

However, I want to remind you of the fact that the DA coalition in
Stellenbosch has scant regard for democratic institutions, as can be seen
from the fact that the mayor was not present throughout the programme of
Parliament - the highest law-making body in the land. This, I believe, is
not good for intergovernmental relations.

During the past four days we have had the most intense conversation with
our people. We have heard them express their gratitude at our government’s
achievements; we have heard them express their dissatisfaction regarding
some of the things we had thought of doing for them but could not; and we
have also heard members of the public express great frustration with the
slow pace of our programmes in some areas.

As we were the winning team a few weeks ago, it is now half time and time
for us to assess our progress on the Millennium Development Goals.

In this area, access to water and sanitation to schools and clinics has
been created. The bucket system was eradicated a year ahead of the target
date of December 2007. In fact, studies on the National Spatial
Developmental Perspective were also completed well in advance.

Firstly, in order for us to truly master service delivery challenges, it is
important for us not to interact as different spheres of government, for in
the eyes of our ordinary people there is only one government and that
government starts in the ward at a micro level.
We have all the macro instruments in place, but local government is closest
to the people and this will be the first port of call for citizens. Through
this interaction, we are ensuring that we create trust between government
and the public to freely express opinions and share ideas on solving
problems.

All the frustrations that have been brought to our attention have been
addressed properly. I believe that as Salga we have taken up the seven
tasks that the President has set us, including how we ensure that
councillors are more accountable or are being made more accountable and how
we ensure that we manage civil unrest in our townships, amongst others.

We gathered here as Salga in August to design an action plan for
implementing the seven tasks that the President has set us. The change in
government, especially the coalition government in the Western Cape, has
led to certain delays in implementation, for instance, of the ward
committee system, and the same is experienced in KwaZulu-Natal with a 62%
turnover among councillors.

I believe that as Salga, we supported the programmes that have been put in
place to address the capacity constraints, such as Project Consolidate, the
training programmes offered through the University of Pretoria and the
University of the Western Cape, as well as the Executive Leadership
Municipal Development Programme for councillors and officials. Together
with National Treasury, we are running a financial management course
through Wits University, which will ensure that more councillors get
unqualified audits and submit their financial statements on time.

With regard to corruption, we, as Salga, have implemented, to quote the
President’s words:


  ... a local government anticorruption strategy with the necessary
  implementation plan to ensure that we achieve our objectives in this
  regard, focusing on prevention, detection and investigation.

I would like to further quote President Mbeki:

  ... we would like to warn those who think that our municipalities are
  some cash cows ready to be milked by greedy and corrupt councillors,
  businesspeople and officials, that the law will deal appropriately with
  them so that the resources intended for our communities are correctly
  utilised.


Importantly, with regard to the local government leadership, both
politically and administratively, we must work hard in fighting the
problem. Let us win the confidence of the public through open and
transparent governance methods, and the call for a standing committee ...
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Die ADJUNKVOORSITTER VAN DIE NRVP: Ek wil weer ’n beroep doen op die
gemeenskap. Daar is ’n rumoer in die saal wat inmeng met die werksaamhede
van die Raad. As u ruskamers toe moet gaan, doen dit net stilletjies
asseblief. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Once again I wish
to call on the members of the community. There is a lot of noise in the
hall and it is interfering with the business of the Council. If you have to
go to the restrooms, do so quietly. I thank you.]

The PREMIER OF NORTH WEST (Ms E Molewa): Thank you very much, hon Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP. I would like to recognise and greet the President
of the Republic of SA, Mr Thabo Mbeki, all colleagues in the NCOP,
Speakers, Premiers, all other members, honoured guests and all of you,
ladies and gentlemen.

On behalf of the provincial government of the North West, I am honoured
indeed to participate in this debate. Contrary to what Mr Watson has said,
the President’s speech reminds us all of the massive progress that we have
made over the last 13 years. At the same time, it calls upon all of us to
be mindful of the huge task that remains before us.
It is a challenge that we in the North West province embrace with all the
enthusiasm at our disposal, and which we will pursue with every ounce of
energy in us. And we would like to see the same contribution from the DA in
particular, as opposed to the noise we hear all the time when we have these
kinds of debates. [Applause.] Over the last 13 years we have been able to
lay the foundation for a future that is qualitatively better than our ugly
past.

I stand here before you saying that we are indeed satisfied that as a
country and province – speaking on behalf of the North West province in
particular - we have indeed done a lot during these past 13 years. As a
result of our work in the past few years, we are today able to say boldly
that despite the many challenges that remain, we are succeeding in bringing
dignity to the majority of our people.

When we took over in 1994, the targets we set for ourselves and the
objectives were to transform our society and make it a caring one. We have
been able to ensure that amongst many other things, we actually,
qualitatively, bring a better life to our people. We committed ourselves to
working tirelessly towards the noble objective of eradicating the legacy of
apartheid and colonialism in our country.

On this occasion, we must remind ourselves of the pledge we made during our
struggle for liberation that we would not consider our mission complete and
our freedom achieved, unless all our people are freed from poverty,
disease, homelessness and indignity. Today we can reflect on the fruits of
our work with a measure of pride.

The recent community survey results that the hon President referred to
reiterate the story that we have been telling over the last few years, that
we have in this government - acting together - made decisive advances over
the past thirteen years in expanding access to a better life for all our
people. In the North West province particularly, we continue to register
good progress in our efforts to broaden access to basic services such as
water, electricity and sanitation.

Amongst other things, the survey that the hon President spoke about tells
us that the percentage of households using electricity for lighting in the
North West province has increased from 43,3% in 1996 to a staggering 82,3%
in 2007. [Applause.] This tells us that for many of our people, today is
better than yesterday and tomorrow looks even brighter. On this day, we are
therefore justified in saying that as a nation we have come a long way and
that our efforts to build a better society have yielded good results.

Over the past few months, I want to say that as public representatives in
the North West province, both the legislatures and those who are in the
executive have travelled the length and breadth of our provinces, hearing
and listening to our people through the izimbizo and participatory
programmes of our legislature.

The people that we have listened to said that theirs was a story of pain
that co-existed with remarkable hope and patience. What is most striking
about them is their confidence in our democracy and their enduring hope
that tomorrow would be better than today and yesterday. They cling so
tenaciously to the hope that their human dignity will one day be restored
and that today's pain is steadily giving way to a brighter tomorrow.

Throughout these participatory programmes, people express appreciation for
the progress made by government to improve their lives. This appreciation
is expressed alongside concerns at the pace and quality of delivery. We
listened to them and certainly responded to that. There is also recognition
that while basic services have reached millions, there is still a lot more
to be done.

During the first few years of the public participation programme, the most
pressing issues for our people in the North West related to access to
social services, particularly the social grants. Now as we speak, in those
meetings, people are beginning to say that they have actually reached a
saturation point. We are satisfied that most of the people are receiving
the grants. They are now emphasising the need for us to look at the
economic opportunities that concern the performance of our government’s
officials. This is something that we are looking at.

This may mean that government has been able to adequately communicate the
issues around social grants and to also improve grant payment systems. It
may also mean that the President’s message of calling on all our people to
be their own liberators has been taken to heart by them. They now want to
seize opportunities brought by our democracy.

Perhaps at this point in time, we must reiterate our position that local
government, as the sphere closest to the people, is the front desk of
service delivery. Indeed, if local government fails, the whole of
government will fail. This reality requires that local government must be
adequately resourced to enable it to discharge the mandate and
constitutional obligations more effectively.

For many rural municipalities, Mr President, with no revenue, or resource
base, the task of building a better life for all our people may be very
daunting or sometimes may even be impossible, unless the issue of resource
allocation to local economic development is indeed placed firmly on the
agenda. I speak here of municipalities like Lekwa Taemane and Naledi,
amongst the ten that exist in our province. Part of the agenda to transform
our economy must relate to programmes that seek to develop the economy of
our rural communities so that all our people can achieve sustainable
livelihoods.
Consistent with the leadership provided by the President, we continue to
pay particular attention to the economic empowerment of historically
disadvantaged people. It is heartening to note the progress we are making
in giving concrete expression to our commitment to empower those who have
been historically excluded from the mainstream of our economy in
particular. We have refocused our procurement strategies towards responding
strategies directed at the challenges posed by the economic marginalisation
of women, youth and people with disabilities.

We must constantly remind ourselves that the struggle for liberation was a
struggle for the political and economic emancipation of all our people.
Today, we must lead a struggle to unleash the full economic potential of
our land, its people and resources. Let us continue to create opportunities
for all our people so that they too can have the possibility of creating a
better life for themselves and their fellow citizens.

Today, Mr President, we can say with confidence that out of the womb of an
unjust and inhuman society that Mr Watson did not recognise at the time has
emerged a new society that responds to the plight and aspirations of its
people. However, we remain mindful that more work still needs to be done.
We have acknowledged that and will continue to do so.

As the President said, we must therefore continue to intensify our efforts
to ensure equal access to opportunities brought by democracy and freedom. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr M A MZIZI: Voorsitter en die agb President, dit is my voorreg om net
dankie te sê dat ek ook kan deelneem aan hierdie debat. Soos die Voorsitter
dit gestel het: Die NRVP is nie hier om net toesprake te maak nie, maar ook
om te luister. Dit was ’n voorreg dat al die mense wat die debat gehoor
het, al van Maandag hier was, en vir ons alles gesê het. Ons het kennis
geneem. Dit is alles neergeskryf en, daarbenewens, gaan ons weer terugkom
om te sien of alles wat julle hier gesê het op dowe ore geval het al dan
nie. As ons dit herbevestig daardie dag ... (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson and hon President, it is a privilege for me to
thank you for allowing me to also participate in this debate. As the
Chairperson said, the NCOP is not just here to make speeches but to listen
as well. It was a privilege that all the people who have listened to this
debate have been here since Monday and they have told us all that we need
to know. We took cognisance of that. It has been written down and we will
return to see whether what you have said fell on deaf ears. If we reaffirm
it on that day ...]

... nditsho ndithi ukuba anivanga ukuba kufuneka nincede abantu ukuze
abantu bangakhalazi niza kudibana nenyoka iphunga umhluzi. [Kwahlekwa.]
[... I am saying that if you did not understand that you must help the
people so that they do not have to complain, there will be trouble.
[Laughter.]]

Abantu bangakhalazi, iminyaka manje iyishumi nantathu ephelile abantu
belokhu bekhalaza. Uma ngabe asikawenzi lowo msebenzi, nizohlangana
nezimbila zithutha. [People must not complain. Eleven years have gone past
but people are still complaining. If we have not done the work yet, we are
in trouble.]

Voorsitter, daar word liedjies hier gesing wat sê dat dit geldmors en
tydmors is as ons die Parlement na die mense toe neem. Dit is onsin, want
elke mens het die reg om die Parlement by te woon en sy of haar sê te sê.
In die ou bedeling het ons die parlement gehad; ons het die ministeries
gehad; ons het al die mense op al die vlakke gehad. Het julle ooit gesien
dat hulle na julle toe kom om julle toe te spreek? Ja, dis die waarheid.

Nou ja, daarbenewens ook, daar is ’n ministerie waarvan ek nou praat. Hy
het sekere mense verteenwoordig. Wat het hy alles gedoen? Net die naam is
verander. Hy het die naturelle-sake verteenwoordig. Hy het die plurale en
ontwikkelende mense verteenwoordig. Hy het die Bantoes verteenwoordig. Het
hy ooit na daardie mense gegaan? Dis onsin om dit te sê as ons hierheen
kom.

Ek dank die Voorsitter van die NRVP, sowel as die President, dat hy toelaat
dat ons die Parlement na die mense neem. Elke slag as ek na verskillende
provinsies gaan, behalwe KwaZulu-Natal, is daar mense wat sê hulle gaan IVP
stem. Is dit nie wonderlik nie? Ek waardeer dit. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, songs are sung here that say that taking Parliament to the
people is a waste of money and a waste of time. This is utter nonsense
because everyone has the right to come to parliament and to come and air
his or her views. In the former dispensation we had a parliament; we had
Ministeries; and we had people at all levels. Did you ever see them coming
to you to speak to you? That is the truth.

Apart from that there was also one Ministry in particular. It represented
only a certain group of people. What did that Ministry do? Only the name
was changed. It represented so-called native affairs. It represented the
plurals and the developing peoples. It represented the Bantu. Did they ever
go to the people? It is nonsense to say that it is the case when we come to
the people.

I want to thank the Chairperson of the NCOP, as well as the President, that
they allow us to take Parliament to the people. Everytime that we go to the
different provinces, apart from KwaZulu-Natal, people tell me that they are
going to vote for the IFP. Isn’t that wonderful? I really appreciate that.]
Manditsho kuni ndithi njengokuba iPalamente ibihleli apha ... [Let me say
that as Parliament was sitting here ...]

Gijimani ngayo yonke imizila nibabikele, nithi nani magundane senodela
nifile ngoba nilibonile iPhalamende lihleli nabantu lapha e Stellenbosch.
[Go all out and shout that you have seen Parliament brought to the people
here in Stellenbosch.]

Mhlalingaphambili, ixesha lam lincinci, mandithi amade ngawetyala.
[Chairperson, my time is limited. I will stop here].

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr T S P Makwetla): Thank you, hon Deputy
Chairperson, for the opportunity. Hon President, the Chairperson of the
NCOP, hon members of the House, both the permanent delegates and the
special delegates, dear colleagues, hon member Watson, let me disclose, is
a member of the NCOP from my province. As you will all agree, he is no
doubt a very passionate and energetic public representative.

My concern, however, is that I am never sure whether he knows where he is
going. At all times or most of the time, he evinces very strong and
powerful emotions which I cannot but, at the end of his input, feel are
actually valuable emotions squandered because he simply has no clue of what
the forest looks like because he is deep in the woods. He is deep in the
woods and he has no clue of what the forest looks like and he also does not
know exactly whereabout in the forest he is. [Applause.]

I was alerted almost towards the middle of your speech, hon member Watson,
that you were talking about me. When I jumped up for my listening device,
half of the things you said I had unfortunately missed, but I will go to
the Hansard to familiarise myself with the problems you were raising.

Let me say that it is important, however, for me to say this: Hon member
Watson must make an effort to be a good public representative nevertheless.
I am saying “a good public representative” because I cannot but make the
point that it appears that the accuracy or the quality of information he
functions or operates with do not justify the weaknesses that he is
displaying because he cannot deal with problems as if he is an ordinary
citizen because, as a member, he has access to information. Where he does
not have sufficient information, he can put questions to the executive
through his party colleagues in the province and in this Chamber as well,
so that he can then form opinions and judgments on the basis of quality
information.

However, it looks like that is something that he must still address because
from the things I was able to pick up, there are clear inaccuracies. It
cannot be true that the Mbombela Stadium that is being built for the 2010
games in Mpumalanga is behind schedule. No, hon member Watson said, it
should actually have been completed. I did not understand what he was
actually saying ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order, please!

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr T S P Makwetla): The Mbombela Municipality,
with respect to the building of the 2010 stadium, is one of the
municipalities that are ahead of the deadline. [Applause.] Secondly, let me
also say that I will also go and verify these facts as to whether it is
true that the Mayor of Mbombela has taken 300 decisions that have not been
implemented in a year. We all know that the local government elections were
last year. Has he already taken 300 decisions within a year? I am going to
verify that and establish what the problem is.

Allow me to say that it is always a pleasure and a privilege to participate
in this debate periodically in the annual schedule of the NCOP business,
which affords us the opportunity to bring to this national body our
experiences as a province and to share our successes and failures with the
rest of government, nationally, in our endeavour to realise a better life
for all our people.

Speaking as Premier, after three intense years in office, I will not be shy
if my tone sounds different from the first time I addressed this Council.
Yes, I now know a few things more and probably in the spirit of what the
President said in his address this morning, I should tell no lies and I
should not claim easy victories.

My party, the ANC, is in government for a reason and a mission, which is to
accelerate delivery, halve unemployment and slash the levels of poverty in
our country by half by the year 2014. We have indeed registered commendable
progress in this respect. We have created job opportunities directly as
government in the province for over 50 000 citizens over the last three
years. We have brought our performance in education close to the national
average. We have rolled out more water and electricity infrastructure to
communities which did not have access before. We have rehabilitated many
peasant folks in the rural villages by engaging them in tilling the land
for food security again. We have decisively tackled sub-standard and
dehumanising sanitation conditions in our province. The list is endless.
Nevertheless, with these advances, a lot must still be done to promote
development in many of our communities.

With respect to our developmental challenges as a state, as provinces, we
must prudently admit the limits of our constitutional design with regard to
our economic mandate. This is important in order to avoid overstating our
significance in the national economic equation and debate. I say this
because I want to submit that the developmental state challenges we face as
provinces are more organisational and political rather than in the realm of
the economic debate. We all committed ourselves to accelerating delivery
and therefore, by implication, developmental work.

What is the experience of the provinces in this endeavour, and Mpumalanga
in this regard? What is theory and practice? What are the successes and
what the failures? What are the contentious assumptions that we began our
duties with?

The intervention by the Presidency to propose that all provinces must work
out priorities for themselves in the context of the medium-term strategic
goals was a much-welcomed development and in our province, it found
resonance in our observations and thinking. The idea of prioritising
catalytic projects and programmes to accelerate development is noble. We
have zeroed in our province on the big five of Mpumalanga – our big five
flagship projects: The Maputo Development Corridor, the Moloto Rail
Development Corridor, Water for All, Heritage Greening Mpumalanga in the
province, and tourism and accelerated development ... [Time expired.] Thank
you very much, Deputy Chairperson, for the opportunity. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chair, I shall in my allocated three minutes tell
the truth as it is. The President, apparently, must still sign the recent
appointment of judges. One matter, however, impacts negatively on
transformation in this regard. The President surely does not have the
particulars of this matter. I am going to give it to him and I shall now
proceed in Afrikaans.
Pas ’n maand gelede was daar twee aansoekers vir die pos van Regter-
president in die Vrystaatse afdeling van die Hoërhof. Een ’n wit persoon
met 19 jaar diens in die hoërhof, asook ervaring in die appèlafdeling. Daar
was ook ’n swart regter met sewe jaar ervaring in die hoërhof, ook met
appèlhof ervaring.

Die wit regter het vir ’n paar jaar in die Transkei baie harde werk gedoen
waar hy met swart regsgeleerdes baie nou saamgewerk het. Daarna was hy weer
terug na die Vrystaat waar hy in talle sake opgetree het met assessore wat
vrouens en swart persone ingesluit het. Hulle was sy assessore. Die swart
regter, op sy eie weergawe, het nooit in sy sewe jaar bygedra om enige
assessore – vrouens of swart mense – op die regbank saam met hom te neem
nie. Op hierdie feite het die wit regter sonder twyfel veel meer tot
transformasie op die regbank bygedra. Die swart regter was juis die
resultaat gewees van transformasie. Hy was ideaal geplaas om soos sy
eweknie vrouens en swart assessore te gebruik en hy het die geleentheid
nooit gebruik nie.

Aan die ander kant is daar 11 afdelings van die hoërhof in Suid-Afrika met
net een wit Regter-president wat tans aftree en nou het die regterlike
dienskommissie ’n maand gelede hierdie swart regter as Regter-president
aanbeveel in die Vrystaat. Die regterlike dienskommissie het blindelings en
ondeurdag getransformeer met die duidelike boodskap dat as jy ’n wit
Afrikanerman is, is jou kanse op bevordering nul.
Dit gaan nie oor die kwalitiet van hierdie regters nie – ek ken hulle albei
– albei is goeie regters, maar dit gaan verder. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[No more than a month ago, two persons applied for the post of Judge
President of the Free State division of the High Court. One was a white
person with 19 years service in the High Court, including experience of the
Appeals Court. A black judge, with seven years experience of the High Court
and Appeals Court experience also applied.

The white judge worked in the Transkei for a few years where he did
sterling work. He worked in close contact with black legal minds.
Thereafter he returned to the Free State where he appeared in many cases
alongside assessors that included blacks and women.  They were his
assessors. The black judge, by his own account, has never in his seven
years assisted in taking any assessors – female or black – on to the bench
with him. Given these facts, the white judge has, without a doubt,
contributed much more to the transformation of the bench. The black judge
is already a product of transformation. He was ideally placed to make use
of women and black assessors but he never made use of the opportunity.

On the other hand, there are 11 divisions of the High Court in South Africa
and only one white Judge President who is currently in the process of
retiring. A month ago the Judicial Service Commission recommended this
black judge as Judge President of the Free State. The Judicial Service
Commission has transformed blindly and in an ill-considered manner and has
sent out a clear message that, if you are a white Afrikaner male, your
chances of being promoted are zero.

This is not about the quality of these judges – I know them both – they are
both good judges, but it goes further.]

The President must please tell the country whether transformation means
that opportunities in the country are to the exclusion of certain people.
We doubt whether that is the intention of the President. We, the FF Plus,
believe the President when he says that South Africa belongs to all who
live in it. We are also serious when we say that we believe the President,
but please, Mr President, tell us what you really mean. Is that to the
exclusion of certain people or does it also include other people? I thank
you. [Applause.]

The ACTING PREMIER OF LIMPOPO (Dr A Motsoaledi): Chairperson, His
Excellency the President of the Republic, Mr Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of
the NCOP, Premiers, fellow MECs, members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen,
yes we have to debate transformation. We debate it precisely because we
enjoy the fruits of transformation and we cannot leave it to chance because
it cannot be wheeled in on the wheels of inevitability. It will emerge from
discussions in this debate. We have to do it because we do not want to
forget where we come from.
Mr Watson is grey-haired, but he has already forgotten what South Africa
used to look like only 13 years ago. If we stop the debate, what about the
young children who were born after 1994? They will never know where we come
from, and if we forget where we come from we can easily slip back into the
old ways. We also have to debate it, Mr President, because unfortunately we
still have many Mr Watsons. Despite the gains that democracy has brought
us, we still have many of his ilk, where children in farm schools are still
refused access because some farmers are still burning their schools or just
moving the gate 5km away from where it originally was so that they get
discouraged by the long distances.

We have to debate it, Mr President, because there are still mass evictions
on the farms because of people who, like Mr Watson, believe the
Constitution is there to protect them, but not their black brethren. We
have to debate it, because Mrs Tshivula was buried nine months after she
had died, because there are still people who believe that the Constitution
protects them but not the rights of other people, even the dead.

We have to debate it, because in Limpopo many farmworkers, even children,
are still being shot because they are mistaken for monkeys or donkeys. We
have to debate it because there are still human beings who are thrown into
the lions’ den, like in Biblical times.

Mr President, these are the reasons why we have to debate, but we are happy
that very serious changes have taken place. Since you have challenged us to
tell no lies and claim no easy victories, but to actually tell the
situation as it is on the ground, we are happy, because the ANC is well
known for that. We are not scared of issues. That is why we are able to
change them.

At the opening of a school that was constructed in 1995 ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

The ACTING PREMIER OF LIMPOPO (Dr A Motsoaledi): ... by the IDT, some
people challenged me whether the new government will indeed build beautiful
schools like the one that was built by the IDT.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Can I appeal to hon members to
respect other members even if they are saying things that they do not like.

The ACTING PREMIER OF LIMPOPO (Dr A Motsoaledi): Thank you, Chairperson, I
thought it was their manner of entering the debate. They just have to be
guided in the proper way of debating with me.

I said to them that I am not overly worried about their concerns regarding
the issue of school buildings, because I know the ANC government is
definitely going to achieve that within the shortest possible space of time
and we did so when you instructed us that you no longer want to see
children under the trees. What I was worried about was whether we would be
able to and how long it would take for us to reverse the arrested human
development that took place over 50 years of Bantu education and apartheid,
whether we would ever be able to achieve this.

In this case I want us to focus very seriously on education. Much has
happened, Bantu education is being reversed but there are still many
challenges and in this case we welcome the validation of the introduction
of Grade R in our schools and the fact that the Cabinet took a decision
that we must have at least one million Grade R learners, five-year olds in
our schools. It will also afford them the opportunity to take advantage of
the nutrition programme which is run so well in schools, but not
necessarily as well in rural communities, because of logistics.

We need to redouble our efforts on the improvement of mathematics, science
and technology because some of us are spending sleepless nights, and I need
to tell this to Mr Watson, because one of the people he is descended from
who died long ago, has left us with a legacy which is very difficult to
eradicate. In February this year the hon Deputy President and the Minister
of ...

Mr A WATSON: The speaker is accusing me of protecting certain people. Will
he name them please? He is misleading the House. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Watson, you were not disturbed
during your debate.

Mr A WATSON: I was! I was!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Therefore, just allow the hon
member to continue. Please take your seat.

The ACTING PREMIER OF LIMPOPO (Dr A Motsoaledi): The hon Premier of
Mpumalanga said we must furnish you with facts so that you will debate
better next time. That is what I am trying to do.

Chairperson, I was about to tell him that when the hon Deputy President of
the country and the Minister of Education launched Club 100 in February
this year, consisting of schools in the Republic which can produce 100
learners who pass mathematics and science, only 13 schools qualified
because of this legacy I am talking about. That is why I am saying we need
to go to war on the issue of mathematics, science and technology in
education. In Limpopo I have 1 600 vacancies for mathematics teachers and
1 300 vacancies for science teachers. We have searched far and wide and we
could not get those teachers. Transformation in this regard is not
negotiable and has to be debated very deeply.

We also need to eagerly work on mass literacy projects which I know the
Cabinet is debating, because only when all citizens are able to read and
write will they be able to deepen the debate on transformation. We think we
need to prioritise education more than we have ever done before.

We need to enter this debate, because there are people in this country who
believe that transformation is when all of us deliberately and
systematically forget our cultures and switch to English as the overall
language that must represent our dreams. This was a widespread belief in
some of our schools where the Department of Education has to fight with
parents about the need for their children to understand their own languages
and culture because if we do not do so we will get lost.

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Hon Chairperson, hon President and all other protocols
observed, today we are having a debate on transformation for a better life
for all; so, Masijule Ngengxoxo Mzansi [Let us deepen the debate, South
Africa.] A better life for all means a better life for all. By this the ID
does not mean that nothing has been done. We acknowledge great progress
since the previous regime, but then the emphasis is on “all”.

We have not yet reached the “all”. From the hearings this week it seems
that we are still very far from the “all”. In reality there is still a
bitter life out there for many South Africans. Issues of water, sanitation
and housing, which are core issues for existence, should be prioritised. We
hear of children being born under bridges. This borders on living the life
of animals.

We have also heard about the 2% abuse of farmworkers by farmers. That 2% is
2% too many. The selection of leaders at local government level must be
scrutinised in-depth to evaluate their motives for being leaders at this
level of government, owing to the fact that this leadership is closest to
the communities and service delivery is at the core there. With this I do
not exempt the other spheres of government. The Constitution of this
country should now come alive and be a reality for all South Africans and
it should not remain only a script. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms T XASA (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, our President, President Thabo
Mbeki, the President of the Republic of South Africa, Premiers, MECs,
Ministers, members of the NCOP, all our distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, it is indeed an honour for me to represent the Premier of the
Eastern Cape and the people of the Eastern Cape on this important occasion.

As we continue on the quest to realise the vision of a better life for all
and begin to wind down this term of democratic governance, we truly
appreciate the opportunity being given to us by this House to reflect,
share insights and indeed contribute to the deepening of the debate on
transformation for a better life for all.

We continue to be diverted by our opponents whose policies have been
rejected by the masses of our people, but as you have said, hon President,
here we are not afraid to stand in front of our people, because we
represent their aspirations and we speak the truth because we understand
that the challenge before us has yet to be accomplished.

We are committed to ensuring that, even if it is by force, we will ensure
that co-operative governance is achieved. South Africa is a unitary country
that lives on its ideals for a democratic, non-sexist, nonracial and
developmental society. This continues to guide us and we will not be
destracted. For two consecutive years the Eastern Cape province has been
rated by Markinor as the best performing province.

This is attested to by the robustness of our economy, the unwavering
commitment of our government to serve our people better and the service
delivery impact which is being felt by our people on the ground. Here we
can point to some of our achievements where we have seen injections in
terms of capital investment into the province that goes way beyond
R4 billion that has been earmarked for our two Industrial Development
Zones, IDZs.
Our provincial industrial strategy has looked further into our areas of
focus, targeting investments in other sectors of our economy such as
agriprocessing, forestry, timber and tourism. We have also developed a
provincial capex plan which seeks to address our planning and budgetary
requirements for the provision of roads, rail, air, electrification and
social infrastructure.

We conducted our own studies, looking into how we were doing in terms of
areas of service delivery, and such studies have indicated that our basic
household income has improved primarily through the uptake of social
grants, and the levels of access to basic services have also improved
significantly. Our access to health and education has also improved. And,
as you pointed out, hon President, the community survey of 2007 continues
to say to us that we are committed to assuring our masses that tomorrow
will be better than today.

Of course our administration continues to be beset by systemic
deficiencies, more aptly reflected by the recent audit outcomes indicating
the qualifications of a number of our departments. In most instances, this
situation is occasioned by an acute shortage of skills. We are, however,
taking a number of steps to address this, including the development of
strategically linked training programmes in order to improve the capacity
of individuals within the Public Service as well as delivering a quality
service.

Our government has resolved to exercise judicious stewardship of public
resources, reflecting both rigour and restraint, aimed at eliminating
wastage while increasing our capacity to spend on service delivery
programmes. Our contribution to Asgisa is also on course; we have put a
number of measures in place, including the cost of doing business in the
province, reducing barriers to entry through targeting poor growth sectors,
and reducing the cost and efficiency of logistics through the development
of world-class logistics in the IDZs.

As part of our socioeconomic balancing within the province that is
characterised mainly on the two-economies scale, we have targeted certain
growth areas and we are also removing our regulatory barriers that we have
detected, some of which include the environmental impact assessment
obstacles, some red tape that has been identified through the growth and
development summits that we have held in partnership with our
municipalities.

We also take pride in having championed the poverty reduction strategy that
was announced by the President in the state of the nation address in which
11 of our municipalities in distress are participating, and as such we are
looking at how we can see our poor communities graduating from poverty.

In conclusion, Chairperson, I wish to take this opportunity to thank you,
the members of the NCOP and the members of the National Assembly, for
allowing the Eastern Cape to host the National Parliament. I hope that the
people of the Western Cape have taken pride and interest in participating
because this is where we can truly listen to and share with the people of
South Africa. Thank you very much.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Ms D Peters): President of the Republic
of South Africa, Mr Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, Speakers, Premiers, members of the NCOP and
provincial legislatures, distinguished guests ...

... dames en here, gemeenskap van die Wes-Kaap, ek wil die geleentheid
gebruik om die dapperheid van ons President, mnr Thabo Mbeki, vandag aan
die wêreld bekend te stel en om aan die President te sê, daardie dag toe
die Springbokke die Rugbywêreldbeker gewen het, was ons baie trots op u,
meneer.

Om van Suid-Afrika af te gaan na Frankryk om die Wêreldbeker by die Engelse
af te neem en terug te bring Suid-Afrika toe, dis net ’n dapper man wat dit
kan doen. [Applous.] Ons President het die lande van die Noorde gewys dat
die lande van die Suide dit ook kan doen. Ons is baie trots op u.
[Applous.]

Weer eens wil ek baie dankie sê aan president Mbeki en u regering, vir dié
oomblik wat u gebruik om met die mense te kom gesels. Ons weet sulke
oomblikke het in die verlede nooit bestaan nie. Dit is ’n ware regering van
die mense wat hierdie oomblike kan skep en ons is baie dankbaar daarvoor.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... ladies and gentlemen, the community of the Western Cape, I want to
take this opportunity to present the braveness of our President, Mr Thabo
Mbeki, to the world today and to say to the President: That day when the
Springboks won the Rugby World Cup, we were very proud of you, sir.

To go to France from South Africa to take the World Cup from the English
and bring it back to South Africa, only a brave man can do that.
[Applause.] Our President has shown the countries of the North that the
countries of the South can also do it. We are very proud of you.
[Applause.]

Once again, I want to say thank you very much, President Mbeki and your
government, for this brief moment to come and talk to the people. We know
that such moments never existed in the past. It is a true government of the
people that can create these moments and we are very grateful for that.]

I want to start by saying that despite the 2006-07 South African survey
indicating an increase in the income levels in the Northern Cape,
significantly high levels of poverty and stubborn unemployment continue to
haunt every aspect of our people’s daily lives. Poverty remains our number
one enemy in the Northern Cape.

I want to take this opportunity to raise - in principle - on behalf of the
people of the Northern Cape, the fact that the time has come for the
province to get its fair and equitable share of the economic development of
South Africa. We therefore call for industrial redress, or what is called
industrial decentralisation.

Mr President, you and the Deputy President take heed of our pleas, but we
need just a little bit more. The announcement by the Minister of Minerals
and Energy on 30 May 2007 that, I quote:

   The State Diamond Trader will initially open in Johannesburg but, with
   time, will move to Kimberley to make Kimberley the real diamond hub of
   South Africa.


... was the biggest economic victory that province achieved since 1994.

A legacy of more than 100 years of unjust and skewed economic activity was
reversed by this announcement. The reality is that although the political
will and support has been demonstrated by this announcement, it seems that
the Northern Cape is now the victim of administrative delays. We are
informed, and reliably so, Mr President, that some people and other role-
players seem to want to delay or derail or sidetrack the implementation of
this decision to bring, what you called on 16 November 2004 in Antwerp,
“the sparkle back to Kimberley”. I again humbly call on you for support and
direction.

Mr President, we want targeted implementation plans and dates, which are
very essential for this sparkle to return to Kimberley in the interest of
the people of the Northern Cape. The relocation of the State Diamond
Trader, SDT, should go to its original and rightful home, which must become
a reality. I want to say this is not a contest with Gauteng and a contest
with the Premier of Gauteng.

Adding to that, it is necessary that the curse of a lack of resources that
has been cast on the Kgalagadi region, through it being an apartheid
government labour reserve, must be broken. On the maps of the Justice
department, Kgalagadi still has labour reserve number one and labour
reserve number two in the books of our government, 13 years down the line.
Those things must be removed.

We have elevated, through your initiatives, Mr President, this Kgalagadi
district to a rural node that must be elevated out of this resource curse,
but it remains a labour-sending region. People work as labourers in their
thousands on farms only to survive on a subsistence income. This is despite
the fact that some of the highest deposits of iron ore and manganese are
found in this mineral-rich region. The Northern Cape hosts the biggest
exploitable good quality iron ore in South Africa at Sishen.

The reality is once again that the raw product leaves the Northern Cape
without the necessary beneficiation taking place at the source of the
mineral. We are saying the solution to this unacceptable scenario is that
the Northern Cape must have a ferrous, iron ore or metal smelter. We have
the ore, manganese and other ferrous metals. We have the water. You can
call it sea, river or underground. We have the gas. The people of Namaqua
will tell you, very soon they will be hearing the gas moving below them to
Saldanha. I think it is important that they benefit from that gas that will
be moving below them.

We are also saying, in the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
initiative, we can benefit equally so from the coal of Botswana, but we
also can benefit, because the Northern Cape is equally part of South
Africa, from the coal in Mpumalanga. Also, offshore, a hundred kilometres
from Namaqua, we have the Ibhubesi Gas Works and the Kudu Gas Field that we
need to benefit from.

You were in Namibia yesterday and I think those types of engagements must
benefit the people of the Northern Cape equally so. It is important that we
work for the people of the Northern Cape equally, so that we work for the
people of South Africa.

Mr President, the dimension stone of Namaqua is like the people of that
region and we know you highly treasure those people. They are like real
assets. The beneficiation of granite, marble and slate, the existence of a
deep-sea harbour at Port Nolloth and a multimodal cargo hub in Upington
linked to the revitalisation of the rail network via De Aar are just some
of the economic activities that would add value to our people’s lives.

Ek wil hierdie oomblik gebruik om die mense van die Wes-Kaap weer eens te
herinner dat dit, soos die President en hierdie regering sê, belangrik is
dat ons altyd saam met mense werk, want die President het gesê ons moet die
waarheid praat. Ons gaan almal kerk toe en ons glo almal dat, as ’n mens
die waarheid praat, jy verlos gaan word en hemel toe sal gaan die dag
wanneer jy sterf. [Applous.]

So ons sê, hierdie regering het van die begin af hard gewerk met die wette
om die mense se lewens te verander, om ’n beter lewe vir almal te bou.
Vandag het ons beleide wat gratis gesondheidsdienste vir kinders onder 6
jaar beskikbaar stel. Ons weet baie van ons mense, soos swanger vroue, het
altyd swaar gekry om geld te kry sodat hulle by die klinieke kan gaan
aanmeld. So ons sê dit is belangrik dat ons daardie goed kan onthou.

Kinders kry ’n bord kos by die skool. Baie van ons ouers kan nie lees en
skryf nie, nie omdat hulle nie skool toe wou gaan nie, maar as gevolg van
die beleide van die verlede het hulle ouers nie geld gehad om hulle skool
toe te stuur nie. [Applous.] So ons sê dit is belangrik dat ons dit onthou
sodat ons kan verstaan hoekom mense nou eers water en elektrisiteit in
hulle huise kry; hoekom baie bruinmense en swartmense vandag nog in
plakkershutte woon. Ons moet terugdink en onthou.

Dié regering het baie gedoen. Wat kon ons gedoen het met die geld wat ons
die mense gee vir grondeise? Wat het met die mense se grond gebeur? Mense
soos mnr Watson sal weet. Mense is verwyder van hulle grond om plek te maak
vir mense soos mnr Watson. [Applous.]

So ons sê die vorige regering kon daardie geld gebruik het om meer dienste
aan ons mense te verskaf. Ons sukkel om die apartheidskuld af te betaal.
Wat kon ons nie gedoen het met daardie geld nie! Kom ons dink watter ander
regering op hierdie kontinent gee sy mense gratis water, gratis huise,
gratis kos vir skoolkinders en kindertoelaes? Alles gratis! Watter ander
regering doen dit? [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[I want to take this opportunity to remind the people of the Western Cape,
once again, that it is, as the President and this government said,
important that we always work with people, because the President has said
we must tell the truth. We all go to church and we all believe that if you
tell the truth, you will be saved and go to Heaven the day you die.
[Applause.]

Therefore, we say this government has worked hard on the Acts from the
beginning to change the people’s lives, to build a better life for all.
Today we have policies that make free health services available to children
under 6 years of age. We know many of our people, such as pregnant women,
have always battled to get money to enable them to report to the clinics.
Therefore, we say it is important that we should remember those things.

Children get a plate of food at school. Many of our parents cannot read and
write, not because they did not want to go to school, but because of the
policies of the past their parents did not have money to send them to
school. [Applause.] Therefore, we say it is important that we remember that
so that we can understand why people are only now getting water and
electricity in their homes; why many brown and black people still live in
shacks today. We must think back and remember.

This government has done a lot. What could we have done with the money we
gave the people for the land claims? What happened to the people’s land?
People like Mr Watson would know. People were removed from their land to
make room for other people like Mr Watson. [Applause.]

Therefore, we say the previous government could have used that money to
provide more services to our people. We have difficulty in paying off the
debts of apartheid. What could we not have done with that money! Let us
think which other government on this continent gives its people free water,
free houses, free food for school children and child support grants?
Everything free! What other government does that? [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

Mnr F ADAMS: Voorsitter, dit is ’n voorreg vandag en ’n geleentheid – ’n
groot geleentheid vandag, Voorsitter – om ons nommer een Springbok in ons
midde te hê, naamlik President Thabo Mbeki.

Voorsitter, wat ’n wonderlike voorreg en gesig was dit nie vir Suid-Afrika
toe die President op die skouers van spelers sit met die Wêreldbeker
omhoog. Watter gesig was dit nie, Voorsitter, om te sien dat ons President
Suid-Afrika se President is nie. Ons President is ’n President vir die
mense. Voorsitter, watter voorreg was dit nie en watter blydskap was dit
nie om te sien dat die Wêreldbeker en sport mense verenig het; versoen
hierdie nasie van Suid-Afrika versoen het.

Agb President, op u skouers rus ’n groot verantwoordelikheid. U moet die
land lei; u moet leiding in Afrika gee; u moet u leierskap aan die wêreld
betoon; en u doen dit baie goed - uitstekend soos ek dit sal sê of soos
mense in Afrikaans dit sal sê. President, armoede moet verslaan word.
HIV/Vigs moet verslaan word. Ons kinders moet skool toe gaan en leer. Daar
is huise om te bou; water om aan te lê; paaie om neer te sit. President,
moet u derhalwe nie steur aan die negatiewe mense in Suid-Afrika nie, want
hulle, wil ek amper sê, is gebore om negatief te wees.

Daar is ’n spreekwoord – ’n idioom – wat sê leë blikke maak die grootste
geraas en dit is wat die DA is: leë blikke. Voorsitter, ons het baie om te
doen in Suid-Afrika. Die DA stel net nie belang in ons mense se toekoms en
in ons mense se leefwyse nie, Voorsitter. Mev Helen Zille, die DA
burgemeester en nasionale leier in die Stad Kaapstad, Voorsitter, het
besluit dat sy en haar raadslede nie hier moet wees vir die hele week nie.
Ek wil vandag noem alle DA-raadslede, Voorsitter, is vandag glad nie eens
hier nie. Hulle is glad nie eens hier nie. Die burgemeester van
Stellenbosch het hierdie Huis probeer mislei Maandag deur te sê dat sy
sukkel om met die LUR te praat terwyl die LUR sê ek het jou al hoeveel keer
genooi. [Applause.] Mev Zille het gesê dat sy nie geld wil uitgee om hier
te wees nie en net so gee mev Zille ook nie geld uit om deernisbeleid toe
te pas in haar munisipaliteit nie. Dit is die einste Stad Kaapstad wat
mense se water afsny. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, it is a privilege and an opportunity – a great
opportunity today, Chairperson - to have our number one Springbok in our
midst, namely President Thabo Mbeki.

Chairperson, what a wonderful privilege and sight it was for South Africa
when the President sat on the shoulders of the Springboks holding the World
Cup aloft. What a sight it was, Chairperson, to see that our President is
South Africa’s President. Our President is a president for the people.
Chairperson, what a privilege it was and what a joy it was to see that the
World Cup and sport united the people – reconciled this nation of South
Africa.

Hon President, on your shoulders rests a great responsibility. You must
lead the country; you must provide leadership in Africa; you must show your
leadership to the world; and you do it very well – excellently, as I would
put it or people who are Afrikaans would put it. President, poverty must be
defeated. HIV/Aids must be defeated. Our children must go to school and
learn. There are houses to be built; water to be piped in; and roads to be
laid out. President, I must therefore not disturb you with the negative
people in South Africa, because they, I would like to say, are born to be
negative.

There is a saying – an idiom – that empty vessels make the most noise and
that is what the DA are, empty vessels. Chairperson, we have much to do in
South Africa. The DA simply is not interested in the future of our people
and in the lifestyle of our people, Chairperson. Mrs Helen Zille, the DA
Mayor and national leader in the City of Cape Town, Chairperson, has
decided that she and her councillors should not be here for the whole week.
I want to mention today, Chairperson, that all the DA councillors are not
here today. They are not here at all. The mayor of Stellenbosch tried to
mislead this House on Monday by saying that she is struggling to talk to
the MEC, while the MEC says, “I have invited you many times already.”
[Applause.] Mrs Zille says that she does not want to spend the money to be
here and in the same way Mrs Zille also does not spend money on the
application of indigent policies in her municipality. This is the selfsame
City of Cape Town that cuts off people’s water. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order! Hon Darryl Worth.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I would like to know if the hon Mr Adams is
prepared to take a question on who wrote the speech for him?
[Interjections.] Who wrote the speech for you?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Will you take a question, Mr Adams?

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, he has already asked the question and asked who
wrote the speech for me.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Yes, you can put your question.

Mr D A WORTH: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to ask Mr Adams who
wrote the speech for him? Who prepared the speech for him? [Interjections.]

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, in answer to the hon Worth: I wrote my own speech
because in the ANC we are allowed to be independent thinkers.
[Interjections.] You see, the ANC does not scrutinise our speeches like you
and your leader does, hon Worth.

Voorsitter, watter skande is dit nie. Terwyl die regering en die President
alles gedoen het om 6 kiloliter gratis water vir ons mense te gee, sny die
DA tot dit ook af, Voorsitter. Mev Zille gebruik nie die bronne wat tot
haar beskikking is as leier en burgemeester van die Stad Kaapstad om die
polisie te help om dwelmbase uit te sit wat tik verkoop nie; wat dwelms
verkoop; wat ons vroue en kinders se lewens verwoes nie. Sy doen dit nie,
maar teen die polisie wil sy protes aanteken. Sy reël optogte, Voorsitter,
teen die polisie – mense wat bereid is om haar te help – in plaas daarvan
dat sy, soos die ANC, ons gemeenskappe leer dat ons vennootskappe moet smee
met die instansies wat daar geplaas is deur die regering. Voorsitter, hulle
het nie ’n beleid of ’n geskiedenis van deernis nie.

Dis die einste DA wat, toe die Wes-Kaapse Wetgewer plase gaan besoek het om
die mense se omstandighede op plase te ondersoek, nie deel was van daardie
besoeke nie. Die einste DA – hoe kan ’n man nou hier kom praat van armoede
as hy self nie eens daar was om te luister nie? Hulle het geweier.
Voorsitter, hulle wil ontken dat uitsettings plaasvind, maar hulle sit die
mense uit.

AgriSA en Agri Wes-Kaap het gesê dat daar sekere elemente in die
boeregemeenskap is wat plaaswerkers behandel asof hulle diere is.
Inteendeel, hulle het so ver gegaan om te sê dat, Voorsitter, in sekere
gebiede word die diere beter behandel as die plaaswerkers. Voorsitter, dis
hoekom ek vandag nie eens hare op my kop het nie, want ons moes agter op
die bakkie sit terwyl die hond voor sit. Dan het die oubaas nog baie vinnig
ook gery en dit het gemaak dat ons hare deurmekaar waai.

Voorsitter, ons mense kry swaar. Ons mense kry swaar op die plase.
Plaaseienaars koop liewer voorraad aan sodat ons mense by die nooi op die
plaas by die winkel moet koop eerder as om hulle dorp toe te vat waar hulle
‘n bietjie geld kan spaar.

Voorsitter, as ’n mens kyk na die spioenasie-saga – ek wil u sê mev Helen
Zille het ’n geskiedenis. In 2000, toe die DA die Wes-Kaap regeer het, het
hulle liewers geld uitgegee om bunkers te bou; om meeluisterapparate aan te
koop. So, dit is geen verbasing dat hierdie spioenasie-saga nou uitkom nie.
Ek wil vir die DA sê: wat jy saai, sal jy maai. [Applause.]

Ek wil vandag vir u sê, indien daar enigsins mense was wat omgegee het vir
Suid-Afrika, Voorsitter, dan is dit hierdie mense wat nou aan bewind is.
Voorsitter, baie van hierdie mense het families verloor; het goeie vriende
verloor. Voorsitter, die bloed het gevloei dat ons vryheid kan geniet en
die DA wil ons glad nie eens daardie vryheid gee nie. Ek sê vir julle, DA,
in Wes-Kaapse taal: julle maak julle laat. Ons sal voortgaan in ons stryd
na vryheid.

Voorsitter, die DA moenie skaam en suinig wees met die waarheid nie. Die DA
wil die ANC kritiseer. Toe ons in 2000 begin het met hierdie program, het
hulle gesê dit is die ANC se politieke veldtog, maar wie voer vandag ’n
politieke veldtog? Dit is die einste DA. Ek wil vir julle sê, DA, julle wil
sê: doen wat ek sê, maar moenie maak wat ek doen nie. Nee, julle gaan nie
ons mense vat vir enigiets nie. Ons mense het polities gegroei. Daar is nie
meer kans – ’n man kan maar hier al die tale kom praat, maar wragtig, jy
gaan ons nie meer verneuk nie.

Ek wil uitsonder vandag iemand wat versoening, iemand wat vrede probeer
bring in Suid-Afrika met haar musiek – tant Grietjie van Garies.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, what a disgrace it is. While the government and the President
did everything to give 6 kilolitre free water to our people, the DA cuts
that off as well, Chairperson. Mrs Zille does not use the resources that
are at her disposal as a leader and the Mayor of the City of Cape Town to
help the police to evict the drug lords who sell tik; who sell drugs; who
destroy the lives of our women and children. She does not do that but she
wants to protest against the police. She arranges marches, Chairperson,
against the police – people who are willing to help her - instead of
teaching our communities, like the ANC does, that we have to forge
alliances with the institutions that are created by the government.
Chairperson, they do not have a policy or a history of compassion.
This is the selfsame DA who, when the Western Cape legislature visited
farms to investigate the conditions of people on farms, was not part of
those visits. How can one come here and talk about poverty when one was not
even there to listen? They refused. Chairperson, they want to deny that
evictions occur, but they evict people.

AgriSA and Agri Western Cape said that there are certain elements in the
farming community who treat farmworkers as if they are animals. On the
contrary, they went as far as to say, Chairperson, that in certain areas
the animals are treated better than the farmworkers. Chairperson, that is
why I do not even have hair on my head today, because we had to sit on the
back of the bakkie while the dog sat in front. And then the farmer drove
very fast as well and that meant that our hair was blown about by the wind.

Chairperson, our people are having a difficult time. Our people are having
a difficult time on the farms. Farm owners would rather buy supplies so
that our people must buy from the farmer’s wife at the shop on the farm
rather than taking them to town where they can save a bit of money.

Chairperson, if one looks at the spy saga, I want to tell you Mrs Helen
Zille has a history. In 2000, when the DA governed the Western Cape, they
rather spent money on building bunkers and eavesdropping devices. So it is
no surprise that this spy saga has been revealed now. I want to tell the
DA: As you sow, so shall you reap. [Applause.]

I want to tell you today, if there were people who cared in any way for
South Africa, Chairperson, then it would be these people who are in power
at present. Chairperson, many of these people lost families and good
friends. Chairperson, blood flowed so that we could enjoy freedom and the
DA does not even want to give us that freedom. I say to you, DA, in the
language of the Western Cape: You are delaying yourselves. We will continue
in our struggle for freedom.

Chairperson, the DA should not be shy and miserly with the truth. The DA
wants to criticise the ANC. When we began with this programme in 2000, they
said it is the ANC’s political campaign, but who is conducting a political
campaign today? It is the selfsame DA. I want to say to you, DA, you want
to say: Do as I say, but do not do as I do. No, you are not going to fool
our people. Our people have grown politically. There is no longer a chance
of that – a man can come here and speak all the languages, but really, you
are not going to con us any more.

I want to single out someone who tries to bring reconciliation, someone who
tries to bring peace in South Africa today with her music – Aunty Grietjie
of Garies.]

Thank you, Chair. [Time expired.]
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, when I spoke here a little
while ago, I said it was important that we should understand the reality of
our country, we should respect the truth, and we should not claim easy
victories.

All of us know that Jan van Riebeeck came to this country in 1652. All
sorts of things then happened and we could only change the situation in our
country in 1994 – that is a long period. I think it is not correct to
pretend that we can change that reality of over 300 years in 13 years. We
should not go around telling people that we can change that reality in 13
years – it is wrong. That is why I was saying that we should tell no lies.

We have to learn the habit of telling the people the truth. What is the
truth? The truth is that it is going to take us a long time to eradicate
this legacy of colonialism and apartheid. Anybody who wants to win votes by
saying that we can eradicate that legacy in a day is not telling the truth.
I do not believe that such people need to represent our people.

We must tell this truth and say quite frankly and quite honestly to our
people that it is going to take us time to solve these problems, to
eradicate this legacy which has left us with many poor people. It has left
us with many unemployed people. It has left us with many people who live in
shacks, who have no access to water who have no access to clinics, and who
have no access to many things. We must outgrow the habit of promising
people things that we cannot do – it is wrong. [Applause.]

The time to interact with the people and the time to debate with the people
will never be over – it cannot happen. I think people who would say things
such as that the time for debating is over are people who do not respect
the people. There cannot be a day in a week in which one can say that the
voice of the people does not matter, and therefore the time to debate
matters is over - it is not correct. We will be able, in time, to deal with
all these problems of homelessness and so on. But, even when we have done
that, we will have to sit with the people and ask them what we need to do
next.

I was saying that I was very pleased that the NCOP has continued with this
programme of Taking Parliament to the People. I would agree with the hon
Mzizi that it cannot be that we say we are going to stop talking to the
people because it is going to cost us R10, and that it is a waste of money.
How can it be a waste of money, particularly coming from people who have
been elected by the people? So, the debate must continue. I would like to
say again that I really do appreciate the work that the NCOP does in taking
Parliament to the people and ensuring that the people come and participate
in these meetings. I will come back to this matter again just now.

There will be no easy victories and we must ensure that we work with the
people who ask what our elected representatives - our legislatures and our
governments - do together with the people to address all these challenges
that we face.

I understand that the hon Van Heerden is a member of the Judicial Service
Commission. I would imagine that a member of the Judicial Service
Commission is aware of the law, the Constitution and procedures relating to
the Judicial Service Commission. Therefore, the hon Van Heerden would have
known very well that it was completely out of order to raise the question
that he raised about the selection of the Free State Judge President.

This is a matter that obviously cannot be addressed here. I am saying that
I am sure that he knows or ought to know what the procedures are. He ought
to know, for instance, what the procedures are between the selection of
High Court judges and the selection of Constitutional Court judges. I trust
that the hon Van Heerden will pose whatever question he has about the
decisions of the Judicial Service Commission to the body to which he
belongs - not here, Mr Van Heerden. [Applause.]

I must say that the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP and
I discussed this matter some time back that the Presidency is continuously
very interested in hearing from the NCOP - what it learns during the
periods when it takes Parliament to the people. Indeed, as the Chairperson
of the NCOP has said earlier, after the conclusion of our work here, as in
the past, the NCOP will follow up on the matters that have been raised by
the people of the Boland.

We have agreed with the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP
that the Presidency would also appreciate a report from the NCOP about what
the NCOP has learned. The reason for that is that as national government we
are very interested in working with provincial and local governments to
respond to matters that people raise. Therefore, Chairperson, I will say
again that we will rely on you to brief us on what the people have said so
that we can then ensure that all structures at the national level are able
to work with the provincial and local governments to respond to the matters
that have been raised by the people here in the Boland.

I must say, Chairperson, that indeed we would agree very much with the
matters that you, the Premier of Gauteng, hon Ntwanambi, the Premier of the
Northern Cape, and other speakers have raised. These matters are really
what we need to focus on and that is the needs of the people right down to
the household. What you have said, for instance, Chairperson, was that if
there is a blockage in a toilet, that toilet is in a specific house and in
a specific household and government must respond to that challenge.

We have said, MEC Xasa has raised this also, that we have to ensure that
our programmes - poverty alleviation, poverty eradication and social
development - really do focus right down on the household. We must not be
satisfied that people have grants but we must ask ourselves how we can
assist so that people can develop and graduate out of the system of grants
and get skills and jobs to be able to generate their own wealth and not
just depend on grants.

The fact of the matter is that government actually knows – the Deputy
President of the Republic makes this point very regularly – who receives
grants. We know the names of the people and we know their home addresses.
We have this because these people are on government records. So, we know
exactly which family or household is poor. We should be able to enumerate
the interventions we should attempt in that household in order to take
people out of the system of social grants - because they will be able to
generate income; they will be more skilled; they will have access to
capital; and they will be able to develop themselves.

This is precisely the direction in which all structures of government have
to move so that we are able to measure progress - not only in general
statistical terms, but in terms of this particular family, this particular
household and these particular people.

It would indeed be very important that we get the report of this visit from
the NCOP so that we can see what else we need to do as the national
government to respond to the issues that people have raised in this
district.

I must say that, indeed, the concern about farm evictions is a very
legitimate matter. The hon members of the NCOP may be familiar with this,
as we discussed the matter in our last Presidential Working Group on
Commercial Agriculture. All of the farmers’ organisations were there,
national government was there and all sorts of organisations in agriculture
were there and this matter was discussed.

All of us agreed that it is an issue on which we had to focus just as we
had to focus on other issues in commercial agriculture that the Chairperson
of the NCOP had raised and which were discussed here. These matters have to
do with improving the manner in which farmworkers are treated.

As a result of that discussion, a joint task force has been set up which
includes the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs and the various
farmers’ unions so that together - government and the farmers’ unions - we
can respond to these matters. The task team has been set up because we were
as concerned as people here clearly are about these continuing problems. I
do hope, indeed, that the task team will do the work that it has to do
throughout our country.

Again, as I have just said, it has to focus on specific farms. It has to
deal with specific people. It cannot make general interventions, but must
make specific and focused interventions to ensure that indeed this
democracy that we have brought about also begins to reflect itself in the
manner in which our farmworkers are treated.

Lastly, Chairperson, I was very, very concerned about the issue that you
raised concerning the absence of local councillors and members of the
provincial legislature from these proceedings of the NCOP. I do not know
what we can do about it but it is obviously wrong and unacceptable.

We have had a problem here in the Western Cape for some time. I have never
raised this problem before, but I am going to raise it now: In the past -
some years back, you had a government of the Western Cape that was formed
by the Democratic Party and the New National Party, as they were called
then. The problem that arose was that that government wanted to treat the
Western Cape as though the Western Cape was a separate country.

We faced problems because in reality, that government did not want to
recognise the fact that we had one country and one national government. We
had to deal with problems of delegations from the Western Cape going to
Geneva to meet the World Health Organisation, delegations from the Western
Cape going to Latin America to reach agreements about health matters as
though we did not have a national government; as though we did not have one
country.

South Africa is described in our Constitution - it is no longer fragmented
as was attempted under the system of so-called “separate development”.
There is no Western Cape or Cape Town that is separate from the rest of
South Africa. [Applause.]

The National Council of Provinces is a House of our national Parliament and
all structures of government in the country, regardless of the party in
power, must respect that fact. [Applause.] It cannot be correct that
anybody in the country treats these constitutional structures of our
country with contempt and decides that it is a waste of time to interact
with the National Council of Provinces. It is not right.

I had thought that the problem that I am mentioning of, seemingly, a desire
to return to the days of separate development, had died away in this part
of the country. But what you have said about the absence of councillors and
MPLs tells me that perhaps it has not.

I would hope that the political parties that engaged in the struggle to
defeat separate development, that engaged in the struggle to say that we
have one South Africa, that engaged in the struggle to have the
Constitution that we have, will do their work so that, indeed, we overcome
this wrong kind of thinking, that it is possible to develop any part of the
country as though it were a separate entity.

I would like to agree with you, Chairperson of the NCOP, that, indeed, if
there are people who were elected to whatever position and do not do their
work, I don’t think those people deserve to stay in the positions in which
they are. [Applause.]

Chairperson, Premiers, MECs, hon members and people of the Boland, thank
you very much indeed for this opportunity to be with you. I want to say to
the people that indeed we will follow up on all of the matters that you
have raised. As I have said, I am quite certain that the Chairperson and
the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP will give us a report on these matters.
We will then follow up on them because we must continue to be a government
that responds to the voice of the people. [Applause.]

Before we came into this room, the Chairperson of the NCOP told me that
everybody here will be a delegate at the ANC conference next month.
[Applause.] I wanted to say: Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to
everybody, but he said: “No, wait. They are all coming to Limpopo!”
[Laughter.] But, a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to everybody. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                     THANKS TO HON XASA AND HON MQULWANA
                                     AND
                  HANDING OVER OF WHEELCHAIRS BY PRESIDENT

                               (Announcements)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Please be seated. Thank you. Let us all
sit down and listen. I want to thank the President for his response. We
will take another five minutes. I just want to make two announcements, one
from me and the other on behalf of the Acting Premier of the Western Cape,
hon Ramatlakane.

My announcement is as follows: Hon members, today I want to take this
opportunity to thank the hon T Xasa, MEC for Local Government, Housing and
Traditional Affairs in the Eastern Cape, for being the first MEC to send to
the National Council of Provinces a report on the status of municipalities
in the Eastern Cape, in terms of section 106 of the Local Government:
Municipal Systems Act. [Applause.] I hope that all the MECs will do the
same.

Hon Xasa is amongst us. Will you please stand up, hon Xasa, so that they
can see you? Thank you very much. [Applause.] That is how intergovernmental
relations should work. We will consider and study the report and thereafter
we will work with you to resolve the issues that you have raised. Thank you
very much.

The second announcement comes from the Acting Premier, hon Ramatlakane.
Before I make that announcement, I would like to thank hon Mqulwana, the
MEC for Social Development, very much for being with us for the whole day
on Tuesday when we discussed social issues. Omitting to mention that
earlier on was my fault.

The Acting Premier wanted to make this announcement, but he ran out of
time. The announcement reads as follows:


  I want to make particular reference to a family with special needs, whose
  mobility has been stunted as a result of them not having wheelchairs. Mr
  President and chairperson, as a caring government, we have arranged that
  the province meets the needs of this family. We will provide them with
  two wheelchairs and, in fact, we request that the President does us the
  honour of handing the wheelchairs over.

[Applause.] By the way, their plight was raised during a discussion of the
NCOP. I now want to announce the names of these people. After I have
announced their names, I would like everyone to please remain seated;
nobody must leave the Chamber. After announcing their names, I will then
adjourn the House. Once I have adjourned the House, everyone must remain
seated.

The President will perform the task of handing over these two wheelchairs.
After the President has done so, the procession will leave the Chamber
while you remain seated. Once we have allowed the President to leave the
Chamber, then all of us can leave to go and enjoy our lunch.
The two names are: Sindile Nomangola and Lottie Mrhwebu. The husband,
Stephen, will receive this wheelchair on behalf of his wife, who could not
be here this afternoon.

The Council adjourned at 13:35.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         WEDNESDAY, 24 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bill passed by Houses– to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 23 October
         2007:


         (a)     Co-operative Banks Bill [B 13B – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
 1. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Support Program for
         Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.



COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Convention
    for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and Sediments,
    2004 (Ballast Water Management Convention), dated 24 October 2007:

       The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
       request for approval by Parliament of the Convention for the Control
       and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004 (Ballast
       Water Management Convention), referred to it, recommends that the
       Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the
       said Convention.

    Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Convention
    on Oil       Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation, 1990
    (OPRC Convention),      dated 24 October 2007:

       The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
       request for approval by Parliament of the Convention on Oil
       Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation, 1990 (OPRC
       Convention), referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms
       of section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.


    Report to be considered.

                          THURSDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

         (a)     National Environment Management: Waste Bill [B 39 –
              2007] (National Assembly– proposed sec 76) [Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
              No 30142 of 3 August 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by
         the Minister of Transport. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services.


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 25 October 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:
         (a)     Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 23B – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration of the National Council of
         Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees
         Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         202-2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
    the Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2006/2007 of the
    Department of Labour, dated 17 October 2007:

        The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having been
        briefed by the Department of Labour on its Annual Report and
        Financial Statements of Vote 17 for 2006-2007, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 17 for
        2006-2007, referred to it, reports that it has concluded its
        deliberations thereon.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
    the Convention on the Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources
    in the South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), dated 23 October 2007:


        The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
        considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Convention
        on the Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources in the
        South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), referred to it, recommends that
        the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        approve the said Convention.


      Report to be considered.


3.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Transport
    Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27B- 2007] (National Assembly-
    sec 75), dated 24 October 2007:

        The Select Committee on  Public  Services,  having  considered  the
        subject of the Transport Agencies General Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B
        27B- 2007] (National Assembly-sec 75), referred to it, reports  the
        Bill with proposed amendments as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 1

1.    On page 3, after line 4, to insert the following paaragraph:
      “(a)  the substitution in subsection (2) for the words preceding
           paragraph (a) of the following words:
                 “The Minister must, after consulting with the relevant
                 stakeholders and the chairpersons of the Portfolio
                 Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on Public
                 Service, appoint the members of the Board consisting of-“.

                                  CLAUSE 7

1.    On page 5, after line 38, to insert the following paragraph:
      (c)   the substitution in subsection (3) for paragraph (a) of the
           following paragraph:
                 “(a)  are appointed by the Minister, after consultation
                       with the chairpersons of the Portfolio Committee on
                       Transport and the Select Committee on Public Service,
                       from a list of names of persons which, at the
                       Minister’s request by notice in the media, have been
                       submitted to him or her within the period specified
                       in the notice by any person or body having an
                       interest in the maritime or related industry; and”.

                                  CLAUSE 14

     1. On page 7, in line 23, after “Minister”, to insert “after
        consultation with the chairpersons of the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport and the Select Committee on Public Service.”.


                                  CLAUSE 18

1.    On page 8, after line 15, to insert the following paragraph:
      (a)   the substitution for subsection (1) of the following subsection:
                       “(1)  The Tribunal consists of not more than nine,
                 but not less than five, members appointed by the Minister
                 after consultation with every member of the Executive
                 Council in every province responsible for road transport
                 matters and the chairpersons of the Portfolio Committee on
                 Transport and the Select Committee on Public Service.”.

                           FRIDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

 1. The Chairperson

      a) Municipal Annual Performance Report for 2005/6 by the MEC for
         Developmental Local Government and Housing in North West.


    Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
    Administration.

                           MONDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

         (a)     National Environment Management: Integrated Coastal
              Management Bill [B 40 – 2007] (National Assembly– proposed
              sec 76) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 30141 of 6 August 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within
              three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 2 – Parliament for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements of Vote 2 for 2006-2007 [RP 97-2007].
National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

      (a)   Progress Report on the Mbombela Municipality, submitted by the
         MEC for Local government and Housing in Mpumalanga, in terms of
         section 106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000
         (Act No 32 of 2000).

         Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.

      (b)   Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the
         Government of the Republic of Cuba on the Employment of Technical
         Advisors, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

[REPRINT]


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Transport
    Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27B- 2007] (National Assembly-
    sec 75), dated 24 October 2007:

        The Select Committee on  Public  Services,  having  considered  the
        subject of the Transport Agencies General Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B
        27B- 2007] (National Assembly-sec 75), referred to it, reports  the
        Bill with proposed amendments as follows:
                                  CLAUSE 1

1.    On page 3, after line 4, to insert the following paragraph:
      “(a)  the substitution in subsection (2) for the words preceding
           paragraph (a) of the following words:
                 “The Minister must, after consulting with the relevant
                 stakeholders and the chairpersons of the Portfolio
                 Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on Public
                 Service, appoint the members of the Board consisting of-“.


                                  CLAUSE 7

1.    On page 5, after line 38, to insert the following paragraph:
      (c)   the substitution in subsection (3) for paragraph (a) of the
           following paragraph:
                 “(a)  are appointed by the Minister, after consultation
                       with the chairpersons of the Portfolio Committee on
                       Transport and the Select Committee on Public Service,
                       from a list of names of persons which, at the
                       Minister’s request by notice in the media, have been
                       submitted to him or her within the period specified
                       in the notice by any person or body having an
                       interest in the maritime or related industry; and”.

                                  CLAUSE 14

1.    On page 7, in line 23, after “Minister”, to insert “after
consultation with the chairpersons of the Portfolio Committee on Transport
and the Select Committee on Public Service.”.

                                  CLAUSE 18

1.    On page 8, after line 15, to insert the following paragraph:
      (a)   the substitution for subsection (1) of the following subsection:
                             “(1) The Tribunal consists of not more than
                 nine, but not less than five, members appointed by the
                 Minister after consultation with every member of the
                 Executive Council in every province responsible for road
                 transport matters and the chairpersons of the Portfolio
                 Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on Public
                 Service.”.

                                  CLAUSE 19

1.    On page 8, in line 36, after “Minister”, to insert “after
consultation with the chairpersons of the Portfolio Committee on Transport
and the Select Committee on Public Service.”.

                                  CLAUSE 22

1.    On page 9, in line 35, after “subsection (2)”, to insert “and after
consultation with the chairpersons of the Portfolio Committee on Transport
and the Select Committee on Public Service”.

                                  CLAUSE 23

1.    On page 10, after line 11, to insert the following paragraph:
      (a)   the substitution for subsection (4) of the following subsection”
                 “(4)  The members of the board are appointed by the
           Minister after consultation with the chairpersons of the
           Portfolio Committee on Transport and the Select Committee on
           Public Service.”.


                          TUESDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.


    (b)    Security Transfer Tax Administration Bill, 2007, submitted by
         the Minister of Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.

2.    Introduction of Bills


      1) The Minister of Finance


          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 41 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 77)


         (b)     Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 42 – 2007] (National
             Assembly –     proposed sec 77)


         (c)     Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 43 – 2007] (National
             Assembly –  proposed sec 75)  [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 30398 of 22 October 2007.]


         (d)     Securities Transfer Tax Bill [B 44 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 77)


         (e)     Security Transfer Tax Administration Bill [B 45 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75)  [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 30398 of
            22 October 2007.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2007 [RP 228-2007].


        Referred to the Joint Budget Committee and the Portfolio Committee
        on Finance for consideration and report, in accordance with their
        respective mandates.


     b) Adjustments Appropriation Bill, 2007 [B41-2007].


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
        and report.


     c) Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2007 [RP 229-2007],
        which includes:

              1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;

              2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


              3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


              4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;
              5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local
                 Government", Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;
              6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


              7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
                 Information System", Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


              8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


              9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service and
                 Administration", Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             10. Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service Commission",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             11. Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "South African Management
                 Development Institute", Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             12. Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Statistics South Africa",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             13. Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Arts and Culture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


             14. Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Education", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


             15. Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Health", Adjustments Estimates,
                 2007-2008;


             16. Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Labour", Adjustments Estimates,
                 2007-2008;


             17. Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Social Development",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             18. Memorandum on Vote No 18 - " Sport and Recreation South
                 Africa", Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             19. Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Correctional Services",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             20. Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Defence", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


             21. Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Independent Complaints
                 Directorate", Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             22. Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Justice and Constitutional
                 Development”, Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             23. Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Safety and Security",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             24. Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Agriculture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


             25. Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Communications", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


             26. Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Environmental Affairs and
                 Tourism", Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             27. Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Housing", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


             28. Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


             29. Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Minerals and Energy",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             30. Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;
             31. Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             32. Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;


             33. Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2007-2008;


             34. Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2007-2008;

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
        and report.

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises
      a) Report and Financial Statements of arivia.kom (Pty) Ltd for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors for 2006-
         2007.


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
         Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007.


      b) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme for 2006-
         2007.


                         WEDNESDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted
         by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


        a) National Treasury – Consolidated Financial Information for the
           year ended 31 March 2007.

                          THURSDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry

         (a)     Standards Bill [B 46 – 2007] (National Assembly–
              proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
              No 30351 of 8 October 2007.]

         (b)     National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill [B
              47 – 2007] (National Assembly– proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 30351 of 8 October 2007.]




              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM
              within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


      a) Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified during a
         performance audit on the rendering of catering services at the
         Department of Defence – August 2007 [RP 221-2007].

2.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Agreement Establishing the Collaborative Africa Budget Reform
         Initiative (CABRI), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement Establishing the
         Collaborative Africa Budget Reform Initiative (CABRI).

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr T V D Matyolo, in
         terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
         of 1993).

4.    The Minister of Science and Technology


     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Sultanate of Oman on Scientific and
        Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Sultanate of
         Oman on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Argentine Republic on Scientific and Technological
         Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

      d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Argentine
         Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      e) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Slovak Republic on Scientific and
         Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

      f) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Slovak
         Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      g) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of Australia on Scientific and Technological
         Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

      h) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of Australia on
         Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      i) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Hellenic Republic on Scientific and
         Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

      j) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Hellenic
         Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security


      a) Nomination for appointment of Executive Director: Independent
         Complaints Directorate (ICD) in terms of section 51 of the South
         African Police Service Act, 1995 (Act No 68 of 1995).


         Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs for consideration and report.



