---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-06-20
---

WEDNESDAY, 20 JUNE 2007

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall
move:


   That the House –


     1) notes a letter in the Sunday Tribune of 17 June 2007 titled: “The
        Song brings back toilet memories”, which reported that striking
        teachers, nurses and municipal workers chanted an abusive and
        derogatory song about President Thabo Mbeki;


     2) condemns such displays of vulgarity against the Head of State,
        which exceeds the right of peaceful demonstration as it impairs the
        dignity and reputation of the Head of State;

     3) resolves that whilst respecting the right of public servants to
        strike, they should refrain from such uncouth behaviour; and

     4) notes that such behaviour provides evidence of the need to separate
        the offices of the Head of State and the Head of Government
        forthwith, as it is spelt out in the Constitution Eighteenth
        Amendment Bill.


                        PUBLIC SERVICE AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Deputy
Speaker and members of this august House, the public service innovation
advocate Deb Gilbertson has argued that:


  Context is the ability to see the bigger picture of what is to be
  achieved. It is exemplified in the parable of the three stonecutters. The
  first stonecutter looked miserable and when asked what he was doing he
  muttered, “Breaking rocks”. The second stonecutter looked more cheerful
  and when asked what he was doing said, “Earning a living”. But the third
  stonecutter was ecstatic. He exclaimed he was “Building a cathedral.”

Gilbertson goes on to argue that organisations that lack the ability to see
context are often concerned with mundane administrative matters while those
that perform better will focus on effectiveness and efficiency. Excellent
organisations also concentrate on the rationale of what they are striving
to achieve. While many public servants are deeply committed to the purpose
of their organisations, this can be eroded through poor management and
bureaucracy.

The Bill before you today for a second reading provides an opportunity for
Parliament to strengthen the organisational and human resource policy of
the Public Service Regulatory Framework in order to enhance the ability of
committed public servants to focus on the purpose of what they are trying
to achieve.

Section 195 of the Constitution provides that public administration must be
governed by democratic values and principles, including:

a) A high standard of professional ethics must be promoted and maintained.


b) Efficient, economic and effective use of resources must be promoted.

c) Public administration must be development-oriented.

d) Services must be provided impartially, fairly, equitably and without
  bias.


e) People’s needs must be responded to, and the public must be encouraged
  to participate in policy-making.

Madam Deputy Speaker, we need to recognise that certain organisational and
human resource practices in the current Public Service Act directly or
indirectly obstruct service delivery. In broadening access to services for
the masses of our people, we need to continuously identify opportunities
for innovative ways of delivering services.

Currently, some government services are provided by national or provincial
departments away from the points of service delivery and without direct
accountability and decision-making by those functionaries responsible for
their delivery. Other government services are provided by entities outside
the public service without being directly accountable to a political head.

We have also come to recognise that compliance with the Public Service Act
and its prescripts do not meet the desired standards. This weakens human
resource management and results in time-consuming and costly legal
proceedings. Employees dismissed by departments for corruption-related and
other types of misconduct are often re-appointed by other government
departments soon after their dismissal, which means that misconduct does
not carry effective sanctions. Employees suspected of transgressions
sometimes resign and are appointed in other departments without
disciplinary steps being instituted or, if they have been instituted,
without being sustained.

The primary aim of the Public Service Amendment Bill is therefore to
approve the organisational and human resource framework for the Public
Service to address these obstacles to service delivery. A general objective
of the Bill is to ensure easier day-to-day administration of the Public
Service Act by addressing certain legal difficulties, simplifying or
clarifying several provisions, removing obsolete provisions and aligning
the Act with other legislation.

However, the Bill also proposes some new substantive provisions. One of
these is the introduction of a new institutional form or government
component. Government components will be institutions separate from
departments but within the Public Service. The aim of these alternative
institutions is to enable direct service delivery through a dedicated
entity under the direct control of a Minister, Premier or MEC. In addition,
provision is also made for specialised service delivery units, ring-fenced
within departments.

The Bill contains new measures to improve compliance with the Public
Service Act. These measures include investigations and directions in terms
of the Constitution by the Public Service Commission and the obligatory
implementation of these directions by political and administrative heads.
The Bill also makes proposals for the improvement of compliance by
providing for compulsory disciplinary steps against transgressors and
mandatory reporting in respect of such steps.

The Bill will enhance our anti-corruption initiatives: It introduces anti-
corruption measures to prohibit the re-employment of persons in the Public
Service dismissed for specified kinds of misconduct, eg misconduct
involving corrupt activities, are also contained in the Bill. It is
proposed that the prohibition on re-employment should endure for a
stipulated period and that different periods may be prescribed by
regulation in respect of different types of misconduct.

Some key amendments in the Bill include the introduction of government
components that will function as separate institutions within the Public
Service with their heads serving as accounting officers in terms of the
Public Finance Management Act. The component model is suitable for an
institution, with a unique identity that has specific measurable functions
that can be logically grouped in terms of a particular service delivery
model. Such a component may have original statutory functions or assigned
or delegated statutory functions or a combination of these.

A government component is partnered with a principal department, which will
assist the executive authority of that department, ie the responsible
Minister, in the case of a national department, with oversight of that
component on policy implementation, performance, integrated planning,
budgeting and service delivery.

While proposing this alternative service delivery model, however, it is
important to stress that it is not intended to fragment the state. On the
contrary, it responds directly to forms of fragmentation that have already
occurred through the establishment of public entities. Indeed, the
government component model will also be an institutional mechanism to
reincorporate some public entities, where appropriate and if required, into
the Public Service.

The Bill also proposes provisions that would enhance alignment and co-
ordination between the conditions of service of the general Public Service
falling under the Public Service Act, and those sectors which are part of
the Public Service but have their own employment legislation, where this is
desirable. Such alignment and co-ordination will take place through a
committee of the responsible Ministers.

If this Bill is adopted by Parliament and signed into law by the President,
it will contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of the
organisational and human resource framework for national and provincial
departments, by introducing new service delivery models and enforcement
mechanisms as well as by improving the day-to-day administration of the
Public Service Act.

While compliance in itself does not guarantee efficient and effective
service delivery, it is a necessary step in ensuring the improved
performance which all of us seek in the Public Service. Indeed, all the
measures proposed in this Bill are designed to enhance governance,
accountability and compliance that I am convinced will lead to better
service delivery. Thank you.

Mr P J GOMOMO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Bill before the House today seeks
to amend the Public Service Act to achieve the following: To provide for
the alignment of certain conditions of service to enhance service delivery;
to strengthen the co-ordination of policy implementation and accountability
for effective delivery; to ensure interministerial and interdepartmental co-
ordination of services in dealing with certain responsibilities to foster
accelerated service delivery; to create structures meant to strengthen the
service delivery machinery of the state; to regulate staff mobility in the
interest of the public; to regulate Public Service workers as they
sometimes perform remunerative work outside the Public Service, so that it
is not done in a manner undermining the effectiveness of such workers in
doing their daily Public Service tasks.

My comrades and some colleagues will further elucidate as to the practical
impact and significance of this amendment. This Bill has been with this
Parliament and being considered by the Public Service and Administration
Portfolio Committee for some time now and some amongst us may be of the
view that we took long to dispose of it. As a portfolio committee we are
satisfied that we had to take such a time period, perhaps save for those
individuals in the committee and possibly outside, who will only be
satisfied with the resurfacing of the old apartheid order of doing things.

I want to remind this House that when this Bill was introduced to
Parliament late last year our committee was inundated with submissions to
the effect that certain processes were either not observed at all or were
not observed adequately. These submissions came from a majority of
stakeholders that form part of the Nedlac constituencies.

Some were even calling for the withdrawal of the Bill and others went to
the extent of declaring that they would seek legal recourse to challenge
the Bill in court on the process of participatory legislation, particularly
on the consultation process and on the timing. They expressed their view
that their last hope lay in the portfolio committee’s intervention in the
matter. While others would like to use the public hearings organised by the
committee for a fight in a manner and by parties unprecedented, we realise
as a portfolio committee that we had a duty to protect democracy with its
inherent notion and rule for the separation of powers amongst the three
main organs of state.

We wanted to emphasise that we would do whatever it would take for us to
ensure that the role of Parliament in legislation would not be jettisoned
to either the executive or the judiciary. We did not opt to refer the Bill
back to the executive or instruct that it be withdrawn, for that would have
had its own consequences and would have compromised our oversight role.

We did not opt to continue with the consideration process heedless of the
possibility of unnecessary confrontation, for that would have had
consequences and the position of Parliament as a law-making institution
would have been compromised.

We did not opt to ignore submissions challenging the consultation process,
for doing so would have put us in a bad light as having failed to insist
that the process of consultation is at all times adhered to when we deal
with legislation.

We did not opt to ignore the Department of the Public Service and
Administration’s explanation on their experience in dealing with the
consultation process prior to the tabling of the Bill before Parliament.

Instead we opted for an approach where we proceeded with the consideration
of the Bill while encouraging all the stakeholders to have bilateral
consultations with the Department of the Public Service and Administration.
Such an arrangement was done with a view to facilitating that the parties
concerned would be able to find each other and accommodate each other’s
views in the process, so as to cover the ground otherwise lost due to
alleged inadequate consultation.

We are happy today that, as we recommend the approval of the portfolio
committee’s amendment to the Bill as introduced, we are presenting a Bill
that is a product of thorough consultation. We want to acknowledge that
this is a great achievement for democracy, because out of both the
bilateral processes and the public hearings, we managed to accommodate and
insert views that gave the shape of the Bill we are debating today.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! There are too many meetings taking
place in the House.

Mr P J GOMOMO: Nqanda, Mhlalingaphambili, zingabi kho ezi ntlanganiso.
[Stop the meetings, Chairperson.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: From both sides of the House, Mr Gomomo. Hon members,
let’s refrain from doing that. Otherwise we have the most beautiful lounges
in Parliament for you to go and have tea and continue to have your meetings
there.

Mr P J GOMOMO: We have to stress our observation as the portfolio committee
that despite the fact that we organised two workshops on the Bill with a
view to clearing up all possible semantic misunderstandings, we heard
throughout the consideration of the Bill that people approached the whole
debate as if the Bill before us was introducing a single Public Service
concept. People expressed their opinion of the Bill in that manner. It
would not be surprising to hear such voices in this debate today. All that
we can say about these people is that they are confused.

Of course, we are not saying that this Bill will not address issues that
will become the subject of the debate on the Single Public Service Bill
when it is finally introduced. But what we are saying is that this Bill
currently merely amends the Public Service Act of 1994, with a view to
facilitating service delivery in the current dispensation, such that, with
or without the introduction of a single Public Service, our agent of change
is in a position to deliver responsibly.

We cannot wait because there is talk about the introduction of a single
Public Service Bill. We want those changes now and those changes can only
come now and not later. We commend the Bill as amended.

Mr K J MINNIE: Adjunkspeaker, agb Minister, agb kollegas ... [Deputy
Speaker, hon Minister, hon colleagues ...]

... during the First Reading debate in November 2006 I stated that the
Public Service Amendment Bill is the first shot fired by government to move
towards a single public service in 2009, and that’s a fact.

The Bill purports to improve on staff mobility arrangements for the Public
Service and introduces government components ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Meetings again. Please! Next time I
will have to call you by name and ask you to please excuse yourself from
the House so that we can continue with the business of the House. Hon
member, please continue.

Mr K J MINNIE: ... as a new institutional form within the Public Service,
as well as specialised service delivery units. It also seeks to enhance
compliance with the Act through compulsory discipline of transgressors and
reporting on such matters.

Die DA gaan in ’n groot mate akkoord met die inhoud van die wetsontwerp,
maar daar is rigtinggewende aspekte waarmee die DA nie kan saamstem nie.

Die Staatsdienswysigingswet wat nou dien en die Staatsdienswet van 1994 sal
verdwyn wanneer die beoogde enkelstaatsdiens in 2009 ’n werklikheid word.
Die wetsontwerp wat op die tafel is, is dus voortydig. Dit is onnodig en
het ’n klomp tyd, energie en geld gemors. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The DA, to a large extent, agrees with the content of the Bill, but there
are directives which the DA cannot agree with.
The Public Service Amendment Bill now before us and the Public Service Act
of 1994 will disappear when the proposed single public service becomes a
reality in 2009. The Bill presently before Parliament is therefore
premature. It is unnecessary and has wasted a lot of time, energy and
money.]

The eventual and proposed creation of a single public service is nothing
more than placing the Public Service under one central control, leading to
a central bureaucracy. Components are the creation of another ANC
monstrosity without any indication of any costs involved. [Interjections.]

Dit is so! As ons na die konsepwet kyk wat nou hier voor ons dien, dan sien
ons dat die woorde, “government components” het “government agencies”
tydens die bespreking van die wetsontwerp in die portefeuljekomitee
vervang. Komponente sal slegs gevestig word nadat ’n
lewensvatbaarheidstudie gedoen is.

Dit is nie seker wat die doel van die sogenaamde komponente gaan wees nie,
aangesien dit geen diensleweringsfunksies verwant aan behuising,
gesondheid, voedsel, water en maatskaplike sekuriteit mag verrig nie. Dit
mag wees dat daar oor die spektrum van die Staatsdiens heen ‘n behoefte is
aan organisasies verwant aan die voorstel op die Tafel en dat ’n oop
tjekboek aan al wat uitvoerende owerheid gegee gaan word. Dit is
onaanvaarbaar, agb Minister. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[That is the case! If we scrutinise the draft Bill serving before us, we
see that the words, “government components” replaced “government agencies”
during the discussion of the Bill in the Portfolio Committee. Components
will only be established once a feasibility study has been done.

It is not clear what the objective of the so-called components will be, as
they may not perform any service delivery functions relating to housing,
health, food, water and social security. It might be that across the whole
Public Service spectrum, a need might exist for organisations relating to
the proposal on the Table and that a blank cheque will be given to all the
so-called executive authorities. That is unacceptable, hon Minister.]
The function of specialised service delivery units is clear, because they
can perform specific functions that would enhance the service delivery of a
department within a department. An executive authority may delegate human
resource powers to the head of a unit and not to a head of department. The
unit head operates on delegated powers.

In terms of clause 7(A)(4)(e) the relevant executive authority, after
consultation with the Minister and the Minister of Finance and by notice in
the Gazette, may establish an advisory board without executive functions
for the component and determine - listen carefully – the board’s
composition, appointment procedures and remuneration and all matters
required for its effective and efficient functioning and may include any
other matters necessary for the effective and efficient functioning of the
component.

Ek wonder hoe wyd kan dit gestel word? Die oorplasing en sekondering van
departementshoofde is ’n politieke saak vir die enkele rede dat hulle
uitvoering gee aan die beleid van die regering op nasionale en provinsiale
vlak. In alle gevalle waar hoofde van departemente aangestel word, is die
betrokke Minister deel van ’n kabinetskomitee wat aanbevelings aan die
President maak. In die geval van provinsies besluit die Premier of LUR wie
aangestel moet word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I wonder how broadly this can be put. The transfer and secondment of heads
of department is a political matter for the simple reason that they
implement government policy at national and provincial level. In all cases
where heads of department are appointed, the relevant Minister is part of a
Cabinet committee that makes recommendations to the President. In the case
of provinces, the Premier or MEC decides who should be appointed.]

The Premier could come from any of the political parties and this means
that a Premier can appoint a head of department in terms of the policies of
his/her party that he/she needs to implement. There is a potential for
conflict if the President should transfer a head of department to a
province where the Premier belongs to a party other than the President’s
political party. The argument against this might be that the appointment of
heads of department is an administrative matter, but this is not so – it is
a political matter.

Wat die oorplasing van amptenary betref, is die wetsontwerp gewysig sodat
amptenare se oorplasing nie sonder hul toestemming mag geskied nie. Die
vangplek is egter dat indien dit in openbare belang geag word, oorplasings
sonder toestemming kan geskied. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[With regard to the transfer of officials, the Bill has been amended so
that officials cannot be seconded without their consent. The catch,
however, is that if it is considered in the public interest, transfers can
be effected without the officials’ consent.]
The DA is of the opinion that the wide powers given to the President in the
Bill in terms of making appointments at provincial level are inconsistent
with the Constitution.

Verlede week se nuus dat die regering van voornemens is om met sy planne
vir die sentralisering van die staatsdiens voort te gaan, sogenaamd in die
belang van verbeterde dienslewering, laat die alarmklokkies lui. Die ware
doelwit moet reguit gestel word: Dit is om die ANC se mag te sentraliseer;
om die opposisie minder kanse te gun om alternatiewe diensleweringsmodelle
te skep; en om die reeds vae skeidslyn tussen die regerende party en die
staat te vernou.

Die beoogde wetgewing sal die Minister vir die Staatsdiens en Administrasie
groot magte gee. Dit stel die nasionale regering in staat om oor
aanstellings in alle nasionale departemente en staatsagentskappe, alle
premierskantore, provinsiale departemente, alle munisipaliteite en
munisipale agentskappe asook oor alle werknemers in dié liggame toesig te
hou. Daar is geen waarborg dat sentralisering enigiets verbeter nie. Om dié
rede kan die DA nie die wetsontwerp ondersteun nie. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The news last week that the government intends to pursue its plans to
centralise the Public Service, ostensibly in the interest of improved
service delivery, has the alarm bells ringing. Let’s be frank about its
main objective: It is to centralise power in the hands of the ANC; to give
the opposition fewer chances to create alternative service delivery models;
and to narrow the already vague divide between the ruling party and the
state.

The proposed legislation will provide the Minister for the Public Service
and Administration with greater powers. It will enable the national
government to oversee all appointments in all national departments and
state agencies, all premiers’ offices, provincial departments, all
municipalities and municipal agencies as well as all employees in these
bodies. There is no guarantee that centralisation would improve anything.
For this reason the DA cannot support the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Deputy Speaker and hon members, at the top of government’s
agenda is the need to centralise and consolidate power into a single state
bureaucratic machine. While the Bill elucidates a number of important and
positive issues such as compliance reporting and consolidating the
stability of the Public Service, its overarching objective is laying the
ground work for a single public service.

It is here that the IFP finds the devil in the detail. The IFP supports
federalism, devolution of power and the decentralisation of power.
Decentralisation is an integral part of a pluralist democracy and
development. The three tiers of government should respect the
constitutional status of the other spheres and not encroach on their
institutional, geographical and functional integrity.

Let us not forget that we are bound by the entire Constitution and Chapter
7 elucidates the status of municipalities.

These amendments will begin to make huge inroads into the interdependence
of local government institutions. The IFP is of the opinion that the
independence and integrity of the three spheres of government should be
upheld at all costs, it being a fundamental and entrenched principle of our
Constitution.

The legislation demonstrates that government is pressing ahead to gain a
centrally controlled developmental state. Therefore, the creation of a
single Public Service will achieve national regulation of all spheres of
government within a single framework. Not surprisingly, the single Public
Service will create a monolithic bureaucracy which will cripple local
government’s ability to deliver basic services.

Despite the flexibility of the Bill, especially in terms of outside
remuneration and leave of absence, we have to guard against unintended
consequences. In order to advance accountability and transparency we need
to decentralise control. We cannot, I repeat, we cannot curtail the
autonomy of municipalities by transferring decision-making power to a
central government.
In short, with the creation of a single Public Service, this will discount
voters and their ability to hold their elected representatives to account -
very much like the crossing of the floor legislation.

The IFP supports the prescripts of good governance. The establishment of
government components and specialised service delivery units will fracture
service delivery and will almost dislocate them from the principal
department. Also we need to ask the question: Does the department have the
necessary monitoring and evaluation tools? The IFP believes that the
constitutional integrity of the three spheres of government should be
maintained, and the Minister cannot and should not unilaterally determine
conditions of service. In short, we cannot create a monstrosity.

We have heard in this House today that to oppose the Bill is to wish back
the evil and dark days of apartheid. Far from it! To oppose this Bill is to
fight for power to be truly devolved to the people of South Africa. The IFP
cannot support this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Ministers, efforts to effect
efficient human resource processes and improved disciplinary processes are
commendable, but the ACDP does not agree with the fact that a centralised
Public Service is necessary, or even desirable, in the quest to improve
service delivery.
This Bill does just that. It expands the Minister’s and the President’s
powers, weakens local accountability and threatens the independence and
integrity of individual spheres of government.

While this Bill clearly delivers a blow to democracy it does not in fact
address fundamental problems plaguing service delivery. When officials are
appointed for reasons other than their ability to do their job and are not
held accountable, we can expect service delivery to suffer.

While managers’ salaries are out of proportion with those of the
professionals who advise them and in fact carry the department’s
institutions and organisations, we are courting disaster. Because
experienced and skilled personnel have been overlooked and underpaid and
even enticed to leave the Public Service, we are presently paying
consultants up to three times what we would have to pay relevant personnel.
The few professionals left in the Public Service spend their time managing
the consultants and tendering processes and are therefore not able to
produce. This is the testimony of one such professional, and I quote:


   I recently had a consultant working in my office with one of our
   computers. I spent the first two months of the 12 month contract training
   him, he cost us R45 000 per month. That is the cost of not keeping loyal
   staff.

There are many who believe that a single Public Service will also rob
professionals of their identity and sense of pride in their profession.
When people think of public servants they think of unhelpful clerks at Home
Affairs offices, and not their child’s teachers or doctors, planners,
architects and engineers. They believe a single Public Service will
increase these perceptions.

When it comes to mandatory transfers, this Bill could bring about the
wholesale evacuation of whatever skills remain in the Public Service. The
ACDP will not vote in favour of this Bill, which we believe does not
address the critical issues ... [Time expired].

Mr K K KHUMALO: Before I commence, Madam Speaker, I would like to advise
the DA and the other parties to look at the legislation, such as the South
Africa Act of 1909, section 141 and onwards. They would find the very same
arrangement as proposed in this Bill. Thank you.

It is my belief that the ultimate honour to our liberation struggle for the
freedom of our people resides within the content of the quality in the
services that we deliver to the citizens of this country. The contingent
does not arise in a vacuum, nor is it an invention of sorts, but derives
also from the contextualisation of what the preamble to our Constitution
enjoins us as public representatives to take cognisance of.

The above preamble enjoins us, inter alia, to lay the foundations for a
united democratic state accompanied by social justices based on democratic
values, fundamental human rights where every individual enjoys equal
protection before the law and which affords the recognition of the
individual‘s potential and to improve the quality of life of our people.

It follows, therefore, that the organisation of the state and its
institutional delivery arrangements must be positioned such that the
improvement in the quality of life of our people is realised, but also that
should any challenges to optimal service delivery arise, the system must be
responsive enough to rise to the occasion. The question then arises as to
whether the Department of the Public Service and Administration in its
current organisation is able to meet this challenge.

Madam Speaker, this question must be asked in the context of the basic
values and principles governing Public Service administration as enshrined
in Chapter 10 of the Constitution which I will not read out in total:

   Public administration must be governed by the democratic values and
   principles enshrined in the Constitution, including the following
   principles: a high standard of professional ethics must be promoted ...;
   efficient, economic and effective use of resources must be promoted; and
   public administration must be development-oriented.

We are also enjoined by the Constitution to pass legislation in order to
realise these principles. The answer to the earlier question is that
despite the numerous milestones achieved by the Public Service in terms of
service delivery, for example the provision of services as well as the
introduction of the White Paper, introducing the Batho Pele framework as an
initiative to improve service delivery, various institutional challenges
have presented themselves. For example, underspending of resources that
lead to poor or no service delivery - poor planning that is often
characterised by bad prioritisation, leading to the abandonment of huge
projects with untold socio-economic implications to citizens.

I know of an example in Upington where the construction of the hospital
only went as far as the foundation, which really is an indictment in terms
of planning. Considering the high levels of unemployment in Upington, the
construction of the hospital could have gone a long way not only to address
unemployment per se, but could also have contributed to skills development.


Another project which we hope is not also going to flounder is the
upgrading of the Upington Airport into a fully fledged international cargo
harbour. An agency for this purpose is already in place and we thank the
Ministry of Transport in this regard.

What is clear from the above is that delivery challenges are not only being
experienced at national level, but at the points of delivery as well. This
is evidenced by both the success stories of Project Consolidate and Khaedu.
The success of these two could be categorised as follows: Firstly, it
exposes senior management service to client-oriented skills development
towards improved and effective service delivery; and, secondly, it
highlights the urgent need to provide a mechanism to facilitate a sustained
and co-ordinated synergy for effective service delivery.

Building of institutional capacity is therefore critical if we are to meet
the challenges posed by poverty and underdevelopment. The policy priorities
of the DPSA for the 2008 financial year, with respect to the micro-
organisation of the state is therefore timely and welcomed. I quote:


   This policy serves to assist the state in ensuring that systems of the
   government work in synergy to deliver services. The strategy is to pave
   the way for a single Public Service.


But, not now under discussion; envisaged for the beginning of 2009. A
single Public Service is a policy project aimed at incorporating policy,
but it is not aimed at undermining the principle of the separation of
powers between the spheres of government.

What this Bill envisages to realise, among other things, is to allow the
mobility of staff between departments where they are most needed, and also
to regulate change in the employment capacity where employees are appointed
or transferred to other departments. This endeavour is not intended to
undermine, as I said, the separation of powers between spheres of
government but instead it is directed at giving effect to provisions of co-
operative governance and improving intergovernmental relations - read
together with the constitutional responsibilities of the relevant Minister
and giving effect to the principles of the Public Service.

Madam Speaker, as I said, the streamlining of the work of the Public
Service is nothing new and was there as long ago as 1910 and it is to be
found in the sections that I have quoted. The ANC supports this Bill. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, in respect of the
amending Bill, the MF finds the provisions to be promising and establishing
proper and effective management in the sector, especially in terms of
probation requirements, retirement, absconding and re-employment. We do,
however, note the potential of some concern arising regarding the potential
construing of the centralisation of power.

We are certain that these terms will suit both the state and the Public
Service sector that certainly is serviced with greater security through the
amending Bill. We use this platform to cry out to the public sector to
reach a settlement on its wage dispute and for unions to closely revise the
multi-term wage settlement offered by the department.

The MF greatly appreciates all public servants and the valuable service
they render to South Africa. The public sector is, however, suffering as a
result of the strike and the MF suggests that the strike action be limited
to the boardroom and a one day strike.

With the above reservation and concern the MF supports the Bill.
Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr N E GCWABAZA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister for the Public Service
and Administration, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and hon Deputy
Ministers, the Public Service Amendment Bill, as it is being debated in
this House today, seeks to address, amongst other things, issues relating
to the conditions of service within the broader Public Service.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! The corner where hon Mr Monareng is,
please respect the House or continue with your meeting outside the House.
You may continue, hon member.

Mr N E GCWABAZA: The Public Service Amendment Bill, as it is being debated
in this House today seeks to address, amongst other things, issues relating
to the conditions of service within the broader Public Service.

The proposed Bill seeks to regulate the conditions of employment of public
servants in line with the Labour Relations Act, the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa and the existing collective agreements signed at
the PSCBC – Public Service Co-ordinating Bargaining Council - between the
Department of the Public Service and Administration and organised labour.

The regulation of conditions of service of public servants through this
Bill also takes into consideration the legislation which governs the sector
departments and collective agreements entered into between sector
departments and the unions. This means, therefore, that there is nothing in
this Bill which contradicts sectoral legislative and sectoral collective
agreement arrangements. Rather, the Bill facilitates a process leading to
the overall regulation of conditions of service of public servants as we
proceed towards the creation and realisation of a single Public Service.
And, we make no apologies to anybody about envisaging the creation of a
single Public Service.

In terms of the Bill the hon Minister for the Public Service and
Administration will now determine conditions of service for the entire
Public Service with the concurrence of a committee of Ministers. This
committee of Ministers will consist of the Minister for the Public Service
and Administration, the Minister of Finance and any other Minister or
Ministers whose departmental employees would be affected by and through any
proposed legislation.

Every determination imposed should comply with the Labour Relations Act and
any existing agreements. The Minister will have the power to elucidate or
supplement a determination by means of a directive on conditions of service
if this would result in proper implementation of collective agreements.
This is on condition that the directive would not be in conflict with or
does not derogate from the terms of existing agreements.

The Bill emphasises that a head of department should conclude an employment
contract within the prescribed period. This means that disclosures
regarding vested interests must be made and that a performance contract
would be signed within a reasonable period. According to the Public Service
Commission, this provision has mostly been overlooked and there are
discrepancies, which cause some heads of department not to sign a
performance contract and ignore a declaration of vested interests. This,
according to the PSC, is because some executive authorities overlook this
important provision.

The Bill proposes that the President may transfer a head of department to
the Office of the Premier to serve in a similar capacity as a head of
department or in any other capacity. This shall happen in consultation with
the Premier and shall only take effect if the head of department concerned
agrees to this transfer.

Transfers of other employees who are not heads of department shall be made
by an executive authority in agreement with another executive to whose
department the employee will be transferred. If these two conditions do not
exist, a transfer should be in the public interest. There will be requisite
consultation with the applicable bargaining council established in terms of
the Labour Relations Act, Act 66 of 1995.

The Bill also proposes that an executive authority may appoint an employee
on probation for a prescribed period. At the end of the probation period,
the executive authority may confirm the appointment on condition that the
employee performed satisfactorily and complied with all conditions set for
his or her appointment.

With regard to secondments, the same process as in transfers will apply,
except that there will be no consultation with the relevant bargaining
council but there will be due consideration of representations. Employees
would now qualify to apply for retirement from the Public Service from the
age of 55 – 60 without being penalised during the pension payout if such
application is granted or approved.

For those employees who, by virtue of the nature of their profession, want
to engage in other remunerative work outside the Public Service, they
would, upon application for such permission, be given or denied such
permission within 30 days from the date of application. If the executive
authority fails to take a decision within 30 days such permission would be
deemed to have been granted.

An employee who feels aggrieved in an employment relationship will have
recourse to lodging a grievance with the relevant executive authority. If
an employee is not satisfied with the resolution to a grievance the
executive authority would have to submit the employee’s grievance to the
Public Service Commission, which would make a recommendation. A head of
department may lodge a grievance with the authority or directly with the
Public Service Commission.

The Bill does not limit the constitutional mandate of provincial
governments nor that of local governments as is alleged by our opposition.
Instead, the Bill seeks to further strengthen co-operative governance.
Therefore, there is nothing in this proposed Bill which is in contravention
of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.

Lastly, the Bill seeks to regulate ... The ANC supports the Bill. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Deputy
Speaker, hon members and the Deputy President, when one listens to the
contributions that have come from certain quarters on this particular Bill,
it is quite confusing as to what we are really dealing with.

Very clearly, the federalists have stuck their heads out this afternoon and
have overlooked what is in Chapter 10 of the Constitution, which reflects
on the basic values and principles governing administration, specifically
stating that those principles apply to administration in every sphere of
government, organ of state and public enterprise. There are various other
things that one could take into account.

I want to restate this afternoon that the primary aim of the single Public
Service is to increase access to public services for all the people of our
country and to integrate and improve service delivery at local level. But
this afternoon’s debate is not about whether or not the single Public
Service deals with the centralisation of the state, as there were attempts
to suggest.
Today’s debate is about the Public Service Amendment Bill. I have informed
hon Minnie previously that he must hold on to his speech for when the time
comes and not use it for this debate. That has actually provoked a comment
from a colleague of mine who said: “May I ask you whether you are
masochistic? You are getting help from 1,2 million public servants and
right now you want a further 1,2 million.’’

It’s because he assumed that this definitely could not have been what came
through Cabinet. Indeed, the issues raised are not what came through
Cabinet but are a theory á la DA and even the IFP today. Hon Roopnarain,
you have really disappointed me because I thought you understood this
particular Bill.

What we need to take forward is that we need to ensure that we properly
inform stakeholders about the provisions of the legislation that we have
before us. We also need to ready ourselves for the debate on the single
Public Service that will come up in future and let’s not allow our coloured
view of life to interfere with that. [Interjections.] I was talking about
colour and not about race. If you have race on your mind, please go ahead
and be my guest. I am not going to have that. [Laughter.]

Government components and specialised service delivery units cannot
fragment government services as the new institutions are directly
accountable to the relevant political heads. The current status quo
pertaining to public entities fragments services in the absence of direct
accountability. I think there is also a need to state ... [Interjections.]
The other issue that I should raise ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Minister! Mr Lee, I hope the newspaper you
are amusing yourself with is relevant to the debate. If not, you have to
put it away and ... [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

Mr T D LEE: No! Not a speech ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t need a speech from you. Where I am seated I can
see what you are reading and let it be a matter between you and I. Do not
tell the House what you are reading about and please take your seat.
[Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much, Deputy Speaker, for that intervention. On the issue of the role of
the President in appointments, I would again point out to those members who
profess to have studied the Bill, and clearly did not, that it states that
the President may only transfer a head of department to a provincial
department in consultation with the relevant Premier.

What I consider intriguing in the participation this afternoon is that the
DA is now saying that they are all for political appointees. And clearly
that means competence and everything else is on the back burner. We note
that, as it was raised this afternoon.

I also want to say that, except for transfers, the President is not
involved in the appointment of heads of provincial departments. The claim
of unconstitutionality is thus unfounded. But I understand that it was not
constitutional lawyers who were participating in the debate.

As regards the IFP on centralisation and fragmentation, how can one argue
simultaneously that the Public Service Amendment Bill will centralise
government and that it will fragment government? Is this logical slippage
or what are we seeing here today? I am not quite sure. But I think what we
need to take forward is that we should ensure that we take into account
what has come forward through this Bill because it will contribute towards
the efficiency and effectiveness of the organisational and human resource
framework for national and provincial departments by introducing new
service delivery models by enforcing mechanisms as well as improving the
day to day administration of the Public Service Act.

While compliance in itself does not guarantee efficient and effective
service delivery, it is a necessary step in ensuring the improved
performance which all of us seek in the Public Service. Indeed, all the
measures proposed in this Bill are designed to enhance governance,
accountability and compliance, that we are convinced will lead to better
service delivery.

I would like to take this opportunity as well to thank stakeholders for
their constructive contributions during the public participation process
facilitated by the Portfolio Committee on the Public Service and
Administration under the chairpersonship of Mr John Gomomo. I would also
like to thank all members of the committee for ensuring that the proposed
legislative measures in this Bill uphold and enhance the constitutional
values and principles for public administration enshrined in Chapter 10 of
the Constitution. Notwithstanding the elements of ... [Time expired.]

Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES – 199: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Balfour, B
   M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P;
   Bhoola, R B; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Botha, N G W;
   Burgess, C V; Cele, M A; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J
   J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Daniels, P; Davies, R H; Diale,
   L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Dlamini-Zuma,
   N C; Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C ; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J;
   Frolick, C T; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A;
   Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Hajaig, F;
   Hanekom, D A; Hendrickse, P A C; Holomisa, S P; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, M;
   Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P;
   Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M;
   Kondlo, N C; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekota, M G P;
   Lishivha, T E; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Maake, J J; Mabe, L
   L; Madasa, Z L; Maduma, L D; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlawe, N M;
   Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M
   J; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R
   J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M
   H; Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J; Maunye, M M;
   Mayatula, S M; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P;
   Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni,
   A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T
   R; Mogale, O M; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A;
   Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R;
   Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Mpahlwa, M B; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu,
   B; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Nel, A C; Nene, M J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
   Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J;
   Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J;
   Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, M M; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M
   D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A;
   Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, E G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R
   D; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P
   M; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J;
   Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seadimo, M D; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P;
   Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Skweyiya, Z S T;
   Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Surty, M E;
   Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J;
   Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van
   Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Xingwana, L M ;
   Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES – 64: Batyi, F; Bekker, H J; Bhengu, M J; Bici, J; Biyela, B P ;
   Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S; Buthelezi, M G; Chang, E S;
   Cupido, H B ; Delport, J T; Dhlamini, B W; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dreyer, A
   M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Groenewald, P J;
   Joubert, L K; Julies, I F; Kganyago, N M; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne,
   L B; Lebenya, P; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Marais, S J F; Mars, I; Masango, S
   J; Mdladlose, M M; Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mpontshane, A
   M; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Nkabinde, N C; Opperman, S E; Pule, B E;
   Rabinowitz, R; Roopnarain, U; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Seaton, S
   A; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Sibuyana, M W; Simmons, S;
   Skosana, M B; Smuts, M; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart , M; Swart, P
   S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van Der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M;
   Vos, S C; Woods, G G.


   ABSTAIN – 2: De Lille, P; Harding, A.
Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

 Payment by the Presidency of legal fees of former Deputy President Mr Jacob
                                    Zuma

9.    Mrs S M Camerer (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the Presidency will continue to pay the legal fees of
           the former Deputy President Mr Jacob Zuma’s legal team in the
           future; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, for
           how long;

      (2)   whether a limit on this expenditure has been considered; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   N1313E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. The reply
is as follows. An application for legal representation by any person who is
or was in the employ of the state, including former Deputy President Zuma,
is considered by the relevant department’s accounting officer on its
merits. The recommendation of the state attorney is taken into
consideration in this regard.

If approved, fees to be charged are negotiated at either a retainer rate or
a reduced rate, whichever is the most cost-effective. The number of legal
representatives to be involved in the matter is also limited to the barest
minimum in order to save on costs to be incurred. This reply answers both
parts 1 and 2 of the question.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now call the hon Delport who is standing in for Mrs
Camerer.

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Deputy Speaker, Madam Deputy President, I’m quite
sure that the hon Deputy President would have apprised herself of
government policy and the principles underlying the assistance given to
persons in such instances. I don’t want to talk about specific instances,
like the hon Zuma’s situation. I want to address the hon Deputy President
on general principles and ask her a question.

What are the criteria that the executive expects to be applied when
assistance is given or not given? The problem is that in many instances a
person in an official capacity must defend an action – sure, in his
official capacity. But in his private capacity, who would be considered to
be given assistance – only Ministers, only Presidents, Deputy Presidents,
officials, Members of Parliament – and for what: only murder, only rape, or
...
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The time for the motivation is up, because you have
asked your question.

Dr J T DELPORT: My question is: or, is it the position of he loves me, he
loves me not, he loves me, he loves me not? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I love you not. [Laughter.] As I indicated in the
answer, this applies to people who are in the employ of the state. The
accounting officer looks at this on its merits. If it has been alleged that
the person has committed a crime, the nature of the crime is then looked at
on its own merit. So, this is on a case-by-case basis; and, don’t ask a
follow-up question.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy President, there is a follow-up, but definitely
not from Dr Delport. It is from Mr Swart.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Deputy President,
without reference to the matter under discussion, is it still the practice
in terms of the Treasury’s instructions to recover legal fees spent on
cases where public officials are convicted of charges committed when they
are in public office? Are such fees recoverable at a later stage? Thank
you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, hon member, that is still the policy. I do just
want to remind the honourable House that Wouter Basson and Magnus Malan
were also funded by the state. [Applause.]

 Creation of stronger links between government’s imbizo programme and other
                            government programmes

10.   Ms B N Dambuza (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (a) How can the government create stronger links between its imbizo
      programme and other government programmes and (b) what steps does the
      government take to monitor action that addresses issues raised by
      communities during izimbizo?      N1315E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, the answer to the question is
as follows: Izimbizo are one of the main mechanisms to popularise the
programme of action and to provide a platform to strengthen the partnership
between government and communities.

The key objectives are to accelerate the implementation of the programme
and to identify solutions to problems with regard to service delivery.
Izimbizo have become a key institution of our participatory democracy and
contribute to the capacity of people to act as their own liberators in
changing their lives.

Since 2001 the Presidency has taken part in provincial and district
izimbizo in all provinces, and members of the executive in all three
spheres of government have participated in the national Izimbizo Focus
Weeks each year. At the same time provinces have also held their own
izimbizo and interactive outreach programmes as part of the broader
izimbizo programme.

Out of the experience of this first phase of izimbizo, it was clear that
certain common factors were at play in many of the concerns raised by
communities. In particular, it was necessary to integrate izimbizo more
closely with municipal processes. This led to us initiating a second phase
of izimbizo in 2005 in the form of a municipal presidential izimbizo
programme, alongside the continuing national Izimbizo Focus Weeks and
provincial outreach programme.

The municipal izimbizo programme served as a support mechanism aligned to
Project Consolidate in the identification of problems faced by
municipalities and determining what we would do together to address these
problems.

The izimbizo programme mobilises stakeholders to contribute to the solution
of the challenges facing our municipalities. A fundamental lesson learnt in
the following up of the matters raised during izimbizo has been the
importance of intergovernmental co-operation and the clarification of roles
and responsibilities amongst the three spheres of government. This has
contributed to the development of draft guidelines for various spheres of
government pre and post the izimbizo process.

The government, the Communication and Information Service and the
Department of Provincial and Local Government are capturing all the issues
that are arising out of the izimbizo, and the DPLG monitors the issues
specific to local government.

A review has recommended that provinces should play an active role in
following up issues raised during izimbizo. This should be done in
alignment with their integrated plans, that is their provincial and growth
development strategies and their national spatial development plans.

In 2005-06 a general finding on the monitoring of post-izimbizo tasks was
that there were weaknesses in the following up and reporting systems.
Therefore we have put in place procedures that will ensure that we improve
on the quality of our monitoring. This has now become part of our strategic
agenda, and once we have gathered enough information to report on the
trends, we’ll gladly share with you what we are continuing to pick up and
whether what we have now put in place is assisting us to monitor much
better.
Nkskz B N DAMBUZA: Sekela-Mongameli obekekileyo, ndiyabulela ngenkcazo
yakho enabileyo nekhuthazayo. Kambe ke umbuzo obalulekileyo ngowokuba:
Ngaba ngokolu hlelo uthi sele lukhona, amasebe ayakwazi na ukuba aphendule
eluntwini ngezikhalo neembono ezivakaliswa luluntu kwezi mbizo? Oko
kwenzelwa ukuba xa siphinda sisiya kubamba ezinye iimbizo, singafiki
sihlangabezane neengxaki.

Ukuba asenzi njalo abantu baya kuthi: Benilapha kulo nyaka uphelileyo
ningurhulumente kazwelonke, owephondo nowasekhaya. Nithetha into enye,
kodwa akubonakali kukho utshintsho. Enkosi. [Laphela ixesha.]

USEKELA-MONGAMELI: Sekela-Somlomo, into endiyibonayo kukuba lo asingombuzo
koko ligalelo lokugxin inisa ukuba intle into yokuba sibe nayo indlela
yokuba sibe neliso kwaye silande ekhondweni leengxaki ezichazwe ngabantu
ukuze singazi kuxakekisa aMalungu ePalamente nabanye abantu abamele
urhulumente xa bebuyela eluntwini ngenxa yokuba singalandanga ekhondweni
leengxaki ezazichaziwe. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms B N DAMBUZA: Hon Deputy President, I thank you for your broad and
encouraging explanation. However, the important question is: According to
this programme you say is already in existence, are the departments able to
respond to the communities’ complaints and concerns raised at these
izimbizo? That is being raised so that when we go there to stage other
izimbizo, we do not encounter problems.
If we do not do it that way, people will say: You were here last year as
the three spheres of government, sharing the same sentiments, but there is
still no difference. Thank you. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Speaker, what I noticed is that this is not a
question but a contribution that emphasises the fact that we should look
very carefully, and follow up on the problems raised by communities, so
that our Members of Parliament and other government representatives should
not encounter difficulties when they return to the communities.]

Mr M M SWATHE: Deputy President, I’m going to ask a follow-up question as
to why we see people protesting, vandalising government buildings, looting
and destroying the infrastructure of several municipalities after municipal
izimbizo, for example in Khutsong?

Secondly, do the government and the executive extend the programmes of the
ANC through izimbizo, using public funds? If not, when are we going to see
the concerns of communities being addressed, and not have talk shows? Thank
you very much.

IPHINI LIKAMONGAMELI: Somlomo, angilazi leli lungu ukuthi ngempela
likhuluma ngani, sengathi liyaphupha. Izinkinga esiye sikhulume ngazo uma
sisezifundazweni noma sikomasipala yilezo zinkinga esizikhonjiswa omasipala
bakulezo zindawo. Izinkinga futhi esizibhekayo yilezo ezisuke ziphuma
emilonyeni yabantu esifike sibabone lapho.

Akukaze kwenzeke ukuthi uma siya endaweni thina sifike sesinohlelo lwethu
esifike siphoqe abantu sithi abalulandele. Thina sikhuluma nabantu ngalezo
zinkinga abanazo bese sibuyela emuva, sifike sizame ukuthi silandelele lezo
zinto eMinyangweni kahulumeni, ohulumeni bezindawo nezifundazwe okufanele
ngabe babhekene nalezo zinkinga.

Ngiyakwazi ukuthi, njengomuntu osohlangothini oluphikisayo, ukhuluma
ipolitiki kodwa-ke le nto oyikhulumayo ayihlangene nalutho. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I do not know what exactly this
member is talking about. He seems to be daydreaming. Concerns which we
address when we are in the provinces or municipalities are those that are
highlighted by municipalities in those areas. And other concerns that we
look into are those that come from the people themselves who have attended.


We have never been to an area and forced people to follow our programme.
But we talk to people regarding the problems they have and then we go back,
and try to do a follow up on those things at the government departments,
local governments and provinces which were supposed to look into those
concerns.

I know that since you are on the side of the opposition, you only talk
politics but what you are saying has nothing to do with anything.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy President, when addressing an imbizo, in May last
year, in the Bophirima district, one of the areas that had suffered the
effects of heavy floods, it was reported that you had promised the people
of the Greater Taung area that government would provide 2 000 houses within
two months.

This was in response to some of the concerns raised by the people about the
lack of houses and care, as well as insufficient schools. What I want to
know is whether the Presidency has followed up on those specific matters
and whether government has been able to fulfil that promise.

The Deputy President also did say that weaknesses in monitoring the actions
required to deal with the concerns raised by communities are being
addressed. Now, I want to know: when is the public going to be given the
assurance that all the weaknesses that the Deputy President has identified
will be dealt with? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, in Taung the problem had to do
with floods. So I cannot assure you that there will never be floods in
Taung. The problem that we were dealing with in Taung at that particular
time stemmed from the fact that that place was not suitable for people to
build in. We continue to face the challenge of convincing people to move
away from that area because it is flood-prone.

The local authority and the province have continued to engage with both the
community and the traditional leaders on finding suitable land. The houses,
which people continue to occupy, have been repaired. We started with those
that were severely damaged. However, we are really urging the community
that the long-term solution is for us not to continue having people stay in
residential areas like those. My estimation was that in a cycle of 10 years
we might see the same situation in that particular community.

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Hon Deputy President, you were at Thulamahashe stadium
during an imbizo there. One woman told you of the politically motivated
disruption of service delivery by way of vandalising of infrastructure. My
question is whether you are going to send a team to go and stabilise the
situation in that area.

Given that nothing has happened and the fact that people are suffering, are
you now going to send people to go and do something about that situation?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, there is ongoing interaction
between our province and local government, on the one hand, and the
community of Thulamahashe, on the other. We have not been able to persuade
all the disruptive elements there to cease their actions completely. It’s
not because we have not been trying to do something about the situation
there.

You will agree with me, hon member, that the situation has improved
considerably. However, we cannot rest on our laurels; we have to continue
to be vigilant because the situation has not improved to the level we would
have liked. That is the reason we continue to have interactions with them
through our provincial and local government structures.


                DISRUPTION OF PROCEEDINGS FROM PUBLIC GALLERY

                             AT START OF SITTING

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Regarding the disruption in the public gallery of the
National Assembly earlier on, hon members, I wish to report to the House on
steps that have been taken following the disturbance caused in the House
earlier this afternoon by a member of the public in the gallery.

I have in terms of section 11 of the powers and privileges ordered that the
person be taken into custody by the South African Police Services for
questioning. Once I have received a full report from our security services
I will inform the Whips accordingly. I thank you.

We now come to questions addressed to ministers in the economics cluster.
Question number 187 has been put by the hon S J Njikelana to the Minister
of Trade and Industry.

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

  Progress made towards regional economic integration in the South African
                            Development Community

187.  Mr S J Njikelana (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (a)(i) What progress has been made towards regional economic
      integration in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and
      (ii) what has been the contribution of his department thereto and (b)
      how will his department ensure that there will be no duplication in
      the activities of the SA Customs Union (SACU) and SADC as South Africa
      is a member of both organisations?
            N428E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker.
The SADC regional indicative strategic development plan is the key policy
framework for the advancement of the SADC common agenda, and the attainment
of deeper and broader levels of economic integration and development in the
region.

One of the most focussed areas of the RISDP is the objective of the SADC
free trade area by 2008, the customs union by 2010 and the common market by
2015. The regional economic programme in SADC aims to combine market
integration with policy co-ordination and sectoral co-operation in a broad
development project.

Free trade area negotiations were concluded in 2000, in terms of which by
2008, 85% of goods traded will be duty free and by 2012, 99% of goods
traded will be duty free. The SADC protocol on trade is the vehicle for
pursuing this strategic objective and seeks to increase intra-regional
trade and thereby stimulate economic growth and development.

SACU member states negotiated the SADC trade protocol as a single entity.
These negotiations were an asymmetrical tariff reduction with SACU member
states offering duty free access by January 2008 while other SADC member
states would fully liberalise by 2012.

Since January 2006, as per SACU’s commitment under the SADC trade protocol,
tariff preferences into SACU are already duty free except for sugar, used
clothing and some tariffs in the automotive chapter.

The department is intensifying the implementation of the protocol on trade
to achieve a free area by 2008 which addresses the following areas in terms
of regional integration: Accelerating tariff phase down offers to ensure
deeper regional integration, adopting rules of origin that will be
appropriate to the development needs of the SADC region; and resolving
outstanding issues such as the elimination of none tariff barriers and
negotiating annexes on sanitary and phytosanitary and technical barriers to
trade measure.

Lastly, there is the enhancement of industrial competitiveness through the
implementation of regional industrial development policies and the
establishment of an industrial negotiating forum.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Sihlalo, ndiyabulela kuMphathiswa ngendlela aphendule
ngayo. [Chairperson, I am grateful to the hon Minister for the way he has
responded.]

Minister Mphahlwa, I greatly appreciate the work that has been done by the
country, the department and you under the leadership of President Mbeki in
ensuring that there has been meaningful value added in terms of regional
economic integration. However, can I take you further? Let’s just shift a
little bit, obviously on the basis of the good work that has been done by
the executive. My question therefore is: What is the Minister’s assessment
of the contribution of the SADC parliamentary forum to economic regional
integration and precisely what are his expectations in this regard?

Khawukhe usiphe apho ke, mhlekazi. Iyabulela ilali. [That is my question,
hon Minister. I thank you.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Sihlalo, mandibulele kwilungu
elibekekileyo. [Chairperson, let me thank the hon member.]

It’s important actually to point out the work of regional integration. For
it to advance it means that for each country we must gradually relax the
sovereignty that we each have as sovereign states. That is the only basis
on which regional integration can work and, therefore, there are lots of
things that we need to do in order to enhance regional integration which
require legislative and regulatory measures.

This means adjusting our laws, our tariffs, our regulations and it also
means creating new institutions, for example, in terms of the new SACU
Treaty. We are creating supernational institutions which will be customs
union institutions in order to deepen regional integration.

For all of these things to happen, you need the understanding and the
support and the participation of parliaments. Therefore, the role of the
parliamentary forum is absolutely vital in this particular regard, since
the members of parliament from different countries do not understand what
the agenda to advance regional integration entails.

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, hon Minister, America knows the importance of
economic stability for neighbouring countries in Central America and the
Carribean. America would also undertake all kinds of efforts to ensure
their economic growth. South Africa, as the leader of SACU, is facing
serious challenges as a result of the fact that we have least developed
countries close to us. These economies are more vulnerable. Minister, you
have repeatedly told the WTO that South Africa will unconditionally support
these countries. With all these countries in our backyard, Minister: Is
your department ready to deal with these countries so close to us?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you very much, hon member. I
think that there’s an important question being raised here, namely that
South Africa is a member of the Customs Union in which there are far less
developed countries. I think the issue being raised here is: What are we
doing in order to advance the interests particularly of the least developed
countries among us?

This is an issue that we have addressed on a number of fronts. Yesterday
and today we were hosts to the Prime Minister of Lesotho and from that
angle South Africa has an active programme with the Kingdom of Lesotho to
make sure that within a given period we can assist Lesotho and work
together to make sure that Lesotho graduates out of that status as a least
developed country to a developing country.

So, at a bilateral level, that’s how we are advancing that issue, but at a
multilateral level we are addressing that issue by ensuring that in the
negotiations in the World Trade Organisation, we continue to fight for the
interests of least developed countries such as, for instance, duty free,
quota free market access for products from least developed countries into
the markets of the developed world, as well as into the markets of those
developing countries that are in a position to do so.

In a regional context, as South Africa we have liberalised and reduced our
tariffs at a much faster rate than everybody else in the region, thus
allowing those weaker members of our region to access the South African
market. So, these are all the fronts on which we are fighting to advance
the interest of least developed countries.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Thank you, Minister. The South African Customs Union is
one of the oldest institutions of its sort in the world and SADC has an
equally proud history. In light of your answer, Minister, could you — and
of course we accept that economic integration is most important at this
stage in the global economy — tell us what the details are of the
integrated plan of your department in approaching the development of these
two institutions. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Alright, thanks. I think it has to be
understood that, because these are regional bodies, what we do within each
of these bodies is something that is done on the basis of consensus that is
reached within these institutions and so, the Department of Trade and
Industry wouldn’t have a detailed blueprint for what must happen at Sacu
and what must happen at SADC.

But, what happens is that we participate actively and vigorously within
each of these regional bodies in order to make sure that the objectives of
deepening regional integration are advanced and that we can work towards
developing a consistent approach towards the entire project of regional
integration.

For instance, one of the challenges that faces us now, is that you’ve got
Sacu, which is a fully-fledged customs union, and you’ve got SADC, which
has committed itself to achieving a customs union by 2010. In SADC we
examining what the road map is that is going to take us to a customs union
for the SADC region and what the route is that we are going to follow in
that direction and do we use this fully fledged customs union, which is
within the belly of SADC, as a building block or do we start on a
completely new slate to establish a SADC customs union.

So, really our contribution is in the participation to shape those
deliberations. Currently, the Heads of State from the annual meeting of the
SADC region that was held in Maseru, Lesotho, last year, established the
ministerial task team to work exactly on these issues of what the road map
is towards deepening regional integration. What are the obstacles and what
are the things that we have to do to resolve them?

Therefore, our work must be understood in that context. It is work within
which Treasury participates and it is work within which Foreign Affairs
participates in order to advance those objectives.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, thank you. Hon Minister, most African economies
retain very high trade barriers, largely due to weaknesses in revenue
collection from other forms of taxation. In view of this we do not agree,
hon Minister, that Africa as a continent, with regard to its ability to
face globalisation challenges, should focus on basing regional African
economic communities on free trade agreements and custom unions of regional
neighbours, with each one then being linked to the others through phased
reductions of tariffs and nontariff barriers throughout the continent.

Wouldn’t this provide a solid institutional underpinning for the African
Union as a whole and for trade negotiations with other countries and
regional communities, given the slow progress being made with the WTO
negotiations?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Certainly, we have to accelerate even
without looking at what is happening in the WTO, just in the interest of
achieving the objectives of Nepad. Within that, one of the things that we
need to advance is industrialisation of the continent but, more
importantly, to enhance intra-African trade.

The AU, as well as Nepad, have identified the regional economic communities
as the building blocks that must take us towards a deeper integration
within the continent. This is the stage to which we now need to move. This
is the next stage beyond the framework of Nepad to begin to tackle the
barriers that constrain the degree of trade taking place amongst us as
African countries.

As the different regions, we actually have to work systematically to remove
those barriers to trade. We have to do more than that. We have to invest in
the kind of infrastructure that will ensure that you can facilitate trade
and investment and industrialisation.

Therefore, investment infrastructure, be it road infrastructure or rail or
our infrastructure on the borders or at our ports, is what we need if we
are to ensure that the infrastructure we have and the ports we have, as
well as the tariffs and regulations we have, all work towards the
enhancement of inter-African trade and deepening regional integration. I
therefore agree entirely with your approach to this matter.

                         Institution of a land audit

204.  Mr A H Nel (DA) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:

      Whether she will institute a land audit; if not, why not; if so, when?
                                                                    N1276E

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, yes, I have
instituted a land audit of all state land in consultation with all state
land custodians and users at national and provincial level. This is
required for good land administration and to update asset registers of
government. It is for this reason that I have instructed my department to
conduct such an audit on all state land in co-operation with all involved
stakeholders.

These audits are being led by the various surveyor-general’s offices in all
provinces. Land use investigations and more detailed land audits are being
done in certain parts of the country, based on identified priorities by the
Department of Land Affairs. The aim is primarily to have a clear and
complete picture of all state land assets, including current and future
use, in order to promote the disposal and development of available state
land. I thank you.

Mnr A H NEL: Voorsitter, Minister, ek het my in Afrikaans voorberei. Ek het
gedag u is nog in Limpopo besig om grond uit te deel.

Minister, ek is baie dankbaar dat u dit doen, want dit is een van die goeie
dinge wat gedoen moet word. Nog ’n aspek van die grondoudit wat ook moet
aandag kry, is die volgende: Heelwat grondhervorming geskied buite die
departement se pogings, soos aandeleskemas, gesamentlike besit en privaat
grondtransaksies.

Toe ek vir die DG van Grondsake gevra het of hierdie grondoordragte
ingereken gaan word om die teiken van 30% by 2014 te haal, het hy “ja”
geantwoord. Indien dit wel deel uitmaak daarvan, dan sal ons moet weet
hoeveel dit is en waar dit is. Daarvoor het ons ook ’n grondoudit nodig,
wat meer gaan oor privaatgrond wat oorgedra is. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A H NEL: Chairperson, Minister, I prepared myself in Afrikaans. I
thought you were still in Limpopo busy handing out land.

Minister, I am very grateful that you are doing this, as this is one of the
good things that must be done. Another aspect of the land audit that must
also receive attention is the following: A good deal of land reform is
taking place outside of the department’s efforts, such as share schemes,
joint ownership and private land transactions.

When I asked the Director-General of Land Affairs whether these land
transfers would be included to reach the target of 30% by 2014, his answer
was “yes”. If it does form part of it, we will have to know how much it is
and where it is. For this we also need a land audit that deals more with
private land that has been transferred.]

UMPHATHISWA WEZOLIMO NEMICIMBI YEZEMIHLABA: Sihlalo, ndiyabulela
kumhlekazi. Uphicotho lweencwadi siyalwenza, kwaye ukuza kuthi ga ngoku
sifumanise ukuba umhlaba karhulumente uwonke singawuqikelela kwisihlanu
okanye isixhenxe ekhulwini somhlaba osafumanekayo ukuze wabiwe okanye
kuhlaliswe abantu kuwo. Ngoko ke, xa uthelekisa esi sihlanu ekhulwini
somhlaba ndithetha ngaso kunye nala ma-30 ekhulwini, lo mhlaba mncinane
lee, ukuba ube ungasetyenziselwa ukufezekisa iimfuno zabantu balapha
eMzantsi Afrika abakwisininzi nabangenamhlaba.

Sivumelene kunjalo nje noMphathiswa wezeZindlu kwakunye noMphathiswa
wezeMisebenzi yoLuntu ukuba siza kujonga naphaya kulaa masebe abo, ngoba
nabo umhlaba bawuphethe kwaye bawunika abantu. Ngoko ke, nokuba umntu
ufumana indlu, laa ndlu ayifumanayo yakhiwe phezu komhlaba, nolo ke
ikwalolunye uhlobo lolwabiwo lomhlaba.

Ngoko ke, sithi wonke lo mhlaba siza kuwudibanisa ukuze wongeze phaya kulaa
ma-30 ekhulwini siwafunayo. Kodwa ke, loo nto ayithethi ukuba abaMhlophe,
nabaphethe ama-80 ekhulwini omhlaba woMzantsi Afrika, mabahlale bonwabe,
bolule imilen ze bodwa kulaa mhlaba ngeli xesha thina sisazi ukuba ama-80
ukuya kuma-90 ekhulwini yabantu boMzantsi Afrika abanamhlaba. Abantu
abaninzi kweli abanamhlaba, ngexa kukho amadoda aneefama ezikuma-20 umntu
ngamnye, angaziyo nokuba makenze ntoni na ngazo.

Siyayijonga ke yonke le mithetho, kuqukwa nebinzana elaziwa njengewilling
buyer-willing seller, ukuba njengokuba isithwalisa ubunzima nje, masize
nawaphi na amacebo ukwenzela ukuba noko umhlaba ufikeleleke kubo bonke
abantu. Kaloku uMqulu weNkululeko uthi umhlaba kufuneka unikwe abantu.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I am grateful
to the hon member. We are doing a land audit and until now we have found
that land that belongs to the government is estimated at between 5% and 7%
of the land that is needed for distribution. Therefore, if you compare the
5% and the proposed 30% that we are aiming at, you’ll notice that the 5% is
a drop in the ocean and that it can hardly be used to meet the needs of the
majority of the people of South Africa who are landless.

However, we have agreed with the Ministers of Housing and Public Works that
we look into their departments, as they also deal with land and distribute
it to the people. Therefore, whenever a person is given a house, that means
land has been distributed, because that house has been built on land. That,
we regard as another form of land distribution.

We are therefore saying that we are going to add up that land in order to
make the 30% that we are talking about. However, that does not mean that
white people who own 80% of the total land of this country should relax
while 80% to 90% of the total population of this country is landless. The
majority of the people of this country do not have land, while there are
men who own about twenty farms each. These people do not even know what to
do with this land.

We are looking at all these laws, including the clause that is known as the
willing buyer-willing seller clause. We are checking what other options we
can use in order to make sure that land is distributed evenly. Remember,
the Freedom Charter says land must be distributed amongst the people.
[Applause.]]

Mr C H F GREYLING: Hon Minister, there is a perception that vast tracts of
state-owned land are available for disposal, but is it not the case that a
percentage of this land falls under several state departments, for example,
the Department of Public Works? What is the relationship between the
Department of Land Affairs and Public Works with regard to such land? I
thank you.

UMPHATHISWA WEZOLIMO NEMICIMBI YEZEMIHLABA: Njengokuba besele nditshilo,
Mhlalingaphambili, siyasebenzisana neSebe lezeMisebenzi yoLuntu. Phambi
kokuba uMphathiswa weli sebe anikezele ngomhlaba, kufanele ukuba ndivume
ukuze ndityikitye, ndize emva koko ndinikezele kuye ke ukuba naye atyikitye
phambi kokuba awuchithe loo mhlaba. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: As I have already said,
Chairperson, we are co-operating with the Department of Public Works.
Before the Minister of this department can hand over land, I have to give
the green light and sign and thereafter he signs as well before handing
over the proposed land.]

I want to say to the hon member that the impression that we have vast
tracts of state land that can actually address the needs of the landless
people in South Africa is not true. The fact of the matter is that we have
approximately 5% of state land assets in the hands of the Department of
Land Affairs and various other related departments and therefore it is not
possible for us to meet the needs and the requirements of the majority of
the population of South Africa. We therefore have to make sure ukuba nokuba
siyakhala [that even if we are not fully satisfied], all of us have to make
a contribution.
We have to take some of the land that belongs to the privileged groups that
have had land since 1652 in South Africa. Our people have been waiting for
decades if not centuries for their land to come back, and we are pleading
with all concerned to support the government it its efforts to ensure a
fair and just redistribution of land in South Africa. [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Mphathiswa, siluxhasa sinjalo olu phando uthetha ngalo,
kukho umba endifuna ukuwuveza, wokuba ngokubhekisele kulaa komishoni
wawukhe wayithumela ukuba iphande ngomhlaba ukuba ngoobani abaniniwo -
ukuba usalukhumbula olo phando, ndicinga ukuba isithethi salo yayinguProf
Gutto, endandimphulaphule kunomathotholo esithi baphandile, kodwa abade
bafikelele kwisigqibo sokuba ngowoobani lo mhlaba kweli lizwe.

Lilonke ke kukho umhlaba ongaziwayo nokuba ngokarhulumente okanye
ngowabantu na, ingoobani abaniniwo. Ndizama ukuthi ke, kolu phando
ulwenzayo, kuza kufuneka uyiphande le yalo mhlaba uzimeleyo ndithetha
ngawo, nongaziwayo ukuba ngokabani na. Ndicela ke ukuba loo mba uwuse iliso
nawo. [Laphela ixesha.]

UMPHATHISWA WEZOLIMO NEMICIMBI YEZEMIHLABA: Siyabulela kakhulu kwilungu
elibekekileyo. Ewe, uProf Gutto kunye namanye amalungu ale komishoni
uthetha ngayo sele beyinikezele ingxelo yophando obeluqwalasela ukuba lo
mhlaba woMzantsi Afrika usezandleni zikabani na. Bafumanisile, noxa
bengekalugqibi uphando lwabo, ukuba into engaphaya kwesithathu ekhulwini
sabantu bangaphandle ngabanini bomhlaba apha kweli. Siseza kuyisa ke
ngokupheleleyo ingxelo leyo kwiKhabhinethi ukuze iyixoxe, siphinde ke
siyise ebantwini xa ibuya apho ukuze nabo bahlomle, babeke iimbono kunye
neemfuno zabo ngalo mhlaba welizwe lookhokho babo.

Into ecace mhlophe yeyokuba kuza kufuneka simisele imithetho elawula ukuba
abangaphandle okanye iindwendwe ziwufumana njani na umhlaba. Kuza kufuneka
ukuba sijonge ukuba zikhona na iindlela zokuba bawuqeshe umhlaba ukuze
bakwazi ukuba basebenze xa befuna ukusebenza kweli. Kodwa ke izigqibo
zokuba kuya kwenziwa njani na ziya kufumaneka zikuhlobo lweziphakamiso
ezijoliswe kwiKhabhinethi. Ngoko ke umkhomba-ndlela ngokubhekisele kulo mba
uya kuphuma kooProf Gutto. Ezi ziphakamiso ziya kudluliselwa ebantwini
ngokubanzi ukuze nabo benze ezabo iziphakamiso ... (Translation of isiXhosa
of paragraphs follows.)

[Adv Z L MADASA: Minister, while supporting the land audit, there is an
aspect that I would like to highlight, with regard to the commission that
you had appointed to do the audit with regard to who the land owners are -
I don’t know whether you still remember it, I think it was chaired by Prof
Gutto. I remember listening to him on the radio. He said they had
investigated who the owners of the affected land were, but they could not
find out who owned it in this country.

In short, there is land in this country that nobody knows who rightfully
owns it. I am trying to say to you that your investigation should also deal
with that. I am pleading with you to consider this as well. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: We thank the hon member very
much. Yes, Prof Gutto and other members of this commission that you are
referring to, have already handed in the investigation report that looked
at who owns land in South Africa. They have also found out that about 3% of
this country’s land belongs to foreigners. We are still going to table that
report to the Cabinet, so that they can discuss it. Thereafter, it will be
referred to people, so that they can also make an input on the issue.

What is clear is that we need to formulate an Act that will govern the
selling of land to foreigners. We shall have to look at whether they cannot
lease the land, so that they can work in this country if they want to.
However, the final decision on this will have to come from the Cabinet’s
proposals. Therefore, the way forward on this issue will have to come from
Prof Gutto. These recommendations will be referred to the people, so that
they can also have a say on the matter ...]

... in terms of how we want to regulate land ownership by foreigners in
South Africa. But, as we all know, in all democracies, whether you go to
Germany - I cannot buy land in Germany, for instance, and who am I to do
that – or you go to America, they will tell you to go to the state, as this
is under its jurisdiction. When you apply to the state, they tell you that
you can’t buy land. There are all sorts of tricks that are put in place.

Kodwa ke siseza kuwuxoxa nathi apha eMzantsi Afrika lo mba, sibone ukuba
siwuphatha njani na. Kukho umba weenkampani kunye neethrasti nazo
ezingabanini-mhlaba kweli lizwe. Bazimele ngazo ke abantu abaninzi.
Siyaqhuba ngophando nalapho. Siza kujonga ukuba bekungekhe na kuchazwe
ubunini-mhlaba ngabo bonke abantu abanomhlaba, kuqukwa noLulu Xingwana,
achaze kuMphathiswa weMicimbi yezeMihlaba naMahlathi, kwanokuba umntu
unezindlu ezingaphi okanye unamaplasi amangaphi na, wenza ntoni ngawo,
ingawakhe nabani na. Ndiyabulela. [Laphela ixesha.] [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[However, we still have to discuss this in South Africa and decide how we
will handle this issue. There are issues of companies and trusts that own
land in this country. Many people are hiding behind these formations. We
are also investigating that. We are looking at requesting people who own
land to declare that. That includes people like the Minister, Lulu
Xingwana, and to make people declare how many houses and farms they own and
what they are doing about their farms and with whom they own these farms. I
thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]
  Measures taken by the National Treasury to overcome negative expenditure
                       patterns in contract management

191.  Ms J L Fubbs (ANC) asked the Minister of Finance:
      What measures is the National Treasury taking to overcome negative
      expenditure patterns in contract management? N1258E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. The hon Fubbs
has explained she has had to go back to Johannesburg and I accept her
apologies and wish her well. Let me just explain that the question deals
with something that was raised earlier as well, namely contract management.


Now, in the context of the modernisation of government’s services, there is
going to be a range of contracts that have to be managed. Some are short-
term and, by their nature, some kinds of contracts require a long-term
relationship between government and the contractors. In respect of the
latter there will be IT services, for instance, where the software is
proprietary and vested with the company. You need to be able to manage that
because government can’t develop all of the software.

In the case of some contracts, if you need the design of some fancy
buildings, dams, roads, etc you go to consulting engineers and they design
it for you. Government can’t employ all of these people. In dealing with
the numbers, frequently we tend to get all of these mixed up.

What government did and what the National Treasury undertook as early as
2003 was to provide certain regulations in terms of the PFMA, so that
departments report on the spending under sub-programmes for all contracts
that are actually awarded. The premise of the PFMA, as I have said on a
number of occasions, is that the money is allocated to departments, the
resource is managed in departments.

The Treasury will, from time to time, issue such regulations, but the
oversight responsibility is a responsibility of Parliament and the
oversight responsibility in terms of these issues is vested in Parliament
in terms of section 32 of the Public Finance Management Act. On a monthly
basis, departments or portfolio committees therefore have access to the
information of actual spending departments. These are the arrangements and
the arrangements cut across all manner of matters under the broad heading
of supply-chain management.

So, that is the story. The regulations are there. The regulations have also
been put in place, and they have been made much tougher.  The hon Bhamjee
and the hon Asiya always have debates with me about the toughness of the
regulations in the Municipal Finance Management Act. It is the same issue
and I am saying the power is vested in Parliament. The regulations are
there and they are unequivocal about when contractors can be used and under
what circumstances and the reporting requirements.

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Let me thank the Minister for such a comprehensive
answer. Given that risk management and the availability of sophisticated
skills are critical to professional contract management, is the Minister in
a position to inform this House whether government will not be found
wanting in managing major IT contracts and whether we have the capacity to
intervene timeously to ensure that every service provider performs
according to the prescripts and specifications of the contract intended by
the supply-chain management guidelines?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: It depends on the nature of the contract. Some of
these are managed within the public-private partnership unit located in the
Treasury. That unit was established after we discovered that some
correctional facilities and the previous scheme called APOPS were given to
the private sector without all of the norms being in place.

We established that unit and it oversees the relationship and ensures that
we contract properly, ensures that we have the best available information
that these contracts are so structured that they are to the advantage of
the public service understanding, of course, that the profit motive would
be there. We have had some very successful contracts that are structured
and, for instance, Inkosi Albert Luthuli Hospital would be one such case.

In respect of IT contracts, some are public-private partnership contracts
as well. They have been structured in that way. Some contracts are managed
by outside agencies and many of the IT contracts are better dealt with by
Sita, because they have the IT competencies and can understand some of the
issues relating to service provision a lot better than the Treasury can.

In the Treasury we have a technical assistance unit, which is a kind of
project management facility, available to other government departments in
whatever sphere to support the task of contracting and define the rules for
oversight. More recently, in respect of some other contractors outside of
IT, there has also been the infrastructure development and improvement
programme, as it is called, to ensure that we can get better bang for the
buck in respect of the hard infrastructure contracts. So, we understand
that the profit motive would tend to maximise returns and minimise the
quality of the service. Our interest as a public service must be to try and
tip the scales in the other direction and sometimes we get the equilibrium
just right.

Mr D H M GIBSON: In the private sector, proper cash flow management and the
disciplines of the market ensure that expenditure patterns in contract
management are predictable and are very carefully managed. Companies that
fail to control negative expenditure patterns tend to lose money and if it
continues they go out of business.

In government sometimes it seems to be too easily accepted, especially at
provincial government level, that a roll-over or even an increased budget
allocation will be granted almost as a reward for failure. Will the
Minister agree to support the naming and shaming of those departments,
those officials, those Ministers, who are regular transgressors?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: This is a maiden finance intervention from the hon
Gibson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): You are correct, hon Minister. I
was a bit worried when I saw his name on the screen but then I recalled him
being deployed to finance.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: The short answer is: No, because I believe it’s
the responsibility of Parliament. The PFMA establishes different
responsibilities. Accounting officers are responsible for the outputs and
for finances and that is what portfolio committees must do and that is why
we can publish the information in terms of section 32.

Section 32 encourages in-year monitoring. What the standing committee and
the public accounts committee do is to do retrospective evaluation and then
powers are given to Parliament, in terms of section 88 of the PFMA,
including the power to institute criminal proceedings. These issues are
there, they are set out in the legislation.

My job sometimes I am an impimpi for Parliament – is to say, through
financial accounts, that these are issues and I am glad that Scopa attacks
as vigorously as they do from time to time, but then it is handed over to
Parliament and I think that that strengthens the oversight role and it
gives formal substance to the spirit of the Public Finance Management Act.

          Effects of import quotas imposed against Chinese textiles

218.  Prof E S Chang (IFP) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:
      (1)   Whether the import quotas imposed against Chinese textiles
           resulted in increases in (a) the production output of local
           textile manufacturers and (b)(i) profits and (ii) employment in
           the local textile and clothing industries; if not, why not; if
           so, what are the relevant details in each case;

      (2)   what is the monetary value of the 40% decrease in textile and
           clothing imports, as compared to the corresponding period in
           2006, as stated by the Director-General recently;

      (3)   whether this decrease in imports resulted in a 40% increase in
           production in the local textile and clothing industries; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        N1294E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chair, with respect to all three
questions, perhaps it is important to say that it is too early to quantify
the full impact of the quotas in terms of production, profits and
employment, since it has only been five months since the introduction of
the restrictions.

Nevertheless, the questions asked are pertinent and we should be able to
provide more detailed and precise information as further statistical data
becomes available. Having said that, some preliminary data available for
the ex-factory value of sales at current prices for the period of January
to March 2007, as compared to the same period in 2006, reflects textiles
increasing marginally from R4,1 billion to R4,2 billion. Similarly, the
clothing sector also grew slightly from R3,3 billion to R3,7 billion over
the same period. We are, however, monitoring the trends at present and we
will keep the hon member informed as soon as meaningful statistics and
information become available.

It is also important for me to say that one of the developments we have had
is that this has impacted positively on interactions between stakeholders
within the clothing and textile sector - the manufacturers, the retailers
as well as labour. Those instances where we have had to relax the quotas,
and there have been four such instances so far involving well-known
retailers, have resulted from interactions that took place between
stakeholders within the sector to identify particular problems that they
were experiencing and working out ways in which they would address those
problems.

So, there are very good things that have come out of that – commitments
that are being entered into among stakeholders within the sector. I believe
that this is one of the things required for the survival of this sector. If
you cannot improve and be dynamic with interactions among manufactures,
retailers and labour, we can kiss the sector goodbye.

So, this is a positive development that I can say has resulted from the
fact that we have these restrictions. It is also important to say that one
of the things that we could hope for is that at least we may have stamped
out the rapid loss of jobs. But, again, this is something we would have to
verify with hard data.

I think the final point that I should make is that at the end of the day,
this is a temporary measure - a stop-gap measure. At the end of the day, a
viable strategy is needed for the sector and we are hard at work to make
sure that we can achieve that consensus among stakeholders on a strategy
and the interventions that we need to make to ensure the survival of the
sector. Thank you, Chair.

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson and hon ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Just hold on a second, hon member.
Can we ask the hon Bhengu to take his seat.

Prof E S CHANG: Hon Minister, thank you for your answer and I agree with
you 100% that it is very early to see how this 40% decrease would impact on
our economy. But I want to say that the reason I am raising this question
is that I think that when your DG was interviewed by the SABC, he said that
the 40% was decreased and absorbed into local production and job creation.
That is the reason why I put my question here. But I am happy after your
answer.

My question is: When the DTI introduced the quota, did it analyse what the
purpose was of imposing the quota? The IFP believes that it is for the
creation of jobs, particularly jobs in local manufacturing. Why has 95% of
the quota been allocated to importers and retailers? If manufacturers have
obtained a certain quota based on job creation, they can use that quota to
attract more orders to be made in South Africa by offering a service or
providing the quota to retailers. If there was a formula on how to
calculate and allocate this, and if it was done through transparent
procedures, tell us about the process. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I think that matters of process were
deliberated upon among us – the department and the stakeholders in the
sector. These are matters which I think we settled before the coming into
operation of the quotas. So, those are matters which I regard as having
been settled.

What we may be dealing with right now are particular problems that may have
arisen after that. We are addressing some of these problems, such as the
example that I was referring to just now, where a particular product would
be identified and the stakeholders would interact and agree among
themselves that we do not have this particular product manufactured in
South Africa.

They would then have those interactions that, at the end of the day, would
culminate in them collectively approaching the Minister of Trade and
Industry to say that, arising from these commitments that they have made
amongst themselves on training of people and so on, they require the
Minister to relax the quota on this particular product. There have been
four such instances.

But I seem to have heard part of the question being why we did this in the
first place. If I take you back, this is something we did on the basis of
an approach that was made to us by one of the stakeholders in the sector,
Labour. Labour asked us to take the People’s Republic of China to the World
Trade Organisation.

Our view was that the relationship between us and China is not only defined
by the importation of clothing and textile products. We have a much bigger
relationship with China. China sources a lot of things from us. China is
also a market which we perhaps aren’t fully exploiting as yet. Therefore,
if we had not gone this route of negotiating an arrangement with China that
gives us breathing space in order to address the problems of the sector,
currently we would be locked up in a very difficult process in the World
Trade Organisation to prove whatever charges we would be laying against the
People’s Republic of China. But, that’s also something that would have
negatively affected the relationship between South Africa and the Peoples
Republic of China, politically as well as economically.

So, I think that what we did was the best option available to us in the
circumstances. It has given us breathing space and we are attending to the
problems of the sector. It is my belief that in the course of this year, we
will be coming out with measures that we are going to undertake in order to
assist or make interventions that would assist the sector and ensure the
long-term survival and perhaps the growth of the clothing and textile
sector. Thank you very much, Chair.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Minister, your department made much of the plight of
the clothing and textile industries, which at a certain point were
estimated at losing jobs at the rate of about a thousand a month. In light
of the fact that import quotas, as you said, are a temporary stop gap and
seemingly ineffective - although we take your point that it’s a bit too
early to decide - when will your department be introducing the much-wanted
customised sector support package which was supposed to be introduced after
the inception of the trade restrictions in January? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chair, this is what I was referring to
towards the end of my reply. As the department and as the economic cluster
in government, following the adoption of a national industrial policy
framework by Cabinet in January, we have been hard at work to develop a
programme of action for that industrial policy framework.

So, it is in the context of that that we will, in the course of this year
and hopefully quite soon, be announcing measures that we are going to be
undertaking in a whole number of sectors in the economy, and addressing
other matters, such as issues of infrastructure and so on. So, I can’t give
you a precise time but this is part of the work that we are doing. Clothing
and textiles would be work that we are undertaking in the broader work that
we are doing on industrial development.

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Minister, I think I would like to agree with you that it
is too early to quantify the full impact of the quotas in terms of
production, profits and employment as it has only been five months since we
have introduced these restrictions. I would say that I don’t have any
further questions. Thanks.

   Measures adopted by National Treasury regarding allocation of financial
             resources for education and infrastructure projects

192.  Ms B N Dambuza (ANC) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   What is the updated amount of (a) roll-overs and (ii) under-
           expenditure in provincial education spending between 2002 and
           2006, (b) how many instances of inadequate accountability for
           expenditure occurred and (c) what measures are being considered
           by the National Treasury regarding the allocation of financial
           resources to education;

      (2)   whether the National Treasury has developed any appropriate
           systems to track project expenditure commitments in relation to
           infrastructure projects; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?
                       N1259E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Chairperson. The hon Dambuza has been
hyperactive in her questioning for today’s question time. Let me just start
off by explaining that the process of roll-overs in the context of
provinces is managed within provincial legislatures. As the Minister of
Finance would be required to have a section of the adjusted estimates in
October deal with roll-overs here at national level, provincial executives
would approve the roll-overs but they must go before provincial
legislatures as part of an adjustments budget.  It is for that reason that
this matter vests there and those roll-overs would also include those in
respect of education.

Preliminarily, the figure we have for underspending in education for 2006-
07 across the nine provinces is R1,35 billion. Provincial departments
underspent in 2005-06 by R270 million and in 2004-05 by R1,3 billion; in
2003-04 they overspent by R714 million. They haven’t quite found
equilibrium in so far as these issues are concerned.

If you studied this there would be a few areas where you’d probably find
some of the underspending. One of the areas of underspending, for instance,
is that provinces use a part of the Schools Act, I think section 21, so
schools then have the power to order books and take responsibility for
their own management.

In some instances, in some very poor provinces, schools that are classified
according to section 21 do not submit business plans and therefore cannot
receive the money. It is a double whammy for poor learners in those poor
schools, but that is how the laws apply. The second area where you’d find a
measure of underspending would be in respect of the employment of
educators. Sometimes there is overprovision on the resources side. The
third area is in respect of infrastructure and fourthly, sometimes more
generally, in respect of learner support materials.

Let me complain through you to the Office of the Clerk of the Papers. I
can’t work out what the question could mean with regard to the words,
“inadequate accountability for expenditure occurred”. I can’t work out what
it means. If it means whether parts of the expenditure was actually
unauthorised, then Scopa would have to deal with it and for those years
when there was unauthorised expenditure, the provincial standing committees
on public accounts would have to deal with the issue. If the hon Dambuza
meant something else, then I’d be happy to be advised.

Let me conclude by saying that our engagement as the Treasury is primarily
in the making of budgets. In the making of budgets we do a number of
things. Where there are concurrent functions, we establish what are called
10 X 10s. There would be 10 people from treasuries, both national and
provincial treasuries, and there would be 10 people from the line
functions.
There is an education 10 X 10. We try and ensure that the policy direction
that the Minister of Education sets down is implemented and then finds
resonance, especially when there are new policy areas. Take for instance
the no-fee schools.

The education 10 X 10 meets from time to time. The next meeting is on 10
July and the education 10 X 10 would be very important in informing the
Minister’s committee on the budget in the allocation of resources, so that
we can have our finger on the pulse of the changes anticipated in education
for next year. Education would later come through the Medium-Term
Expenditure Committee and make presentations about some of the changes but
the Ministers would take responsibility.

When the Budget is tabled here in February, we need to know that the
provinces are also in line and in sync with the broad policy direction.
That is our primary engagement. Once the money is allocated, we say:
Parliament, please do what Parliament needs to do about this. Thank you,
Chair.

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Chairperson, thank you, Comrade Minister, for your
comprehensive response and it is greatly appreciated. While we recognise
and support efforts and strides by the National Treasury in the financial
control systems, my follow-up question is as follows: We understand that
there is a pilot project that has been undertaken in the Western Cape for
tracking infrastructure expenditure. What is the timeframe for the rolling
out of this pilot project? We have observed in the Department of Education
that for the last financial year, only 72% of the budget was spent on the
planning and monitoring systems, due to the continuous delays in the
rolling out of the education management information system.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: That is indeed a very important question, hon
Dambuza. It is not just the quantum of money, and that is frequently what
we try to measure. It is what the money buys. In the area of
infrastructure, it is not just the Western Cape, but across all nine
provinces where the infrastructure reporting model is being implemented. We
want to see how much money is spent, not just in one year but over a
multiple of years, sometimes extending even beyond the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework. The current MTEF will take us to 31 March 2010.

This model also helps us with our budget planning. We have introduced a
model and it is configured to include the names of each department by
province so that we can do cross-provincial comparisons; the budget
programmes and the funding sources and classifications, because sometimes
there is foreign donor aid that goes into infrastructure as well; the kinds
of investments; the unique source of funding; and the project
implementation status, and that is then populated by the departments of
education and they measure it against the register of school needs.

It might be early days, but one of the things that the Free State
department of education has asked us to test – and it is still quite
preliminary at this stage – is whether public-private partnerships would
work in education. We don’t know yet. It is part of trying to eliminate the
hold-ups in respect of ensuring that schools are schools, and the Minister
of Education says: We need to see schools as entities that are more than
just a collection of classrooms. Schools need to have places of recreation.
They need to have laboratories, libraries and a series of other facilities.


That is the route that we want to take. We need to build up the capacity
and part of ramping up that capacity is the financial model that we have
now introduced. There is a lot of interaction. We will be able to be on
line with some of the information. For now it is an in-house monitoring
tool.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, hon Minister, financial modelling and
planning all sound esoteric until we reduce it to what the results are of
bad planning and bad expenditure. Every cent voted by Parliament for
educational purposes that remains unspent means that thousands of our
children are forced into schooling under trees or in overcrowded
classrooms, or having to share books. In Diepsloot in my constituency I
have schools with up to 87 children in one classroom.

Those in government who fail to plan properly and spend effectively are
sabotaging the educational efforts of our country. What steps, may I ask,
are you and your department taking to equip education MECs and their senior
officials with the financial and management skills they need to do their
jobs properly? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, despite the “hear, hear” from the hon
Ellis over there, somewhere they said:


  Give me the courage not to judge my neighbour until I’ve walked a mile in
  his moccasins.
The issue is that there are parts of the country where the migration of
people is quite unplanned for. It is going to be the same in many informal
settlements around the country. You can ask the hon Dambuza about the
Western Cape and there would be parts of this province where schools are
completely overcrowded. There are parts of this province where learners are
bused from areas like Site C in Khayelitsha to Mowbray where there are
vacant schools, because this part of planning is proving to be incredibly
difficult.

There are other schools, and you can go to some of those areas – in the
rural areas in the Eastern Cape, for instance – where the pupil-teacher
ratios have fallen precipitously, yet you can’t close down those schools.
The planning function is an exceedingly difficult one. Part of the
difficulty is that the receiving provinces with high urban populations tend
to be playing catch up all the time, and this is the real difficulty.

What the modelling tool does, as esoteric as it sounds, is that while we
have an interest as a Treasury in some of the financial information we also
have the information available from departments of education, which
includes nonfinancial information, and we are starting to build things like
the Expanded Public Works Programme, so that we can get through this system
as soon as possible. It is a never-ending issue, because part of the
challenge is even where these schools are built to go back ... [Time
expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: I thought I would ask a question relating to your 10 X 10
situation, where provinces are not prioritising areas where national policy
and Treasury’s budget had intended that spending to be focussed. Portfolio
committees are often blocked in their questioning with national departments
insisting that they have no say over where provinces spend their money and
it can be very frustrating in terms of what you see as our oversight
function.

I know that the questions have been thrown out there, such as: Does
Treasury hold the key in some way and are there ways of tightening
parameters? You probably understand the questions better than I do. It’s
just a sense of portfolio committees often getting quite frustrated in
their oversight role in these instances. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, let me admit that in some of these
areas we in the Treasury are frustrated from time to time. In an address
that the chairperson referred to the other day that I made to the NCOP
conference, it’s indeed this problem that we are talking about. I used the
example in that address of the school building programme. The commitment is
there.

We got the President to say on more than one occasion in the state of the
nation address that “there shall be no learning under trees”. In fact I
said it in the Budget Speech two years ago and I gave a date, but that
information is dependent on where government vests. In respect of the
concurrent functions – health, education and social welfare – the decisions
about the allocation of resources vest with the provinces.

They’re governments; the Constitution gives them the right as governments.
So, part of what we need to do is to try and reinforce Chapter 3 of the
Constitution on co-operative governance. That is what the 10 X 10 can do.
It can try and ensure that the norms are there and are fully understood. We
can also try to ensure that we maximise the publicity and the reporting to
Parliament about these issues.

One thing that we do each year – and the National Assembly has never dealt
with this – is we publish an intergovernmental fiscal review that gives a
kind of longer horizon - five years forward and three years back - so that
over eight years you can begin to understand the trends in spending,
especially on the concurrent functions. The National Assembly has never
dealt with it.

I believe that those are important tools. The NCOP does debate the issue,
but these tools need to find a place somewhere in Parliament, as Parliament
is defined in the Constitution. I don’t think we can pigeonhole these
functions into different spheres of government, because education affects
all our children and all young South Africans are our children
collectively. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, could you help me understand the
infrastructure reporting model that you referred to earlier? Does it refer
only to the education department, or will it be rolled out to other
departments? The reason I ask is because, in the expenditure report for the
fourth quarter of 2006-07, the report of the Joint Budget Committee, they
refer to certain government capital projects being compromised as a result
of poor departmental planning and financial management and slow spending.
Would this be a model that would be applicable to address those concerns,
or is there another type of model that will be developed to deal with
capital expenditure? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, the model goes beyond education. It’s
a spreadsheet that supports planning and monitoring. That’s essentially
what it is. Among other issues that we have introduced - I referred earlier
to the infrastructure development improvement plan – there is another
system that we’ve discussed within national government and within the
provinces and that is that some infrastructure projects have an expenditure
period that doesn’t match medium-term expenditure.

Sometimes people try and get money. They want to build a road, they want
the money in the next budget, however, the time that elapses between when
the road is announced, when the land is acquired, when the design is done
and it goes out to tender, is frequently 18 to 24 months. There is no point
in sitting with the money and rolling it over. What Treasury would have had
to do would have been to have borrowed the money and pay interest on it
while it’s sitting in some government account.

We are taking a very different view with regard to infrastructure and a lot
of this is still embryonic. The database is part of it, the IDIP is part of
it, but then we’re also looking at infrastructure extending over the
timeframe of the MTEF so that departments can plan, knowing that the money
will be provided for large infrastructure projects. Thank you.

   Announcement of decision on awarding of national operating licence for
                              National Lottery

205.  Dr P J Rabie (DA) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:
      When will he announce his decision on the awarding of the national
      operating licence for the National Lottery?  N1277E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, on 1 June I did make a
statement on this matter. In that statement I said that on 30 May 2007, the
National Lotteries Board delivered a report to me that contained its
recommendation regarding the awarding of the licence to operate the
National Lottery. I did indicate at the time that I would require time to
carefully study the report and to apply my mind to all the issues covered
to enable me to take a decision. I also said that during this period I
would take legal advice and may need to have further communication with the
National Lotteries Board.

Accordingly, a statement on the awarding of the licence will be made in due
course, because I am currently involved in all of those steps that I
indicated when I issued a statement on 1 June. I thank you.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Thank you, Minister. The purpose of the Lotto was to
provide funds to the nonprofit sector, which often provides services which
the government fails to deliver or to supplement. There is trouble with the
non-appointment or the factors surrounding the operator. Because of these
factors and those that have led to the operator not being appointed, what
is the impact on particularly the arts, sports and charities that serve the
vulnerable by not having an operator at this stage? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: The correct answer is that there is no
impact, because you recall that when I made a statement at the end of
March, I did also indicate that we have sufficient reserves to continue the
work of allocating moneys for charity purposes, and that is happening. We
haven’t exhausted those reserves. Therefore, there is no impact because we
do not have the Lotto currently running.

What is happening is that we are not currently accumulating funds in
addition to what we have in place. But there are no charities that would
not benefit, simply because the lottery is not running at the moment. There
is no problem there.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, far be it from me to disagree with my
colleague, but I run a charity called the SA Revenue Service and we are
done in because the lottery is not running. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I have the name of the hon Maake
here, but the next speaker will be the hon Madasa.

Adv Z L MADASA: Chairperson, I pressed for myself to speak. I don’t know if
my name has appeared.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Sorry, I have as the first response
here the hon Maake from the ANC. If this is not the case, I will give you
an opportunity. I thank you. You may continue.
Adv Z L MADASA: My follow-up question to the follow-up of Mr Labuschagne is
that the impact I have seen of the absence of the lottery is that the poor
have their money in their pockets, more investments in their households,
which means more investments in the economy, more productivity, and more
exports. The economy is doing well so far. That is the impact I know about,
and hear people mention on radio. The queues I normally saw in the stores
are not there anymore. This means people are saving. That is the impact I
wanted to report.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I think I must just take
this opportunity to say that we are quite sincere in saying that we are
rigorously processing the report of the National Lotteries Board and that
we are working as hard as we can to make sure that we can conclude this
matter very soon. I must also say that I am not going to be sloppy about
this, and rush it at the expense of the quality of the work that we have to
do.

I also want to give the assurance to the players of the Lotto and those who
have an interest in continuing to play that the Minister and the department
are very hard at work to ensure that we can resolve this matter in the very
near future.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I was going to say that my question has been
answered, but after our Minister of Finance made his statement, I am
definitely going to ask this question. With various needy organisations
that benefited from the National Lottery now being deprived of such
benefits, can the hon Minister please tell us how these organisations are
being helped, now that the National Lottery is no longer in existence? I
thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, if there are instances
like that, it would not be for lack of resources. It is something that we
would have to examine in the functioning of the distribution agencies. So,
I think if we were to be provided with the information as to which
organisations have been negatively affected, that is something that we can
refer to the relevant distribution agency.

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, obviously the hon Madasa was
quite correct in the point that he made about the fact that because people
are not playing the Lotto, they are saving a lot of money. As someone who
doesn’t play the Lotto regularly, I can agree and sympathise with poor
people, who may have more money to spend on other things. As my colleague
Rajbally, who is also from my home town, where we feel these things very
keenly, has quite correctly said, there is another side to the story.

There are organisations that normally rely on money for the work that they
do, whether they are organisations for children, old people, animals or
whatever. The fact of the matter is that they are drowning in paperwork,
scared stiff because money is not coming in. With great respect to you,
Minister, somebody, somewhere has dropped the ball over this, and we can
paper over as much as we like, there has been a huge problem.

We need to give some assurance to those organisations, be they sporting,
artistic, humanistic, or whatever. The point is that they are not getting
the money and are worried that they might not be. Perhaps some assurance
from you this afternoon that that has been taken care of as well, would
also go a long way. I thank you. [Time expired.]
The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Once again, Chairperson, it would not
be on account of a lack of funds. We have to examine the issue of where the
problem is. I am saying that the reserves and the money are there. If there
is a problem like that, we have to look at the relevant distribution
agency. As you know, we have sports and recreation distribution agencies
and arts, culture, environment and heritage distribution agencies, as well
as a social development distribution agency. So, we would have to identify
appropriately where the problem is.

  Budget allocated for development of Pebble Bed Modular Reactor technology

189.  Mr Y Wang (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:


      In light of the new opportunities emerging from the ongoing research
      and development of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor technology since the
      start of the project, (a) what (i) amount and (ii) percentage of the
      budget allocated is spent on the development of (aa) the core
      technology (electricity generation) and (bb) new opportunities such as
      process-heat application and (b) what positive lessons have been
      learnt from this research while working with foreign partners?
      N1250E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (On behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Chair, I am really earning my salary today. I am trying to
make up for the amount that the DA said I must be paid - 1c. So, I am
trying to earn a bit of extra overtime. The budget for the current
financial year for the PBMR is R2,5 billion and 98,7% is deployed on the
Electricity Generating Reactor System and the fuel plant.

The specific budget to develop process-heat applications is       R32
million, which is 1,3% of the total budget. The process-heat designs
benefit greatly from the development of the electricity plant and their
design and basic engineering costs are not expected to be nearly as high
for this reason.

Fuel plants, for instance, are identical in all cases and, by and large, so
are the reactors. It is in the process plant beyond the reactor that the
greatest differences lie and in the case of steam generation, for example,
the necessary technologies are already highly developed.

Therefore, the anticipated cost of design, engineering and licensing
actions for a process-heat system will be less than that for the first
reactor at Koeberg. South Africa has participated in the Generation 4
International Forum hosted by the Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD in
Paris. This interaction has permitted South Africa to secure precompetitive
models of aspects of reactor design and costing. It has ensured that our
programme is respected and understood globally and that our competitors
cannot take a pre-emptive position with their different design approaches.

The PBMR is a full partner in a consortium led by Western House Electric
Company. They have secured a contract in the US Department of Energy
Programme called Next Generation Nuclear Plant. This participation has
allowed South Africa to be seen as a key partner in one of the most
respected reactor design and engineering companies globally in a
competitive bidding process to provide preconceptual design inputs to this
programme.

Finally, the PBMR also draws on the research, engineering and test services
of partners in Spain, the Russian Federation, the Netherlands, Germany and
Japan, among others. These inputs enhance the confidence of our current and
future clients and regulatory authorities that we draw on global skills and
good practice in developing a leading reactor system while ensuring the
critical intellectual property is retained in South Africa as a platform to
develop our own industry. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, Minister. Hon Wang. Or is
it hon Wong? Please tell me. Please help me.

Mr Y WANG: Yes, Chairperson, it’s supposed to be Wang. Some people
pronounce it differently; it depends where you come from. So, yes, it’s
Wang. Hon Minister, I am not too sure I should pose this question to you
because in your reply it seems that the PBMR projects are still on track
and 98% of the budget is still targeted on the core technology, which is
electricity generation.

However, it seems to be in the committee or from the study groups, some of
the funding is being diverted to the process-heat or additional
applications. I am just wondering as to how this is going to affect our
fiscus in future? Regarding these additional applications, are we going to
have any fiscus benefits in terms of possible income and international
agreements, if any, of our partners in the US or the agreement with the
Chinese counterpart? I think there is Chingwa University that we are
working with.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Well, we would refer the question to
the relevant Minister. I know his officials are also present. I can say
that the stage that we are at in terms of the development of the PBMR is
really a stage where we are investing resources in the development of this
highly advanced nuclear reactor technology.

So, we are not at a stage where we are looking at any immediate returns,
because the timeline that we are looking at to produce even the first plant
is somewhere around 2011-12. And so, we aren’t at that stage where we will
be looking at the flows to the fiscus. But we have to ensure that the money
with which the fiscus supports us is appropriately deployed to develop the
core technology and therefore if there are issues about moneys being
diverted to other applications, I think that will be something which I
would hope the Minister for Public Enterprises can come back to Parliament
on. Thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, I don’t know whether the Minister will be able
to answer this question in the absence of Minister Alec Erwin, but maybe
Minister Manuel can assist him. With regard to the Pebble Bed Modular
Reactor or PBMR, I just want to know what measures have been planned to
protect both the communities and the environment against possible exposure
regarding the operation of such technology. Secondly, for what specific
purpose will the more than R1 billion for this financial year be allocated?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, I don’t see this being
a supplementary question. You are welcome to answer it but you are not
obliged to.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Yes, Chair. With regard to the issue of
the environmental impact of the PBMR, I think that in South Africa we
historically have had a good track record in terms of the use of nuclear
technology. I don’t think that we have had any disaster that has had the
kind of impact that the disaster at Chernobyl did.

Secondly, even though our environmental impact assessment dispensation is
new, I think it is fairly robust and enables us to ensure that going
forward, as we move more and more into this area of the necessary nuclear
technology because of the energy challenges of the day, there are the
necessary environmental impact assessments. This as a technology which has
a reputation for higher levels of safety than some of the existing nuclear
technologies, is also something that gives us confidence. We are moving
into this technology with a reasonable degree of confidence that we are not
and will not be exposing South Africans unnecessarily or carelessly to the
dangers of nuclear configurations that do happen on occasion.

On the amount that’s been allocated, I think that the question that I
responded to at the beginning does answer that question of where the money
is going to. It is to develop the core technology.

   Provision of gas stoves to disadvantaged communities, and contribution
                   thereof to relieving the energy crisis

190.  Mr Y Wang (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      (1)   Whether Eskom continued to supply replacement gas stoves to the
           disadvantaged communities in 2007; if not, why not; if so, (a)
           how many (i) communities received gas stoves and (ii) units were
           given (aa) in 2006 and (bb) during the period 1 January 2007 up
           to the latest specified date for which information is available
           and (b) what was the rationale to give these gas stoves;

      (2)   whether any other options were considered; if not, why not; if
           so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether this project contributed significantly to relieving the
           energy crisis; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details;

      (4)   whether Eskom engaged the gas industry to keep prices down; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             N1251E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (On behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Thank you, once again. During the 2006 Cape electricity
supply outage, a major accelerated Demand Side Management Programme was
launched by Eskom to reduce electricity usage, particularly during peak
times, which is from 6pm-8pm in the evening.

Given the fact that household cooking is a significant contributor to this
evening peak use, a programme that specifically targeted the conversion of
electric cookers and stoves to LP gas stoves and cookers was designed and
launched for all households in Cape Town. Disadvantaged communities in the
Cape were included through an electric two-plate exchange programme. The
electric-to-gas programme was for a specific timeframe and therefore was
not continued in 2007.

A number of lessons were learned from this exercise and these lessons are
being incorporated into the overall demand side management roll-out
programme. This will ensure that the most effective interventions are
pursued.

Yes, alternatives were considered and adopted. The LP gas programme formed
part of a broader energy savings programme in the Western Cape, which
included the issuing of energy efficient lights, the insulation of geysers,
retrofitting of commercial buildings with energy efficient equipment and
incentivisation of the usage of back-up diesel generators owned by
commercial and industrial undertakings.
The programme played a significant part in relieving the energy crisis,
particularly during the crucial peak consumption periods with an overall
attributable saving during the winter of approximately 20 megawatts.

Eskom had discussions with LP gas suppliers and it was agreed that prices
would be kept at a preferential rate. Thank you, Chair.

Mr Y WANG: Chairperson, hon Minister, my query in terms of these gas stoves
is the safety concerns, because the way I see it, we are taking away
electric stove plates from the communities and we are giving something
else, which is not as safe. You can’t tell me that gas stoves are 100%
safe. We have gas explosions all the time in other countries - I don’t know
about here yet - but that’s why I was asking the rationale for giving gas
stoves rather than other more energy saving electric plates as one option.

I was wondering if the Minister can perhaps answer in terms of future
consideration. Are we ever going to consider that and education on the safe
use of gas stoves in the community? Are there any educational programmes?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you. Obviously, you would have
heard from the response that the essential motivation was demand
management, which is a huge challenge that is facing South Africa at the
moment. What it means is that we have to undertake a variety of initiatives
that will all work in the direction of containing excessive use of
electricity.

Obviously, one of the things that we have to do as we encourage people to
use less electricity and find better ways of limiting the use of
electricity is the use of alternative sources for such things as heating,
for example. So, the gas stove initiative must be seen as one such
alternative source.

We have, however, to undertake intensive education campaigns, both to teach
people on safety when they do use gas, but also to educate people about the
need to contain and reduce the use of electricity. All of those things are
a balancing exercise, the ultimate objective is to really ensure that we
can preserve the energy resources that we have.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, what was the cost
involved in replacing gas stoves? And, taking that into account, how much
will Eskom, at the end of the day, save in substituting gas for electricity
in this exercise? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I do not know what it cost
Eskom to undertake this exercise, but I think that it is important that
part of the response indicated that a saving of 20 megawatts was realised
as a result of this initiative. You can impute some rand value, I guess, to
that, but I don’t really know the direct cost to Eskom of undertaking this
exercise.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, I’m not sure if you’d
be able to respond to this, but during the Minister of Minerals and
Energy’s previous budget speech, reference was made to a total of some
three million households receiving LPG cookers and the question was: How is
this progressing and is Eskom part of this delivery?

Additionally, a comment has been made that very few countries have electric
cooking as it is energy inefficient - 30% versus 65% - and, therefore, is
there a plan to convert our current electricity-based household cooking to
other fuel such as LPG gas, bearing in mind the comments about safety that
were made. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Yes, obviously, I cannot answer the
question exactly, except that the Department of Minerals and Energy is
actually the main driver of the programme to ensure that we can
increasingly encourage South Africans, and we can actually come up with a
complete programme that is aimed at the management of demand and the
diversification of sources of energy and heating.

I wouldn’t have an exact answer as to how the programme is going, but this
is actually an important initiative, which I think is going to require the
participation of various faculties. It is a multidisciplinary process,
because the Department of Minerals and Energy is driving it and Eskom has
to play a role. We may also have to play a role as the Department of Trade
and Industry to the extent that in some of these areas, you may actually
have new possibilities to manufacture and produce things as part of
supporting that overall drive towards alternative sources and
diversification of sources of energy. Thanks.

Mr C L GOLOLO: Thank you very much, Chair. Thank you very much, Minister
for your response. Given the tight supply of electricity in the country,
does it mean that natural gas is going to play a prominent role in the
South African energy supply? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Again, hon member, I’m sure that the
Minister of Minerals and Energy would probably give you a more accurate
response than I can give you, except that I can really reaffirm the need
for South Africa to diversify sources of energy.

If natural gas is going to be a major source, we would, obviously, have to
look at the issue of supply of that natural gas, but I think the basic
point is that South Africa has tended to rely excessively on electricity
for its own energy needs and cooking and heating. As a result, because
South Africa is also a low-cost electricity producer and, therefore, people
have had this cheap access to electricity, there has been the tendency to
be careless and to be wasteful.
Part of what we have to do is to teach people ways of saving electricity.
You have geysers that are on for the whole day when people are not at home
but at work. So, these are the sort of things that South Africans have to
begin to appreciate. They must not take for granted the availability of
electricity. They must know that it is a finite resource that can run out
and we’ve got to begin to inculcate that culture of energy saving amongst
South Africans, including the drive towards the diversification of our
energy sources.

   Conclusion on separate government–led skills development interventions

201.  Mr C M Lowe (DA) asked the Minister of Labour:

      Whether he has found that separate government-led skills development
      interventions in each economic sector are too resource and capacity
      intensive; if not, how did he reach this conclusion; if so, what are
      the relevant details?        N1272E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Chairperson, I do understand some English,
but unfortunately it was very difficult to understand the question. Suffice
it to say that we use a collaborative approach.

As government, we work with employers and trade unions. So, we do not have
a skills development intervention which is only by government. I tried to
look into all kinds of dictionaries to find out what is it that the hon
member really wanted from us, because we use everything on skills
development, including social dialogue. Even the money on the National
Skills Fund has not been agreed by government alone. It was a matter of
consultation and I have not received any complaint about the collaborative
approach and the fact that we are using social dialogue from anyone.
Therefore I cannot cherish a single-track approach to skills development.
That’s all I can say.

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, hon Minister of Labour,
for a very good response. I must apologise, sir, because this question was
dictated back to South Africa when I was with you in Geneva recently and it
has, possibly, not come out as I would have liked it to come out.

Let me try to explain what I am trying to say, Minister. The DA is very
concerned that we are trying in various areas of government to address the
skills problem, with a government that has serious capacity problems. I
think we need to be frank about this: Government is not able to do as many
things in certain areas as we would like it to do. Because of that there is
a concern in the DA that we are trying to provide an answer to skills
solutions across many fronts. That really was what was behind my question
to you, sir.

Let me give you an example. If we deal with skills development and Setas
and identifying scarce skills in South Africa, the Deputy President’s
Office is dealing with that under Jipsa. Your own department, sir, is
looking at where the necessary skills are that we need to attract and what
are they and how we deal with it, and Nedlac is dealing with that issue.
The Setas - all 23 of them individually - are looking at what skills we
need to be addressing ... [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, I don’t know whether that is what
Parliament must do, looking at what is behind these questions, because you
must ask me a question and I must come and answer, not what is behind the
question. I want what is in front of the question.

I don’t know what I am going to do with the hon member. It is quite a pity
that he is probably asking me the question for the last time, because he is
now going to Home Affairs. [Interjections.] No, no, sir, please, English is
your home language. The question that I have in front of me says: “Whether
he has found that separate government-led skills development interventions
in each economic sector are too resource and capacity intensive; if not,
how did he reach this conclusion; if so, what are the relevant details”?

We do not have a separate government-led skills development intervention. I
have answered the question.
Ms O R KASIENYANE: Chairperson, there is confusion. I am actually satisfied
with the Minister’s response, when he says that interventions are based on
a collaborative model and I agree with what the hon Lowe is saying, when he
says that government cannot do things alone. He is quite right. One can ask
the hon Minister: Do you think government can address this issue of service
delivery alone? This is a matter of partnerships.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: It is always through partnerships that we can
succeed as government, in particular, on the matter of skills development.
We cannot, as government, do this alone. That is why I was stressing that
we are using a collaborative approach; we are using social dialogue; we are
using tripartite; we are working with employer organisations; we are
working with trade unions, in order for us to succeed. It can’t be
government only.

We even took advice, for that matter, from opposition parties - those that
are not informed by newspapers on what ideology they must follow. Those who
have an ideology and principles will obviously advise us and make comments,
but those who just read newspapers and listen to journalists who are driven
by their own ideology will obviously have difficulties with people like
myself.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                 VISIT TO BRANDVLEI AND DRAKENSTEIN PRISONS
               ESCAPE OF ANNANEAS MATHE FROM C-MAX IN PRETORIA

 (Consideration of Reports of Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services)

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much, Chair. I am presenting to this House on
behalf of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services the report on a
visit to Brandvlei Prison and Drakenstein Prison.

The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services visited the Brandvlei and
Drakenstein Maximum Security Prisons in January 2007. The committee had
visited these facilities before, but the focus in the earlier visit was on
juvenile offenders. This visit focused on offenders held in the maximum
security facilities.

These prisons are both maximum security facilities, which hold serious
offenders, many of whom have committed violent crimes. In addition, due to
the location of these prisons in the Western Cape these centres also hold
many gangsters with close ties to and networks with gangs outside the
prison walls. It is thus very important that the security arrangements at
these prisons should be tight to ensure that these gangsters cannot bring
drugs and other illicit articles into the prison.

Key problems identified by the committee, include overcrowding. Both
Brandvlei and Drakenstein Maximum Security Centres are very overcrowded.
The Brandvlei Maximum Security Centre currently holds over 1 100 serious
offenders and it is 175% overcrowded.

The Drakenstein Maximum Security Centre holds 665 offenders and it is 175%
overcrowded. It is actually designed to hold 386 offenders. It is clear
that high levels of overcrowding make it extremely difficult for
correctional services staff to effectively control the offenders, and these
problems make it more difficult when one takes into account the high number
of gangsters and gangsterism activities within these centres.

Let me come to gangsterism. The problem of gangsters is rife in the Western
Cape and both of these maximum security facilities hold high-profile
gangsters from the region. A few weeks before the visit of the committee, a
group of these gangsters attacked four warders at the Drakenstein centre.

I think I must say something about this. Two months ago, three inmates were
killed in the Krugersdorp Prison after they were allegedly assaulted by
prison officials. It made headlines in all the media. This is wrong! We
have said that it is wrong and we are condemning it, but we must also be
very honest. Our officials are being attacked, day in and day out, and
nobody is saying anything about the attacks on our officials. Their lives
are in danger day and night, and we can’t condone a situation where inmates
think that they are now prison warders and the prison warders are now
inmates. It is unacceptable that law-abiding citizens like our officials
must be held hostage. Nobody has the right to take anybody hostage!

The Constitution of this country is defending and protecting the rights of
everybody, but when it comes to our officials, these people in orange
uniforms think that they alone have rights and they can do or say whatever
they like to our law-abiding officials. These people cry when we visit
these prisons. They ask us what they must do. We are not saying that they
must be assaulted, but these inmates must understand that there is law and
order in prisons, and we as this House must really protect the prison
warders’ rights so that they can do their work to protect us.

These people are working with people with up to 23 life sentences. The
other day we visited a maximum security prison where an inmate is serving 2
000 years. This person does not have any respect for life, but when he is
inside there, he knows the Constitution of the country better than anyone
else does. He thinks now that he is inside there he must be treated
differently from people outside. I am saying that we must look into that.

The security problems at these prisons that were identified by members of
the committee, include the shortage of members, partly due to the partial
implementation of the seven-day working week, which means that unit and
case managers who have been tasked to do their work, are often required to
do security work.
New recruits are used to do security work and they lack experience, which
is a problem in the prisons with high gang activity, as they do not yet
have the knowledge and experience to identify potential gang-related
problems before they escalate.

Physical issues, such as lockers for prison officials, were also a problem.
Officials’ lockers are kept within Brandvlei Maximum Security Centre,
instead of outside the building, which is a security risk and can aid
corrupt activities.

Our recommendation as a committee is to request the department to give
updated reports on progress, on action taken to alleviate gangsterism in
prisons around the country, on progress with the long-awaited anti-gang
strategy. The department must report on that, follow-up on recommendations
made by the Jali Commission - the report with regard to gangsterism - and
monitor the extent to which these recommendations have been implemented by
the department.

Collusion by some members in gang activities and the effort to reduce the
opportunity for members to be involved in corrupt activities was a key
concern of the commission. The committee has repeatedly called for the
vetting of all staff that work in maximum security facilities. While the
committee understands that part of the problem in the vetting process lies
with the National Intelligence Agency, NIA, it will closely monitor efforts
by the department to undertake this responsibility as agreed by the
Cabinet.

The committee will also monitor progress in the implementation of security
infrastructure, particularly in maximum security facilities, including the
introduction of CCTV cameras, X-ray machines and the cashless system.

Mention must be made of some real successes within these two correctional
centres. The Group of Hope at Brandvlei Maximum and the success of the
technical courses in Drakenstein, including electrical engineering, must be
noted. The department within the centres and even more importantly the
offenders who drive these innovative and successful programmes must be
commended. The ongoing support of the department and others in ensuring the
growth of these successful programmes should be prioritised.

A problem noted by the committee was that the artisans are resigning in
numbers because of poor salaries and a lack of promotion. We were informed
that these people are being recruited by other countries. I want to present
these reports to this House. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

  That the Report on the Visit to Brandvlei and Drakenstein Prisons be
  adopted and that the Report on the Escape of Annaneas Mathe from C-Max
  Prison in Pretoria be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Visit to Brandvlei and Drankenstein Prisons adopted.
Report on Escape of Annaneas Mathe from C-Max in Pretoria noted.

                          BUDGET ANALYSIS WORKSHOP
              HEARINGS OF JUSTICE AND PROTECTION CLUSTER, 2006
          THIRD QUARTER NATIONAL EXPENDITURE 2006/07 FINANCIAL YEAR
                  EXPENDITURE REPORT FOURTH QUARTER 2006/07

            (Consideration of Reports of Joint Budget Committee)

Ms L L MABE: Thank you, hon Chairperson. I thought that somebody would jump
up and come and assist me. On behalf of the Joint Budget Committee I would
like to present the Report on the Budget Analysis Workshop and the Report
on the Hearings of the Justice and Protection Cluster. The Report on the
Third Quarter National Expenditure, I’ll combine with the Expenditure
Report on the Fourth Quarter for 2006-07.

The committee had a workshop and we looked at the terms of reference in
relation to other committees of Parliament, for instance the Portfolio
Committee on Finance, and what our relationship with them should be, so
that we avoid overlapping of issues; the relationship with Scopa, so that
issues that were raised could be taken up by Scopa and vis-à-vis the issues
raised by Scopa so that we can take them as the year continues; also our
relationship with the portfolio committees to ensure that both committees
in the Joint Budget Committee will inform each other on the issues that
they deal with in the different departments.

We also looked at what our role should be in recommendations to Parliament
on amending money Bills. In the workshop, of crucial importance were the
programming challenges that we are faced with. The issues when we have
public hearings should be discussed in the portfolio committees so that
there should be no repetition in what we do in the Joint Budget Committee
and what the portfolio committees are doing, so that both committees can
benefit from that interaction. Unfortunately, we still have programming
challenges that need to be taken up and addressed.

The important issue that will continue to be very important in our
interaction as a committee is the research problem. The research capacity
of Parliament leaves much to be desired and most portfolio committees find
it difficult to get information which they can use to engage different
departments. The Joint Budget Committee can then engage with departments on
monthly spending.

The Minister of Finance earlier on indicated that Parliament has
information in the form of section 32 reports which they can use to hold
the department accountable. The challenge is: Does the capacity of
Parliament’s research assist committees of Parliament to do vigorous
oversight? And this is a big challenge. It needs to be improved speedily.

We looked at what the training needs of the committee were so that we can
have institutional memory but also that we can have an impact in terms of
other departments spending for the sake of spending. Or are the departments
spending to have outputs? What are early warnings in the departments? Do
these departments have fiscal dumping at the end of the financial year and
not have utilised funds?

Come March, especially, then you will see a lot of spending by the
different departments because they will then transfer moneys to the
different institutions or to local government and provincial government.
This is posing a serious challenge. Without proper research capacity, the
portfolio committees will not be able to monitor what is happening in the
different departments and their spending of money.

We also looked at public participation. We have observed that most of the
people who participated in the hearings of Parliament in the form of
portfolio committee hearings, are people who have financial resource
capacity. What about the poor who yearn to make inputs to what Parliament
is doing regarding the budget? How do we cater for such people? Go to the
rural areas. How do those people make an impact in terms of what issues are
affecting their lives and how does Parliament take up those issues? These
are some of the challenges that we are facing as a committee.
We also looked at the challenges of the joint nature of the committee.
During provincial weeks it is difficult for the committee to fulfil its
mandate. The NCOP component has to go to the provinces but at the same time
there is a lot of work ahead of the committee which the committee must
grapple with whilst the other section is in the provinces. How can we
address this problem to ensure that there is continuity in terms of
addressing and attending to the issues as presented in the section 32
reports.

We also looked at the relationship between the committee and the Office of
the Auditor-General and the National Treasury. I would like to report that
we are satisfied and happy that both the National Treasury and the Office
of the Auditor-General could take heed when we called on them and engaged
them and they could meet the standard as per the request of the committee
in terms of how they can assist the committee in order for the committee to
be be capacitated better to fulfil its functions.

I would also like to indicate that we had to define what our role should be
as the committee in terms of the financial management capacity model
presented by the Auditor-General. What can we as a committee do to ensure
that the departments start putting systems in place so that by the time the
Auditor-General comes with auditing the departments will be in a better
position to provide what is needed by the Auditor-General? They could also
account for what they have done with the funds allocated to them, rather
than spending for the sake of spending.

We have critically raised the issue of what the departments are doing with
regard to nonperformance by senior managers. What are the powers that the
portfolio committees have to ensure that, if a particular manager does not
perform, they can engage the department and the Minister in that regard?

I would like to cite an example. This morning we had a public hearing. It
was a joint meeting with Scopa. The CFO of Home Affairs boldly stated that
he was not an accounting officer so we cannot expect him to account,
whereas he was in the company of the accounting officer. His excuse was
that the accounting officer is new, therefore the accounting officer cannot
respond to the issues raised by the two committees. This is uncalled for
because the CFO is there. He is the person who looks after the finances of
the department and he must assist the accounting officer, who is new in the
department, to respond to the issues raised by the committee.

This is uncalled for. And you ask yourself: If the Minister says that there
is a turnaround strategy in the Department of Home Affairs, how is that
possible with such a CFO who says that he is not the accounting officer?
What will the situation be with regard to finances and the managing of
finances in that department? This is a challenge and I would like to make
an appeal to the Minister that she must address this issue with the CFO.

I would like to present the reports to the House. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Voorsitter, die komitee moet aandag gee aan die
bestedingspatrone van departemente. ’n Groot bron van kommer is die feit
dat departemente gesamentlik R5,3 miljard van hul begrotings nie in die
afgelope boekjaar spandeer het nie. Dit, ten spyte daarvan dat die staat
83% van die konstruksie-infrastruktuur daar stel, wat as basis dien vir die
privaatsektor vir verdere ekonomiese ontwikkeling. Gegewe die
onderspandering, is die twee grootste sondebokke die justisie- en
beskermingsdienstesektor, asook die ekonomiese dienste- en
infrastruktuurontwikkelingsektor. Dit is juis hierdie twee sektore wat
hulle aan die grootste agterstand in dienslewering skuldig maak.

Indien ons kyk na die individuele departemente, dan het die Departement van
Vervoer R400 miljoen onderspandeer. In die praktyk is daar meer as 100 000
km paaie op die waglys vir herstelwerk. Die Departement van Handel en
Nywerheid onderspandeer R188 miljoen, maar in die praktyk sukkel jong,
opkomende ondernemings om toegang te kry tot internasionale handelsmarkte.
Die Departement van Behuising onderspandeer R171 miljoen en dit terwyl daar
’n agterstand van 2,2 miljoen huise is.

Die Departement van Landbou onderspandeer R148 miljoen en dit terwyl daar
’n groot behoefte aan opleiding- en ondersteuningsdienste aan opkomende en
bestaande boere is. Die Departement van Justisie en Konstitusionele
Ontwikkeling onderspandeer R477 miljoen. Die personeeltekort en agterstand
in administrasie en die afhandeling van hofsake is nie naastenby
aangespreek nie. Ons regstelsel beweeg nou na ’n punt om in duie te stort.

Die Departement van Korrektiewe Dienste onderspandeer R586 miljoen. Tronke
om 12 000 misdadigers te huisves is nie gebou nie en Suid-Afrika sit steeds
met chaotiese oorvol tronke. Die Departement van Gesondheid onderspandeer
R115 miljoen. Ongeveer 50% van die geld was bestem om goedere en dienste
aan te koop, wat so noodsaaklik is om ons openbare hospitale toe te rus.

Binnelandse sake onderspandeer R237 miljoen. Hierdie geld was bestem vir
die aankoop van masjinerie en toerusting, wat die departement nodig het vir
beter dienslewering. Provinsiale en plaaslike regering onderspandeer R820
miljoen. Vanweë ’n personeeltekort en swak ondersteuningsdienste van die
departement se kant af aan derdevlakregering, het minder as 50%
munisipaliteite hulle finansiële state betyds by die Ouditeur-generaal
ingedien.

Hierdie ongespandeerde geld word van die belastingbetaler verhaal om dit in
dienslewering terug te ploeg. Gepaardgaande hiermee het die Tesourie die
afgelope boekjaar R30 miljard meer belastinggeld ingevorder as wat fiskaal
beplan was vir die huidige jaar, en maak die Minister ook voorsiening vir
’n oorskotbegroting van 0,6% van die bruto nasionale produk.

Die Tesourie moet besef dat die oorinvordering van belasting en ’n
oorskotbegroting niks anders as ’n skande is nie. Eerstens word geld
onnodig uit die ekonomie onttrek, wat andersins in ekonomiese ontwikkeling
teruggeploeg kon word. Tweedens word geld in ’n staatsrekening gestoor, wat
andersins vir noodsaaklike dienslewering aangewend kon word. Derdens, die
belastinglas kan verlig word vir Suid-Afrikaners, aangesien ons van die
hoogste belasting ter wêreld betaal en kan die belastingkoers van 28% na
26% van die bruto binnelandse produk verlaag word.

So is die R5,3 miljard wat departemente nie spandeer het nie, tesame met
die R30 miljard belastinggeld wat ooringevorder is, geld wat vrugteloos en
waardeloos uit die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie onttrek is en is beslis nie tot
voordeel van Asgisa se groei-inisiatiewe nie. Die Tesourie moet wegdoen met
’n oorskotbegrotingsbenadering, in plaas daarvan om dit te probeer koppel
aan ’n gesonde ekonomie.

Tweedens, moet die Tesourie doeltreffender oordeel aan die dag lê tydens
die toewysingsproses van geld vir departemente en dit is nou tyd dat die
Tesourie sy eie interne openbare finansiële verhore hou met die direkteurs-
generaal van departemente voor en na begrotingstoewysings oorweeg is om
sodoende te verseker dat departemente hulle geld effektief spandeer.

Ek stem wel saam met Minister Manuel se punt dat die Parlement en spesifiek
die portefeuljekomitees ’n groter en ’n strenger rol sal moet speel, om te
kyk dat departemente hulle fondse effektief aanwend. Ek dank u. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Chairperson, the committee should address the spending
patterns of departments. Of great concern is the fact that departments have
jointly failed to spend R5,3 billion in the past financial year. This in
spite of the fact that the state provides 83% of the construction
infrastructure that serves as a basis for the private sector for further
economic development. Given the underspending, the two main culprits are
the Justice and Protection Services Sector, as well as the Economic
Services and Infrastructure Development Sector. It is precisely these two
sectors that are guilty of the biggest backlog in service delivery.

In the case of individual departments, the Department of Transport has
underspent to the tune of R400 million. In actual fact, there are more than
100 000 km of roads on the waiting list awaiting repairs. The Department of
Trade and Industry has underspent by R188 million, but in reality, young
emerging enterprises are struggling to gain access to international trade
markets. The Department of Housing has underspent by R171 million and that
whilst there is a housing backlog of 2,2 million houses.

The Department of Agriculture has underspent by R148 million and that
whilst there is a great need for training and support services to emerging
and existing farmers. The Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development has underspent by R477 million. The staff shortage and backlog
in administration and the finalising of court cases, have not even come
close to being addressed. Our judiciary is moving towards a point of total
collapse.

The Department of Correctional Services has underspent to the tune of R586
million. Prisons to accommodate 12 000 criminals have not been built and
South Africa is still dealing with chaotic, overcrowded prisons. The
Department of Health has underspent by R115 million. About 50% of this
money was destined for the acquisition of goods and services which are so
essential to equip our state hospitals.

The Department of Home Affairs has underspent by R237 million. This money
was destined for the acquisition of machinery and equipment, needed by the
department for improved service delivery. Provincial and local government
has underspent to the tune of R820 million. On account of staff shortages
and poor support services from the department to the third tier of
government, less than 50% of municipalities have submitted their financial
statements to the Auditor-General on time.

These unspent funds are recovered from the taxpayer to be ploughed back
into service delivery. Coupled with that, the Treasury has collected R30
billion more in taxes in the past financial year than the National Treasury
had envisaged it would for the present year and the Minister has also made
provision for a budget surplus of 0,6% of the gross national product.

The Treasury should realise that the over-recovery of taxes and a budget
surplus are a disgrace. Firstly, money is being withdrawn from the economy
unnecessarily which otherwise could have been ploughed back into economic
development. Secondly, money is being kept in a state account which
otherwise could have been utilised for essential service delivery. Thirdly,
the tax burden of South Africans could be lessened since we are paying some
of the highest taxes in the world and the tax rate of 28% could be reduced
to 26& of the gross national product.

So, the R5,3 billion that had not been spent by departments, together with
the R30 billion in over-recovery of taxes, is money that had been withdrawn
from the economy needlessly and with nothing to show for it and this is
definitely not to the advantage of Asgisa’s growth initiative. The Treasury
should do away with a surplus budget approach, but rather try to link it to
a sound economy instead.

Secondly, the Treasury should exercise far more effective judgement during
the process of allocating money to departments and it is about time that
the Treasury has its own internal public financial hearings with the
directors-general of departments before and after budget allocations are
considered, thus ensuring that departments spend their money more
effectively.

I do agree with Minister Manuel’s view that Parliament and especially the
portfolio committees should play a more prominent and more rigorous role to
ensure that departments use their Funds effectively. I thank you. [Time
expired.]]

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, I have a few general observations about the
reports of the Joint Budget Committee. It has been contrasted that your
first quarter expenditure is normally underproportioned, whereas your last
quarter has been overspent in quite a few cases. This is particularly the
case insofar as the capital budget and transfers are concerned, where you
find that in the first quarter only about 10% was utilised, and in the
final quarter - the fourth quarter - more than 50% of the total year’s
allocation was spent. I think that one must look at this, that particularly
in future, there will be a more even spread in terms of the expenditure of
the budget and not that they concentrate again on the last quarter.

There is a particular concern about the provinces and local governments.
Parliament underspent by R75 million and it also had about R30 million
extra, mainly in the form of interest that came through and which was
utilised as a surplus account. The surplus account of Parliament was
utilised for parliamentary accommodation projects. I must say, I think that
this was very well spent. From the little bit I have seen so far, it seems
to have been very well spent.

I would also like to agree with the Chairperson with regard to the
inadequate research capacity in Parliament, which remains a concern. This
means that the ability of the parliamentary committees to effectively
conduct oversight and thereby ensure better service delivery is being
compromised. In this regard, the Joint Budget Committee recommends that
Parliament should prioritise enhancing research support to the committees.

The IFP supports this report and we will vote for it if any vote is called
for. [Applause.]

Ms R J MASHIGO: Chairperson, hon members, government departments should use
public funds for the purpose they were voted for by Parliament according to
the PFMA’s provisions, otherwise, we run the risk of the funds being
diverted from appropriate priorities of government to other departments,
which will inevitably compromise the quality of life of the people.

What we observe is that the departments referred to some savings under
current expenditure, which I can say is actually underspending or lack of
spending by the departments. Vacancies resulted in the most underspending
and, as a result, at the end of the last quarter, these funds were moved
from their original purpose to other programmes, which is totally
unacceptable because this is what we actually term ``fiscal dumping’’.

As far as vacancies are concerned, I think there were a lot of
contradictions, because the departments said there were vacancies, but we
have a database of unemployed graduates who are desperately looking for
work and can be trained. The departments have told us that these graduates
do not have experience. I say that there are learnership programmes,
through which these unemployed graduates can be trained and given
experience to fill the relevant vacancies.

What’s more important is that there is a lot of money which is being used
for recruitment agencies, who take a long time to headhunt suitable
candidates. Some times they take far longer than the time it would have
taken to retrain or put people in the learnership programmes.

As portfolio committees we should really ensure that our departments are
engaged in addressing this issue of vacancies and the plans they have,
because the government has all the systems in place to ensure that the
issue of unemployment and vacancies is addressed.

With those words I can say the ANC supports this report. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP notes from the report that certain
government capital projects were compromised due to poor departmental
planning and financial management as well as slow spending. Clearly, urgent
and appropriate steps need to be taken to address these problems.

We also share the concern that the inability of some departments to fill
vacancies means that the trend of underspending, more particularly on
salaries, will continue. This cannot be allowed to continue as severe
understaffing impacts on budget and service delivery.

Additionally, it is apparent that certain government services continue to
be compromised due to weak financial planning and management, resulting in
consecutive qualified audit reports. The ACDP supports the Committee’s
focus on certain specific delinquent departments, including the Department
of Home Affairs, Department of Health and Department of Land Affairs.

The ACDP will accordingly support this report and commends the work of the
Joint Budget Committee. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms L L MABE: Thanks, hon Chairperson. Based on the fourth quarter spending,
I’m not going to comment much on the vacancies because the hon Mashego has
captured what we discussed in the committee.

I would like to give an example pertaining to the Department of Sport and
Recreation. The Auditor-General, in his report of 2005-06, indicated that
42% of senior managers’ positions were vacant. In addition 46% of highly
skilled supervisory level managers’ posts were vacant.

This year the department underspent on vacancies, and the question is: Why
does it take such a long time to employ people to fill those vacancies?
What are the departments doing to ensure that they don’t compromise service
delivery?

Remember that Sport and Recreation is the department that must drive 2010
for South Africa. Without proper, skilled personnel at managerial level, at
supervisory level, how will we achieve that objective? Will funds be
utilised? Will funds be spent and not achieve what they are intended for?
That is the question which we must ask as Parliament.

Let us remember that these funds that are supposed to be spent on the
vacancies are termed savings. Are they real savings? That is a definition
we said National Treasury must provide to the committee and to Parliament
so that we know what the National Treasury and the different departments
understand by savings.

As regard capital spending, I’d like to indicate that we have discovered
that departments do not plan properly and do not manage; they do not
monitor what happens with regard to capital spending. They come with
projects; they do not send people to those projects to see whether projects
are being carried out or not.

People monitor in their offices. How is that possible? How is it possible
to do monitoring in your office rather than going to the project to see
whether the project is taking place, if it is being constructed or not?
That is the challenge to portfolio committees to perform their oversight
function.

But we also discovered in our report that 18 departments spend less than
50% of their capital spending or capital fund. Remember, they spend less
than 50 %. Funnily enough, in the last quarter of the financial year, they
spend more than 100% but the total budget says they spend well. How is this
possible?

People outside will think that the department spends well, within the
budget. Regarding capital spending, suddenly total spending is in
equilibrium. This is a question that needs to be answered by portfolio
committees when they engage; they must get answers from the departments.

You know, we were proud. I remember reporting to this House that the
department started spending in December, but I was not aware that they
would not spend for January and February, until March, which is the end of
the financial year, so that they could take the money to municipalities and
provinces.

I was not aware of this. I thought that they had improved. Unfortunately
this was not the case, and I erred telling this Parliament that there was
an improvement with regard to capital spending by departments.

I’ll also give an example of the Department of Public Works. During the
first quarter they spent 8,2% of capital spending, during the second
quarter 1,23%, during the third quarter 18% and during the fourth quarter
59,4%. How is that possible?

The Department of Provincial and Local Government, spent 6,2% during the
first quarter, 8,4% during the second quarter, 35,6% during the third
quarter and 114% during the fourth quarter. How is that possible? How is it
possible, members? Remember, the Department of Provincial and Local
Government must transfer funds to local government and provinces. One
hundred and fourteen per cent in one quarter is a challenge to us.

With regard to the Department of Arts and Culture, they overspent because
of the Women’s Day and Youth Day celebrations. Is this department not aware
that it must plan and budget for those activities because they are annual
activities? Can they tell us that they were not aware of these
celebrations? Then they tell us that they overspent because they didn’t
know that they were responsible for making provision for spending for those
activities. That’s really surprising.

The other thing that I want to raise with the House is that in the 2003-04
financial year, Parliament had minus R9,8 million in its surplus account.
Suddenly, right now, the balance is R293 million. That money is supposed to
assist us in our work as Parliament; it now goes to the surplus fund. Who
decided that it must go there because we wanted it to be used? Why did they
plan for it, knowing that they were not going to use it, and put it in a
surplus fund?

We, as this House, must ensure that we make them accountable. They must
account to us why that is the case when we are struggling as Members of
Parliament and the money has been put in a surplus fund. On behalf of the
committee, I want to mention that there are some departments - I’ll give
the Department of Health as an example. Of its budget, more than 90% goes
to provinces in the form of transfer payments. But you go to a hospital or
a clinic, there are no medicines. They get such a big allocation in the
budget, but there are no medicines. What does that mean? And they tell you
of procurement delays and all these things.

They will come and report to the portfolio committees that “we spent well
and clinics have medication and whatever”. Go to those clinics and you ask
yourself: Did we vote that medicines must not be provided to clinics? Is
that what we voted for as Parliament? This is a challenge. We know that in
our constituencies people struggle to get proper health care facilities,
but we vote for the funds to be used and they are not used for that
function.

Remember, the Minister of Finance said earlier on that national priorities
are overridden by the provinces because funds go to the provinces and they
decide what to do with those funds. I’d like to present the report to the
House. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

                     VOTE NO 12: STATISTICS SOUTH AFRICA
                        VOTE NO 8: NATIONAL TREASURY

        (Consideration of Reports of Portfolio Committee on Finance)

Mr N M NENE: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo, namalunga ahloniphekileyo. [Thank you,
Chairperson, and hon members.]

The Portfolio Committee on Finance met on 22 May 2007 to consider an
Updated Strategic Plan of the National Treasury for the financial year 2007-
08 in accordance with section 55(2) of the Constitution and in line with
section 27(4) of the Public Finance Management Act.

This engagement followed a briefing which took place on 10 May 2007 where
the Minister briefed the committee on policy matters in relation to this
Budget Vote. Subsequent to that, we had another briefing from Stats SA on
its strategic plan for 2005-06 to 2009-10, together with the work programme
for the same period.

Concluding these engagements, the committee tabled its reports in the ATCs
of 23 May 2007. In these reports there are some recommendations that we
made. We have recommended that the National Treasury must table a
discussion paper on the measurable objectives so that there should be
clarity on these things.
We also said that the National Treasury should submit a comprehensive
report on government guarantees that are issued in respect of state-owned
enterprises and conditions thereof. Finally, it should develop a policy
framework relating to the mandates of the developments on finance
institutions which we found did not exist.

On the South African Revenue Service or Sars we said that they must submit
a detailed report on the progress of discussions within six month on their
role with regard to the implementation of the social security tax and wage
subsidy which was proposed at the beginning of the year.

They should also submit a report within six month on the implementation
measures relating to the rights of debt. As Stats SA we said they must
table a report with specific timeframes for the implementation of the
National Statistics Systems and finally report on the development of a
national poverty line outlined in their strategic plan.

We trust that the department and its agencies will implement these
recommendations and the committee will follow-up on these matters as per
our mandate as Parliament. On behalf of the committee I present this
report. Thank you.

There was no debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

            VOTE NO 21: INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS DIRECTORATE (ICD)
              STRATEGIC PLANNING WORKSHOP, 19-20 FEBRUARY 2007
           STUDY TOUR TO AUSTRALIA, 30 NOVEMBER – 10 DECEMBER 2006

  (Consideration of Reports of Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security)

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, on behalf of the Portfolio Committee on Safety
and Security I’m presenting three reports for consideration by the House.
There is a report on Vote 21, ICD, one on the strategic planning workshop
and another on the study tour to Australia.

The Independent Complaints Directorate remains an important tool in the
democratisation of the South African Police Service. This is clear in the
22% budget increase that the ICD received for this financial year. Although
the increase is welcomed, it is still insufficient to deal properly with
the many challenges faced by the ICD. The priorities for 2007-08 include,
among others, the filling of vacancies, especially those of investigators,
as I said yesterday, and improving the finalisation of cases and addressing
backlogs.

The opening of satellite offices that will improve the effectiveness of the
ICD is clearly a priority. Among the recommendations that the committee
made regarding the ICD are: Firstly, they must keep the committee informed
about progress made in filling vacant positions.

Secondly, the committee further recommended that the ICD receives the
required support and co-operation from members of the South African Police
Service. We supported the budget of the ICD and we’ll support efforts by
the ICD for more funds to establish more satellite offices.

On 19 to 20 February 2007, the portfolio committee embarked on a strategic
planning workshop. The workshop was attended by members of the committee,
the Minister and the national management of SAPS. The workshop focussed on
the following issues: The expected legislative framework for 2007; the
training programme of the South African Police Service; the challenges that
they face in terms of training, and other challenges that they face in
general.

Regarding the preparations for the 2010 Soccer World Cup, the Presidential
stations were discussed in detail in terms of budget allocation, training
at station level, crime statistics and challenges and successes. The
committee made some recommendations that are included in the report.

Regarding the study tour to Australia that was held from 30 November to 10
December 2006, the committee visited Australia to investigate legislation
that specifically deals with human trafficking. In particular, the
committee was interested in gaining insight into the policing of human
trafficking and challenges that have been experienced since the passing of
that country’s legislation.

A number of lessons and recommendations for consideration came out of the
trip. Among these were: The portfolio committee will liaise closely with
the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development in the
process of developing this legislation. The committee will further interact
with the South African Police Services on current and envisaged plans to
combat human trafficking more effectively. The committee believes that in
terms of legislation we would do well to address the issue of reducing
demand.

We further recommend that legislation must be premised on the protection of
women as a human rights issue rather that a criminal justice issue. The
committee further recommends that higher penalties should be included in
the South African legislation for the trafficking of children. Other
recommendations deal with, for instance, actual investigations and policing
of human trafficking. Focus is also aimed at the training of all
departments that will be included in the process.

In the area of prosecutions very specific recommendations are made. Victim
support and prevention of these crimes and specific recommendations are
also included in this report. I therefore introduce the report for
consideration by the House. I thank you.

There was no debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.
The House adjourned at 18:09.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    Select Committee on Social Services


         (a)     Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] [See
             Resolutions passed by National Council of Provinces (Minutes
             of Proceedings of National Council of Provinces, 8 June 2007,
             p 1040) and by National Assembly (Minutes of Proceedings of
             National Assembly, 14 June 2007, p 1095)].


              Introduction in the National Council of Provinces (proposed
              sec 76(2)) and referral to the Select Committee on Social
              Services of the National Council of Provinces, as well as
              referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 18 June 2007.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within
              three parliamentary working days.


         (b)     Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21 –
             2007] [See Resolutions passed by National Council of Provinces
             (Minutes of Proceedings of National Council of Provinces, 8
             June 2007, p 1040) and by National Assembly (Minutes of
             Proceedings of National Assembly, 14 June 2007, p 1095)].


              Introduction in the National Council of Provinces (proposed
              sec 76(2)) and referral to the Select Committee on Social
              Services of the National Council of Provinces, as well as
              referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 18 June 2007.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within
              three parliamentary working days.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the Protocol
     on Policy and Regulatory Framework for NEPAD (New Partnership for
     Africa’s Development) ICT Broadband Infrastructure Network for Eastern
     and Southern Africa, dated 19 June 2007:


          The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
          Protocol on Policy and Regulatory Framework for NEPAD (New
          Partnership for Africa’s Development) ICT Broadband Infrastructure
          Network for Eastern and Southern Africa, referred to it,
          recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
          Constitution, approve the said Protocol.


Request to be considered.


