---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 09 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-03-09
---

FRIDAY, 9 MARCH 2007
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 09:32.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                     WELCOMING PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Please be seated.
Thank you members, I would like to welcome the hon Premier of the Free
State to the sitting today and special delegates from all the provinces and
also the councillors who are present. Thank you very much for being here
this morning.

                                 NO MOTIONS

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Deputy Chairperson, we have agreed in
the Whippery that today there will be no notices of motion and also no
motions without notice. Thank you.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON NCOP VISIT TO THE FREE STATE IN TERMS OF THE
                PROGRAMME OF TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE



The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Madam Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP, hon Premier of the Free State, hon Beatrice Marshoff, distinguished
special delegates, hon members, fellow friends, colleagues and comrades,
the real test of democracy does not lie in the frequency of multiparty
democratic elections after every five years, but in the ability of the
institutions of our government to inspire confidence in the masses through
sustained action to bring about a better quality of life for all.

The consideration and the debates on the report of the NCOP Taking
Parliament to the People in the Free State should once more afford us an
opportunity to reflect on the impact this programme has on changing the
lives of our people. As we do this, it should not escape our mind that this
programme is the first ever innovative initiative of its kind in the whole
world undertaken by the National Council of Provinces in the 21st century
to give living and programmatic expression to the notion of a people’s
parliament that so many parliaments and democrats in the world aspire and
continue to aspire to. We therefore must use this occasion as a fitting
tribute to the successive visionary leadership of this august House for the
pioneering task that will forever represent an indelible mark on the
history of redefining and repositioning Parliament in the 21st century.

In this regard our honour should be bestowed to the pioneer of this
programme, the now Minister of Education, Comrade Naledi Pandor, the late
Comrade Joyce Kgoali, who never hesitated to take this programme to new
heights, and lastly, the current Chairperson of the NCOP for breathing new
life into this programme of Taking Parliament to the People that has proven
so many sceptics wrong.

We should celebrate this as a trademark that defines the new People’s
Parliament of the 21st century, whose intellectual property rights reside
accordingly with the collective wisdom and determined efforts of all of
you, our legislatures and the executive arm of government in all three
spheres of government.

A people-centred development and reconstruction process has become the
defining feature of the 21st century development paradigm for developing
countries over the world. Accordingly, South Africa’s reconstruction and
development programme, inspired by the vision of the Freedom Charter, is
firmly rooted in the philosophy and paradigm of people-centred and driven
development.

According to the 2006 Human Sciences Research Council’s South African
Social Attitudes Survey, more than 60% of South Africans of all races do
not have the means and ability to participate meaningfully in the
governance of the country in order to influence the outcome of policy
decisions of government, except through participation in the elections. We
are saying that this is not enough.

This is, in part, attributed to the history of secrecy and the lack of
accountability of the successive white minority regime, and on the other
hand to the lack of experiences, resources and expertise to meaningfully
engage the government of the day on issues that affect people’s lives. As a
result of this, the majority of our people depend on the goodwill of their
elected representatives to make policy choices that respond to their
aspirations that is giving the space of engagement with government with the
allied formations that represent a minority interest in the economic,
political, social, religious and cultural spheres of public policy-making.

It is not an overstatement to say that the majority of our people are not
participating in the formulation of the Integrated Development Plans, IDPs,
and budget formulation of their municipalities, not because they are
deliberately excluded, but due to the technical language in which these
processes are driven, which by nature is alienating. In this regard our
IDPs and budget processes are dominated by the selected privileged elite
who represent the interests of tiny sections of our citizens.

If you are to test this against the vision of the Freedom Charter when it
says “no government can justly claim authority, unless it is based on the
will of the people”, we certainly agree that we still ought to traverse
some more miles to empower our people, as a democratic state, to ensure
that their voices are a final verdict in the policy-making and the resource
allocation processes of our country in a meaningful way.

This is not a given course because of democracy, but a highly contested
terrain of struggle that must be fought and won in our lifetime. A
developmental democratic state that takes itself seriously must instil
capabilities within ordinary men and women, young and old, rich and poor,
and inspire them with confidence to master the art of constructively
engaging the state on a continuous basis to shape the content and pace of
transformation.

It is through this effort that, as elected representatives of our people in
a democratic state, we can truly come alive to the clarion call of the late
President of the ANC, Comrade Oliver Thambo, when he said:

  Constant mobilisation of our people to firmly take charge of their
  destiny and the future of their country in their hands is an
  indispensable weapon for the victory of our revolution in the hands of
  the liberation movement.

The NCOP, through the programme of Taking Parliament to the People, has
achieved and continues to achieve the following core strategic objectives:
There is the democratic consolidation through sustained interaction with
the masses of our people to find common solutions to the challenges of
transformation; placing the exercise of oversight and the accountability
mandate of Parliament firmly in the hands of the people so that they are
able to shape their own future and their destiny; building the capacity and
confidence of our people to constructively monitor and evaluate government
performance on a structured and sustained basis; and creating a platform
for ordinary men and women to provide the democratically elected government
with feedback on how their actions and policies are impacting on their
lives.

Through its ability to straddle the three spheres of our executive and
legislative arms of government, as President Thabo Mbeki has said, the NCOP
has the opportunity to bring cohesion in our co-operative system of
governance by constantly ensuring that the three spheres of our government
are capable not only of joining efforts together in the acceleration of
service delivery, but of enhancing efficiency and effectiveness through
better integrated development planning.

The ability of one sphere of government to detect deficiency in terms of
both planning and the implementation of nationally agreed development
priorities resides firmly in the hands of the NCOP to monitor
implementation across the three spheres of government.  To reduce this task
of monitoring to the encroachment of the NCOP on the legislative and
oversight competency of other spheres of our legislatures, as some sceptics
have alleged, is an academic fantasy that should find no place in the
contemporary politics of development and transformation in our country.
[Interjections.]

Against this background, allow me to make a few observations on critical
issues that were raised by the people of the Free State in Tumahole, Parys
during that week of the NCOP Taking Parliament to the People. The first and
the most burning issue that pervaded our four days of deliberation was the
persistent perceptions and allegations of nepotism and corruption within
the municipalities.

Hon Premier Marshoff would certainly agree with me that that perception is
one of the most dangerous weapons against the stability of the state, more
so when it is repeated over and over again. If people have made serious
allegations against public officials, how are you going to act on this
matter to allay their fears, without the danger of being seen to be
covering up? It is a critical challenge and therefore it is fitting on the
occasion of the debate on this report that the hon Premier give us some
insight in terms of the kind of programmes and interventions that the Free
State government will undertake to respond to that particular allegation
that was made during the NCOP Taking Parliament to the People visit.
It is my view that bold action on matters of this nature, to clear our
government and lay matters to rest, is one such act that inspires the
confidence of our people in our elected institutions of governance. I am
saying this because councillors have rejected these allegations outright
and therefore believe it is also in their best interests that an open and
transparent process of further investigation into these allegations be
undertaken as a matter of urgency.

The second issue relates to farm evictions and the alleged abuse of
farmworkers by farmers. If we cast our minds back, we will recall how one
farmworker was gruesomely murdered by his employer, who pulled him behind a
moving bakkie in 2001. That situation nearly caused racial chaos in the
whole region and therefore a speedy and urgent look into this matter is
required, and the people deserve to know how their elected government is
going to deal with this question.

In conclusion, on behalf of the presidium of the NCOP I want to convey
sincere appreciation for the warm reception that the Free State province
accorded the NCOP under your good leadership, hon Premier, and further
thank you for bothering to come in person, when this august House is
considering the Free State report. I am confident that you derive strength
and courage from the 2006 HSRC South African Social Attitudes Survey that
ranked the Free State as number one in terms of a population satisfaction
rating on government performance. I think it would be of interest to hon
members to go through that report. It was released. After the Free State,
it is Limpopo which is then followed by the Eastern Cape. There are a lot
of indicators that are used to do so. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms N MTITSHANA (Eastern Cape): Madam Chairperson, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, molweni ngale ntsasa [I greet you all this morning]. In 2002,
the NCOP adopted a programme of Taking Parliament to the People with the
aim of promoting public participation in parliamentary affairs and to
assist the NCOP in carrying out its oversight functions.

Sifanele ukuba siliqhwabele izandla eli linge ngenxa yendlela elisebenza
ngayo. [We have to applaud this programme because it works very
effectively.]

From 6-10 November 2006, the NCOP held sittings at Fezile Dabi District
Municipality in the Free State province. The visit was a success as it was
very well attended - with the President, Ministers, MECs, Mayors, members
of this House and various other stakeholders in attendance. In particular,
the people greatly welcomed the address of President Thabo Mbeki.

The Free State visit was a true reflection of the entrenchment of the
programme of Taking Parliament to the People as a key mechanism of ensuring
public participation in Parliament and a strong culture of participatory
democracy in our country.

Throughout its sittings in Parys, the NCOP held hearings and visited
various sites. It had the opportunity to interact with the people on issues
pertaining to the delivery of quality services by the municipality and also
observed the impact that legislation and various development programmes,
established by the government, have on the lives of ordinary South
Africans. Today, they have assisted people through the programmes on a
number of issues such as supporting and training young emerging
entrepreneurs. However, a major issue that was raised was the
unavailability and inaccessibility of Umsobomvu at regional levels.

As you know, Umsobomvu ...

... uphaya kufutshane nalapho iziseko eziphezulu zikhoyo, babe abantu
abatsha belapha ezantsi, uninzi lwabo lungaphangeli. [... is situated up
there with the other institutions of government, far from the young people,
most of whom are unemployed.]

In terms of local government, various issues were raised pertaining to the
inaccessibility of councillors and the fact that the people are not able to
reach the councillors in a reliable and effective manner. More needs to be
done to ensure that people are encouraged to attend izimbizo, IDPs and also
participate in these important gatherings because that is the formal place
for raising issues and sharing information.

Uye ufumanise ukuba ezinye izinto zazithethiwe, kodwa kwathi kuba abantu
babengekho, baphoswa, zaba ngathi zange zaphathwa. [You would find that
some issues had been raised, but because some people were not in attendance
when this happened, and missed out, it would seem as if these issues were
never mentioned.]

Also, there must be strong partnership and co-ordination between the
legislature and local government municipalities.

On the issue of reporting, the NCOP must monitor and check that these
report-back meetings do happen and that feedback transpires from them.

Kufuneka kukhangelwe ukuba ngaba izinto eziphakanyiswa ngabantu ekuhlaleni
ziyenziwa na. Sidinga ukuba sikhangele ukuba oomasipala bethu bayabonelelwa
na ngezinto abazidingayo ... [We need to assess whether issues raised by
the people in their communities are attended to. We also need to check
whether our municipalities’ needs are catered for ...]

... so that they are in the forefront of the reconstruction and development
of the country. There is a need for the municipality to play an efficient
and effective role to ensure that poor households have access to basic
needs.

With regard to agriculture people raised a number of issues and concerns.
The main issue that caught my attention was the issue of a lack of support
for emerging farmers, and the lack of follow-ups on farmer support projects
that are funded through the Department of Agriculture. We cannot afford
that ...

... iSebe lezoLimo kuzwelonke libe alikwazi ukuqinisa isebe lezolimo
lephondo kuba kulapho siya kubona khona ukuba sibheka phi na nendlala. [...
the national Department of Agriculture is unable to strengthen a provincial
department of agriculture, because it is at that level where we would be
able to see how effective our efforts are at fighting poverty.]

The Free State department of agriculture clearly falls short in some areas
and thus needs to sit down and determine, in consultation with the relevant
stakeholders, what needs to be done to address the various problems and
shortcomings of the programmes in the province.

Another issue is that ...

... akuzi kunceda ukuba abantu sibanike iifama, kodwa singabi nayo inkqubo
yokuhlola ukuba baqhuba njani na kuzo. [... it is not going to help to give
people farms, without a programme to monitor their progress.]

I would like to applaud the Fezile Dabi District Municipality on their
youth development programme in partnership with Umsobomvu for, despite the
many challenges faced by the youth, they have managed to train them here
and there.

In conclusion, the programme of Taking Parliament to the People was
essentially to ensure that the NCOP plays a more significant and effective
role in ensuring a better quality of life for people of South Africa. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy House Chairperson, hon Premier of the Free State and
special delegates present, as the President has indicated, the NCOP is the
only institution in the constitutional system of governance in South Africa
that straddles all the three spheres of government and which has the
mandate to monitor the implementation of legislative and executive
decisions in these three spheres.

Taking Parliament to the People has the aim of promoting public
participation in parliamentary affairs and assisting the NCOP in carrying
out its oversight function. As part of this function, the NCOP held its
sittings in the Fezile Dabi District Municipality in the Free State, which
is my home province, from 6 to 10 December 2007.
Some of the topics selected for public hearings were, for example, co-
operative governance, poverty alleviation, education, social needs,
agriculture and trade and development affecting the Free State.

Whilst a wide range of issues was discussed, I would like to concentrate on
just a few of them. The national government has set targets on the
eradication of the bucket toilets by 2007, water supply by 2008, sanitation
by 2010, and solid waste and road infrastructure by 2013.

The eradication of the bucket system remains a major problem in the Free
State as alluded to in the report. According to the department of land and
environmental affairs, the Free State province has     88 791 bucket
toilets, a backlog of 67%, which still have to be replaced from January
this year. The next worse province, according to the official figures was
the North West province with 15%.

Most municipalities in the Free State have capacity problems with the
sewage treatment plants and have little spare capacity. How this backlog is
going to be eliminated by the end of the year 2007, remains to be seen. The
ageing water pipes and sewerage treatment are in urgent need of attention,
particularly in the Parys area, as much water is lost due to leakage and
many rivers are periodically polluted.

The provision of water to farm schools and populated rural areas also needs
to be addressed.

The poor condition of the gravel and service roads in the Ngwathe municipal
area during the NCOP visit is also mentioned in the report. This, however,
must be viewed against the budget allocation for roads in the Free State
province, which was increased from R516 million to R947 million. However,
the department needs some R2 billion a year for five years to catch up on
the backlog of the condition of roads in the province.

Insufficient RDP houses and poor construction of houses also continue to be
a problem throughout the province. Contracts to built houses should be
awarded to large building contractors who use local labour and can be
financially liable for incomplete or badly built houses. In the past
financial year, the Free State lost R117 million due to their inability to
spend the money allocated for housing in the province.

The Premier of the Free State has stated that poverty and unemployment
continue to be the biggest enemy of the people in the province.
Unemployment and poverty continue to deny our people their dignity.
According to the Institute of Race Relations, 46,4% of the people in the
Free State still live in poverty. Joblessness in the province has increased
to almost 40% in the last 10 years. Mining, which contributed only 14,3% to
the Free State’s GDP way back in 2001, continues to decline despite the
anticipated establishment of the Voorspoed mine, which is a diamond mine
near Kroonstad. And urgent attention, which should have taken place years
ago, will have to be given to the Welkom and Goldfields area to sustain and
grow the economy.

Most of the challenges and shortcomings highlighted in this report about
this particular area, are not unique to the Free State province, but are
similar to those found in most other provinces which the NCOP has visited.
Bloemfontein, I must say, was voted the best city and town to live in, and
the growth rate is increasing for the Free State. There must however be a
follow-up process and oversight to ensure that the shortcomings and
backlogs are addressed in a concerted and an efficient manner.

Lastly, I would wish to thank the Premier of the Free State and all
concerned for the hospitality and courtesy extended to all the NCOP
parliamentarians during our visit to the province. I thank you. Viva,
Vrystaat! Viva!

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Deputy Chairperson, you know, for the first time I hear
somebody from the DA acknowledging in the House that the ANC administration
is good in the Free State. Keep that up! When credit is due, please, do
give it.

The NCOP programme is a very good and useful tool in interacting with our
people. From province to province, we have been able to get the ordinary
person in the street. We have been able to talk to MPs and people. So, they
don’t only have to watch television or listen to the radio, they also -
once in a lifetime - have this opportunity.

When we visited a farm in Heilbron, we expected to see a prosperous
business for a group of young men and women. We went there with the
officials from the provincial government. From our findings and
observations, all I can say is that our officials, as implementers of
government programmes and policies, are really not doing us proud. A
beautiful idea like that one is done a disservice by officials from both
local and provincial governments.

The farm is a big piece of land – about 77 hectares and can have a very
good turnover. Those young people were not taken through a process. There
is neither development nor managerial mentoring – they were just given
money ...

... ukuze bazibonele ukuba benza njani na [... and left to their own
devices].

All that was needed there was to teach them skills and train them. You may
think that they are lazy. Maybe that element would be there, but ...
... isebe nalo ngokwalo lavuma ukuba zange lenze nto [... the department
also acknowledged that it did nothing].

There was not even a week’s course to mentor them.

The failure of local government to assist the emerging black farmers
through the LED strategy is something the province must follow up, because
the Free State is a farming province. The previous farm owner ...

... wasebenzisa amaqhinga ukuze iinkomo zakhe zidle kumadlelo akule fama.
Uwuthengisile lo mhlaba, kodwa usafuna ukufumana into kulo mhlaba. [...
used devious means to ensure that his cattle could graze the fields on this
farm. He sold this land, yet he still wanted to benefit from it.]

That’s not right. When you sell, you must sell. It’s wrong to say I’m
selling, but borrow me.

Ngaphezulu, xa sifuna uMzantsi uqhubele phambili, kufuneka abo
babenamathuba okuxhamla bancedise ekuphuhliseni. Eliyinene lelokuba sonke
masiphucule ubomi babantu, sibancede ukuze nabo bakwazi ukuqingqa.
[Furthermore, if we want South Africa to develop, those who had
opportunities before have to assist with development. The truth is that we
all have to better the lives of the people, and help them learn to stand on
their own two feet.]
I’m saying this in isiXhosa so that one can understand better. There is a
difference between “ukuqingqa” [to learn to stand on your own] and
“ukukhasa” [crawl]. We have passed the crawling stage now.

Bonke abantu kufuneka bemile. Asisafuni ukukhasa kuba sikhase ngokwaneleyo.
[One has to stand on one’s own two feet. However, we no longer want to
crawl, because we have crawled long enough.]

If we keep on crawling, we will crawl to the fire. We don’t want that!
[Laughter.]

I also want to say that we need to do some oversight work.

There is the issue of saying those who live far from the main road ... and
this does not only apply to the Free State. I’ve been to one province,
which I don’t want to mention, because sometimes we go home. Those who live
far from the main road or the tarred road, will be the last to get
electricity. And that’s not right!

That farm had electricity before, but because the colour of management has
changed, suffering must come back because that is where it belongs. I don’t
think we were created to suffer, but some people are responsible for our
suffering. What guides us at the beginning of each year is the state of the
nation address by the President. [Interjections.]

Uyangxola wena! [Kwahlekwa.] [You are making a noise there! [Laughter.]]

Officials are not informed by the real conditions. They only give out money
but they never follow up.

Let me conclude by saying that there should be joint planning with
municipalities on a timely basis, and we should put technical skills and
resources at municipal level, as this is the sphere of government closest
to the people.

The fact that that farm had no running water and electricity is a cause for
concern. I hope they’ve gone back to look at all the issues we raised with
them so that when we follow up, we can say: But you were supposed to
correct this, what have you done?

Lastly, our young people do not know how to acquire accredited technical
and work experience on farming projects. Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the Youth
Commission, wherever they are, must get this message, because I think for
us there is everything in place.

Nto nje abantu abazimiliseli izigqibo zikarhulumente. Ndiyafuna ukuthi,
Mam’ uNkulumbuso, kuza kufuneka ubajonge ngeliso elibanzi abaqeshwa bakho.
Abantu bayafuna ukuba ngoobhongoza nabo: “Hayi sidiniwe kukukhongoziswa,
sifuna ukukhongozisa abanye. Kodwa xa izinto zisenzeka ngale ndlela,
azenzeki ngendlela. Aba bantu baye kula fama okokuqala, okwesibini besiya
kwakuziintsuku ezimbini okanye ezintathu phambi kokuba kufike iggiza
elisuka kwiBhunga leSizwe laMaphondo. Iyalifuna iliso lakho laa nto.

Ndicinga ukuba nomphathiswa wephondo zange azi ukuba kwenzeka ntoni na
kulaa ndawo. Wayeqala ukufumana umfanekiso ngento eqhubeka phaya apha
ebomini bakhe. Sidiniwe kukuba ngokuthi kuthethwe ngabantu abamnyama
njengabaqeshwa basezifama, ngoku sifuna ukuba babe ngamafama. Lithuba labo
eli.

Okwangoku kusaphethe thina, singasoze siphinde siyeke ukuphatha, kuza
kufuneka sibone ukuba abantu bethu, nezizukulwana zethu, ziyaxhamla. Enkosi
kakhulu Sekela-Sihlalo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[It’s just that people do not implement government’s decisions. I do want
to say, Madam Premier, that you have to keep an eye on your employees.
People want to be able to stand on their own two feet. We are tired of
receiving hand-outs; we now want to be our own bosses. However, this is not
the way things are supposed to be. These people went to that farm two or
three days before the arrival of the delegation from the NCOP. That needs
your attention.

I think that even the MEC had no idea what was happening there. It is only
recently that she has been able to form a picture of what is going on out
there. We are tired of speaking of black people as farmworkers; we now want
them to be farmers. This is their opportunity.

Whilst we are in power - and we will never relinquish it - we will have to
see that our people and future generations do benefit. Thank you very much,
Deputy Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Premier, hon MECs, and hon members,
taking Parliament to the Free State enabled us to get to know, and interact
directly with, ordinary citizens of the province. In Parys, also through
communication with people, we identified problems such as a lack of water
supply and electricity, inadequate housing and collapsing of RDP houses, a
lack of quality health care systems and education, a shortage of industries
that contributes to the lack of employment and poverty alleviation.

Hon Deputy Chairperson, in order to deal with these problems that I,
together with other colleagues, have also mentioned we urge the provincial
and local government to improve their capacity to deliver through the
Expanded Public Works Programme, whilst fast-tracking delivery. The IFP
also urges government to pay more attention in fighting corruption by
involving civil society participation so that communities will be able to
engage more in poverty eradication. All in all, the IFP is saying that you
should continue to strive for the best in the Free State. A lot has been
done although a lot still needs to be done. The journey is not yet
finished.  Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Deputy Chair, Premier, and hon delegates, it is
evident that Project Consolidate has yet to have an impact on basic service
delivery, which is nonexistent in some Free State districts, because the
bucket system is alive and well. Irregularities related to housing tenders
continue to exist. Poor workmanship that relates to ineffective monitoring,
poor quality control, and monitoring and evaluation by various agencies and
large companies is not the answer.

What is ugly and repulsive are the many faces of government corruption,
which seems to have pervaded some district municipalities in the province.
General infrastructure concerning roads impacts negatively on productive
economic activity via transportation of goods, etc. What is very concerning
is the delayed implementation of IDPs. Does this point towards lack of
technical capacity to implement?

Poor intergovernmental relations in terms of co-ordination need to be
addressed by the relevant MECs. The prevalence of the increase in farm
evictions in some areas is disturbing and unacceptable, and this is a
national thing. The ESTA needs to be looked at urgently by government. The
inability to provide effective support services to small and medium
enterprises indicates that Seda agencies’ reach needs to be expanded.
Provision of information and mentoring services to small business owners is
essential for job creation to be sustainable in the second economy.

Given that HIV/Aids is a national pandemic and is high on the government’s
agenda, the poor roll-out of ARVs at clinics presents issues in terms of
political will. The MEC for health should prioritise sufficient supply
stock of ARVs to clinics. Health infrastructure at some clinics is in
neglect. Poor staff management, inferior equipment, etc present cause for a
national outcry. Skewed funding allocations to public and private schools
impact negatively on the quality of education and efficient management.
Teacher levels, inadequate funding for colleges, and poor learning
infrastructure contribute to the deteriorating education system in pockets
of the province.

Hon Chairperson, it is time that oversight becomes more meaningful by
requesting sanction where possible, as to how things will be turned around.
Where is Batho Pele, basic service delivery, and anticorruption mechanisms?
They certainly do not seem to operate in some areas of the Free State
province. Perhaps the concept of a single service needs quick
implementation so that skilled human resources can be transferred from
national to provincial government, which is required in this instance.
These are not just criticisms, and I think they should be taken in the way
they are given. Thank you.
Mr C A T SMITH (Northern Cape): Hon House Chairperson, Premier Marshoff of
the Free State, acting Premier Mr Tselapedi ... [Laughter.] ... members of
the NCOP, special delegates of the provinces, MECs present, distinguished
guests, and ladies and gentlemen, it is actually very sad that we have this
debate in this House only now. My humble opinion is that we should have had
it immediately after the visit last year, and the reason is that this is a
very important oversight exercise.

Therefore I want to take the liberty also to congratulate the leadership of
the NCOP, and all the members for doing this. But it is important to note
that the Premier of the Free State and the executive could have benefited
much more out of this debate if we had had it last year so that she could
have include some of the very important points that came out of here in the
state of the province address that they have had. So, my suggestion and
recommendation is that the NCOP should think of having this debate
immediately after the visit, so that it can have the impact it deserves.

Madam Deputy Chair, this month we celebrate Human Rights Day, one of the
most important public holidays of our new democracy. We call on all South
Africans to work for peace, stability, a culture of tolerance, and an
appreciation for the wonderful rainbow nation that we have. The visit by
the NCOP to the Free State province illustrates that whether someone lives
in a rural or urban area all South Africans are equal. Deliberations were
therefore aimed at creating a platform for people to engage government and
Parliament on issues such as the right to basic service, including crime,
and health care, the functioning of local government, and job creation
through the Expanded Public Works Programme, or EPWP.

One of the things that struck me immediately as we turned off from the N1
towards Parys was the quality of the secondary road that we used, which was
fairly bad.

Dit het ook onder my aandag gekom dat daar ten tyde van daardie besoek aan
die pad gewerk is. Dit sê vir my dat daar net aan die pad gewerk is vir die
besoek van die NRP. Dit sê vir my dat dit nie ’n standhoudende strategie is
wat deurlopend so gehou word nie. Paaie is ’n baie belangrike aspek wanneer
dit kom by die instandhouding van die ekonomie. As ’n mens kyk na hoe snel
die ekonomie groei, is dit belangrik dat ons die instandhouding van paaie
ernstig moet opneem. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It has also come to my attention that they were working on the road during
that visit. This leads me to believe that they were only working on that
road for the duration of the NCOP visit. This leads me to believe that this
is not a lasting strategy that is continuously maintained. Roads are a very
important aspect when it comes to sustaining the economy. If one looks at
how rapidly the economy is growing, it is important for us to take the
maintenance of roads seriously.]

We have set a clear vision to provide an integrated transport system and a
client-centred public works service, which satisfy the needs of the people
while supporting and facilitating social and economic growth, and the
development of all the people of the Free State. We have to promote
accessible, safe and affordable movement of people, goods and services, and
render efficient and effective public works services. Road safety remains a
daunting challenge for all of us. The horrific road fatalities cannot be
allowed to continue. We must shift from being reactive to being proactive,
and allocate resources where they will have the most impact.

The main strategic objective of the EPWP is to ensure that there is a long-
term self-reliance in economic sustenance in a sustainable manner on the
part of our people. In order to achieve this, we need to ensure that the
EPWP helps us to develop the pool of skills our economy requires, because
part of the main problem around unemployment in the country is structural
unemployment. This means that whereas there are job opportunities created
from time to time, there are, however, no corresponding skills on the part
of the majority of job seekers.

Therefore the implementation of the EPWP is aimed at responding to these
challenges as a matter of urgency. Discussion on the effectiveness of local
government revealed that there was significant concern amongst communities
about the slow pace of delivery of services.

Ek kan onthou daar was verlede jaar baie opstandigheid in plaaslike
owerhede in die Vrystaat. Alhoewel baie hiervan na my beskeie mening te
doene het met politieke opportunisme, is ek ook daarvan oortuig dat daar
somtyds regte griewe onder die mense is omtrent die implementering daarvan.
Daaraan moet ernstig aandag gegee word omdat plaaslike regering dié sektor
van regering is wat die naaste aan ons mense is. Dit is waar die
implementering van die beleid geskied wat op nasionale vlak gemaak word en
op provinsiale vlak gemoniteer word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[I can recall a lot of turmoil in local authorities in the Free State last
year. Although a lot of this, in my humble opinion, has to do with
political opportunism, I am also convinced that sometimes there are actual
grievances among the people regarding the implementation thereof. Serious
attention must be given to this, as local government is the sector of
government which is the closest to our people. That is where the policy,
which is formulated at national level and monitored at provincial level, is
implemented.]

Taking Parliament to the people is a democratic process to understand
clearly the needs of our people and for the people. There is no way that we
can isolate our people. One of the critical and most urgent challenges is
to accelerate the programme of ensuring the homeless and those who live in
squalor will have decent houses built on well-located land, and have access
to basic services such as water, sanitation and electricity.

Local government needs to reorientate themselves in order to deliver better
services to communities. The municipalities need to change the mindset of
their approach to people at management and operational levels. There must
not be a lack of motivation, lack of organisation, and lack of sufficiently
developed technical knowledge to deal with these problems. All municipal
officials must take action, meet deadlines, and take the best decisions in
the shortest time. The provincial government, local government and the
private sector must work together to create partnerships that respond to
the mandate given to us by the people of the Free State, and that is to
create work, combat crime, fight poverty and deliver services.

The Constitution ensures that local government is recognised as a sphere of
government that enhances the status of local government as a whole, and of
municipalities in particular, and gives them a new dynamic role as
instruments of service delivery. Rural people, and rural women in
particular, bear the largest burden of poverty in South Africa. If we can
change the inequalities and inefficiencies of the past, rural areas can
become productive and sustainable.

Good information is the basis of good planning. It is also a basic
requirement for monitoring and responding to poverty and hardship in rural
and urban communities, and for monitoring and alleviating environmental
damage. Appropriate information is therefore a powerful tool which rural
people can use to ensure that they can compete with the urban areas for
government funding.

AgriSA het nou die dag uit ’n vergadering met die nasionale Minister gestap
omdat hulle kwansuis nie genoeg inligting het oor plaaswerkers nie. Ek wens
hulle kon hierdie verslag van die NRP in die hande kry en daar gewees het
toe die plaaswerkers opgestaan het en hul name en klagtes in die
vergadering geopper het oor hoe hulle mishandel word, en hoedat die howe
nie aandag aan hulle gee nie. Dit is baie belangrik dat ons aandag daaraan
skenk en dat AgriSA hierdie inligting kry sodat hulle kan wegdoen met die
verskonings wat hulle aanbied. Ek will ook praat van die hoë persentasie
van veediefstal wat daar plaasvind en dit moet ook aangespreek word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The other day AgriSA walked out on a meeting with the national Minister as
they ostensibly did not have enough information on farmworkers. I wish they
could get hold of this report of the NCOP and could have been there when
the farmworkers got up during the meeting and gave their names and raised
their grievances about how they are ill-treated, and how the courts do not
take them seriously. It is very important that we give attention to this
matter and for AgriSA to get this information in order for them to do away
with the excuses they are making. I also want to raise the high percentage
of stock theft that is happening there and the fact that this should also
be addressed.]

We, as the ANC, understand that high levels of violent crime and fear
thereof undermine the freedom that we have struggled so long to attain. Our
sense of citizenship and common belonging, of autonomy and dignity, of
purpose and agency, and of hope and possibility are all eroded by the sense
of powerlessness and victimhood that violent criminals inflict upon us in
our streets, homes, schools, and communities. Violent crimes also deter
investment, and constrict entrepreneurship. It does threaten the
achievement of our social and economic objectives.

The relationship between the communities and police is an essential element
of an effective crime-fighting strategy, which has had considerable success
in improving relationships between the community and the police, but
confidence in the criminal justice system is also undermined by poor
service delivery. However, a developmental approach to crime prevention
must be understood as including an emphasis on law enforcement. Fighting
crime is essential if we are to promote investment, tourism and job
creation.

Hon Deputy Chairperson, community police forums must remain an essential
element of our crime-combating strategy. When residents establish
neighbourhood watches, provide police with information, report suspicious
activities, and watch the house of a neighbour who is away, they are
helping to prevent crime, and helping the police to combat crime.

If I look at transformation in the world and look at crime from a world and
international perspective, I must join the President of South Africa in
saying that crime in this country is not out of control. We must thank the
SA Police Service for their dedicated service under extremely difficult
circumstances. To the policemen and women watching over our streets, we
wish to express our sincere gratitude for the work you do daily in
protecting us. To this end, our crime-combating strategy must be designed
to do this over time through visibility and mobility. I thank you.
[Applause.]




            ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF VISITORS FROM DENMARK AND AMERICA


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I would like
to acknowledge our visitors in the gallery - the Danish and American
visitors. You are welcome in our House today. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Ms B Marshoff): Hon Deputy Chairperson of
the NCOP, members of the House, distinguished guests, colleagues, ladies
and gentlemen and our visitors that are walking out, you are very welcome -
as the Deputy Chairperson has said.

The tabling of the report on Taking Parliament to the People in the Free
State in this distinguished House, demonstrates to our people the
seriousness we attach to our community outreach campaigns. It means that
the NCOP does indeed carry out its oversight role in a visible and
transparent manner.

All the issues raised by our people from 6 to 10 November last year are now
tabled in this highest platform, which represents our people. This is a
perfect demonstration of participatory democracy, which our people have
voted for. And I want to thank all the hon members who have participated in
this debate.

During the visit of the NCOP to our province, we emphasised the strategic
role of the NCOP as the only institution which straddles all three spheres
of the co-operative governance construct and therefore placing it at an
advantageous position of keeping an eye on the process that must integrate
legislative and executive decisions at all levels of government.

It would also allow the NCOP to oversee the effectiveness of government
programmes towards improving the basic conditions of our people, and to
make recommendations on how improvements can be made towards our collective
effort of creating a better life for all our people.

The theme of the visit, “All shall have equal rights”, adequately captured
the collective dreams of our people as represented through the Freedom
Charter.

Our people came in their numbers to interact with their representatives
located at various levels of government.

For us, in the provincial government and the legislature, this was the
continuation of the work we are already doing - of taking both the
executive council as well as the legislature to the people.

We have, through a similar campaign, covered the length and breadth of our
province and in the process interacted with communities in each and every
single municipality in the Free State.

Reports of such interactions are thoroughly discussed in the executive
council and get tabled in the legislature, and we always endeavour to
embark on follow-up and report-back sessions, in the same way that the NCOP
did last Monday, where a delegation, together with members from the
legislature and the executive councils and the communities that raised
specific issues, met again in Parys to discuss a way forward on addressing
their concerns. [Applause.]

Such a practice is consistent with our developmental communications
approach where, at all times, our interaction with our communities must
encourage an approach which is responsive, where we give feedback, and
where community participation is always emphasised.

Through the various sessions of the NCOP visits organised along different
themes, our people raised a number of issues which ranged from
socioeconomic to community development issues. The identified themes
ensured that we covered as diverse and as broad a spectrum of issues as
possible, which in essence define the broad mandate of our developmental
state.

Our communities in the agricultural sector drew our attention to problems
such as evictions and the poor working conditions of farmworkers, lack of
support for emerging farmers and lack of appropriate access to roads.

Our youth raised concerns regarding access to information, jobs and skills
development. Our overall social security system was interrogated and
shortcomings were raised such as inadequate ambulances, access to ARVs,
accessibility of government buildings for people with disabilities,
facilities for special schools, social grants and the overall problem of
access to Home Affairs to apply for identity documents. The issue around
the provision of basic services such as water, electricity and sanitation,
as well as the issue about capacity within municipalities, the alleged
nepotism and corruption, as well as poor communication were also raised.

It is by no coincidence that, when we delivered the state of the province
address on the February this year, hon Smith, we sought to respond in more
practical ways to these and other concerns of our communities.

More detailed and specific responses shall emerge as well during the
tabling of our departmental budget votes, which commences on the 13th, and
my own budget vote that will also be tabled on that day.

We also just want to respond to the issues that were raised with regard to
the concerns that members had. On the issue of roads, I am sure that –
members, you have not been back to the province since 10 November - if you
were to come to the province now, you would see a hive of activity around
road construction. Just this past week, I travelled throughout the
province, not because of the preparations for your visit, but because of my
normal duties.

At one stage, I was asking myself if these were really the Free State roads
that we were building and where the money suddenly came from. I can assure
you, the money is from our normal budget. What we have done was even to
bring forward some of the programmes that were budgeted for this financial
year, and we started with them in the last financial year, especially in
the Fezile Dabi region where there’s a lot of activity around road EPWP.

We have also agreed that the co-ordination, monitoring and impact
assessment of the EPWP will be co-ordinated in the Office of the Premier.

We have allocated enough money to Public Works regarding roads and
transport. The budget for this year is almost R900 million, and in the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period we will reach a R2 billion
allocation to catch up with some of the backlogs.

Concerning the issues around water and electricity, and the Heilbron farm
specifically, an additional amount of R500 000 has been allocated and we
are also ensuring that there is someone – an extension officer - that would
give continuous support to those young people there. [Applause.]

We also have the Seda operating in the province now and from the Office of
the Premier we have a business support programme, and we will ensure that
they also benefit from the training through that programme.

On co-ordination and co-operative governance, we are devolving our cluster
system to the municipalities. I can just say that on Monday, we had a
Premier’s Co-ordinating Forum meeting where we met with the municipalities
and most of these issues were discussed. Our programme devolving the
cluster programme to the municipalities is well on track. So, our people
will benefit from them.
We are also addressing the issue of the farmworkers, evictions, conditions
of farmworkers as well as the issue of stock theft. Even last year and at
the beginning of this year, we had quite a number of programmes rolling out
through the province.

We’ve had a discussion with Agri-Free State and agreed on a programme
where, together with agriculture we will go into those districts and to the
farms to run education programmes for the farmworkers and also to address
the issues around crime such as the killings of farmers, stock theft, and
so on. So, this is a joint effort between the provincial government, the SA
Police Service as well as Agri-Free State.

I think because of a dialogue that has always been there, we would be able
to address the concerns of members. We have also given the names of those
people that the farmworkers mentioned to Agri-Free State. We will get
feedback from Agri-Free State, because they have assured us that if these
people are members of Agri-Free State they will definitely have punitive
measures. I don’t know what measures they will employ. But if they are not
members of Agri-Free State, they will also go into consultation with them
to improve the relationship between the farmers and farmworkers.

There are a number of issues. I wish I had more time just to respond to
most of the concerns that have been raised. I think there is quite a lot of
work that we are doing through the provincial government as well as the
municipalities and the different departments that go into these areas and
others.

We will not just concentrate on Fezile Dabi. We will also ensure that the
programme gets rolled out through the province, because this has been quite
a learning experience and a high curve for us. And we will ensure that,
through our multipurpose community centres that are now known as Thusong
Centres, we address some of the issues, give the necessary support and also
ensure that budget allocations go to where they are much needed. We will
also give support to municipalities.

Hon Setona, I would love to respond to the issues around the alleged
nepotism and corruption in municipalities. But I think we need a different
debate for that because there are a number of dynamics that are involved.
At times it is merely allegations and we sometimes follow up on such
allegations. At times it’s easy just to raise the alarm about nepotism and
corruption, and yet when there is an investigation you can’t get to the
bottom of it. There would be no names because people want to remain
anonymous. People don’t want to come forward and give you sufficient
information, and sometimes we just cannot follow up on some of these
issues.

But in cases where we find there are definite grounds for these
allegations, we do follow them up. We then ensure that the relevant
government structures that we have established also do that through the
special investigations unit, the asset forfeiture unit, and all these other
structures that government has established for us. We address these issues
where we become aware of them.

I just want to say that as we embark on our new programme of action for
this year and the rest of the term, we will ensure that we expand and
strengthen the areas around education and social development and also
enhance support with regard to sports and cultural activities and the
housing delivery programme.

Our total allocation in this financial year in respect of the above areas
represents almost 80% of our total budget over the MTEF period.

In conclusion, we just want to say thank you very much for the visit of the
NCOP and for giving us the opportunity to respond to this report. We have
distributed a copy of the report to all our MECs and also the
recommendations and implementation plan that we would work on so that it
becomes part and parcel of the performance management system of our Heads
of Department - HoDs - so that we can monitor and do oversight.

Also, regarding the mentioning of the Human Sciences Research Council’s –
HSRC - report and the public survey, yes, Bloemfontein definitely is the
best city to live in. The Free State is, and we can attest to that, the
number one province when it comes to service delivery and we will continue
to work very hard. The Northern Cape has a lot of catching up to do and we
will work very hard to ensure that we stay the province of choice for
everybody. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr J M SIBIYA: Hon Chairperson , hon Premier, hon councillors, my sister
from my province, Comrade Sheila Sithole, N’wa-Shope, Comrade Acting
Premier ... [Laughter.] ... comrades, ladies and gentlemen, in historical
terms, the ANC has not only been a liberation movement but has also been a
people’s parliament. Before 1994, the majority in this country had no
platform whatsoever to contribute towards the administrative affairs of the
land that affected them.

When the ANC came into power in 1994, a broader Parliament was created and
that in part was in pursuit of the first clause of our Freedom Charter
adopted in 1955 by our people which says: The people shall govern.

Vanhu va ta fuma. [The people shall govern.]

In an explanatory note, the second paragraph of that clause says in part:
All people shall be entitled to take part in the administration of the
country.

Vanhu va ni mfanelo ya ku nghenelela eka mafumele ya tiko. [People have a
right to have a say in how they are governed.]

We don’t want a situation anymore where laws are made somewhere, including
hell if it exists, and they only come to us for implementation. We do no
longer want that. Today the ANC has created a broader Parliament with a
constitutional mandate that includes the involvement of the people in the
affairs of the country.

Taking Parliament to the people is a tested strategy to give people access
to the inner workings of Parliament and give parliamentarians access to
interact with the masses. Our visit to the Free State last year, by way of
taking Parliament to the people, served a good and an important purpose.

Many of the residents of Parys and its outskirts came in large numbers. The
occasion was a fulfilment of a constitutional requirement. In the same vein
the opportunity was thereby provided for the government, both provincial
and local, to provide information to the electorate directly and for the
electorate in turn to have a chance to criticise the government where they
think things are not going well or to ask questions.

When the government answered those questions, they were actually
manifesting what one can call an interim accountability which is a
requirement for us to remain rooted among our masses and be with them all
the time.

When the government answers questions as such, it constitutes the hallmark
of what we call transparency. The time in South Africa is long gone, and
will never return, when decisions were taken in boardrooms, laws made
behind closed doors and the rest of the people of the country were called
upon and coerced into implementing and obeying them. You won’t see that
again.

Comrades, let me drop you a hint about something that you know but you did
not recognise. The philosophy of the ANC is very interesting. It says in
part that a human being is of the highest value in the whole universe. That
is the philosophy of the ANC and not mine. [Laughter.] It says in part
again, there are specific aspects of this human being which must never be
violated unless there are highly compelling reasons. It goes on to say
these aspects are as follows: firstly, dignity; secondly, human rights;
thirdly, honour; fourthly, free thought; and fifthly, self-realisation of
own capabilities.

It is partly due to this that we are an organisation that believes in
equality in everything; equality in all human endeavours. And it is for
this reason that we uphold the Freedom Charter as adopted by our people in
1955 and I want to quote three clauses - which are the second, the fifth
and the sixth clause. The second one says: “All national groups shall have
equal rights”. I am interested in the word “equal” there. The fifth clause
says: “All shall be equal before the law”. I am interested in the word
equal there. The sixth one says: “All shall enjoy equal rights”.
[Laughter]. The word “equal” is very important.

When we took Parliament to the Free State, we were honouring the
nonviolability of the human rights of our people residing in the Free State
as the philosophy of our own organisation says. We were also fulfilling a
constitutional mandate which says that in all the activities of Parliament
there should be involvement by the people -what we mean is participation,
if we want to speak big English. If we had not done that - I am definitely
convinced and I know all of you would agree with me, except those who
choose to think the opposite - not all our masses who were present there
would have managed to come to this Chamber to listen to us had we stayed
here. As a result, if there is anyone who complains about taking Parliament
to the people for whatever reason, let him or her be informed here and now
... [Laughter.] ... that as long as the ANC is in power in this land,
taking Parliament to the people will remain one of the most important
backbones of involving our people in running the affairs of the country.
Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): That concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question. The question is that the report be
agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall now first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the
delegation heads present? In accordance with Rule 71, I shall allow
provinces the opportunity to make their declaration of votes if they so
wish. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this
in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate
to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE: Vrystaat steun ook. [The Free State also
supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Gauteng accepts.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Iyavuma. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms S SITHOLE: Limpopo iya seketela. [Limpopo supports.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Kapa Bokone e e ema nokeng go menagane. [Northern Cape
supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Rev J TSELAPEDI: Bokone Bophirima le yona e e ema nokeng go menagane.
[North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Ms N PHENDUKA: The Western Cape supports.

Report accordingly adopted to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

     CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF THE RULES COMMITTEE OF THE COUNCIL

Order disposed of without debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, since there is no
speakers’ list I shall now put the question. The question is that the
report be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in term of section 65 of
the Constitution, I shall now first ascertain whether all delegation heads
are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the
delegation heads present? In accordance with Rule 71, I shall allow
provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so
wish. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this
in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate
to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE:  Iyaxhasa. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Mrs B Marshoff): Vrystaat steun. [The Free
State supports.]

Business suspended owing to a technical problem and resumed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Gauteng supports.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: What is happening is a disservice to this
House. It’s actually affecting the decorum of this House. We have raised
this more than several times. I will propose that a report be submitted to
the office of the presiding officers about the disservice which is taking
place here. We welcome it if there are new people who are taking
employment, but they must practise before we come to the Chamber. They
should not use the session of this House to practise on the members. I will
propose that as this is happening, it is allowed that the provincial
delegation heads vote by merely standing up and tabling their vote as per
the mandate of their province. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Chief Whip, hon members, maybe
it is important that we firstly ascertain the nature of the problem. Is the
nature of the problem operational; operational in the sense that whoever is
sitting there operating this thing is not capable or is the problem
inherently technical? Is it merely a technical deficiency of the system?

I think the report must entail that, so that we would be able to deal with
the problem adequately. I was just adding to the comments of the Chief
Whip. I hope the proposal of the Chief Whip is accepted in the light of the
conditions that we are facing. We therefore proceed. KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: KwaZulu-Natal agrees.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms S SITHOLE: Limpopo iyavuma. [Limpopo agrees.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga seconds.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Kapa Bokone e tla bo e sa batle tswelelopele fa e sa e eme
nokeng. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Rev J TSELAPEDI: Nyaa, re a dumalana. Re a tlatsa Motlotlegi. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Ms N PHENDUKA: Western Cape iyavumelana. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the report agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   DEEPENING THE DEBATE ON GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN THE WORK OF PARLIAMENT

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Chairperson and
hon members of Parliament, on Tuesday this week, Ghana, one of the first
countries in Africa to gain independence from colonial rule, celebrated 50
years of independence from Britain. This important milestone in the history
of Ghana coincided with the 200th anniversary of the abolition of slavery.

Through the leadership of Nkwame Nkrumah, Ghana blazed the trail in
accelerating the African movement towards freedom, which, in 1994, saw the
last of the nations of Africa under oppressive rule, South Africa, attain
freedom.

As Ghanaians took to the streets of Accra this week in celebration of this
epoch-marking event, it is with a deep sense of pride that, 13 years from
1994, we too are proud to have attained freedom. We are proud to have
attained freedom to be able to define for ourselves the future we want.

In 1945, at the conclusion of the United Nations Conference of
International Organisations in San Francisco, the Charter of the United
Nations was signed. In this charter, the united people of the world
expressed their determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women, and of nations large and small.

At that time, Ghana was still under British colonial rule, and only
attained its freedom in 1957. In South Africa, the policy of segregation
was still in force. And not to be outdone, two years later, in 1948,
apartheid was to be institutionalised.

I am saying this in order to locate the context under which we must
celebrate International Women’s Day 13 years into our democracy, following
a history of perverse politics devoid of any semblance of human dignity and
worth. I am saying this again fully aware that 13 years is a very short
time in the history of a nation. Examples abound in this area.

If we look at the United States, which is one of the world’s longest-
established democracies, the public debate occasioned by the presidential
candidacy of Barack Hussein Obama is clear testimony that only fundamental
transformation is required to engender the kind of national psyche needed
to heal a nation and enable it to resist racial or other forms of
prejudice.

Matsatsi ale a gore batho ba tlhaolwe go ya ka mmala wa letlalo la bona a
ile. [Gone are those days when people were discriminated against based on
the colour of their skin.]

Without a doubt, I am highly honoured to be able to participate in this
debate as we celebrate International Women’s Day which took place
yesterday. History has it that this date was chosen because a Prussian King
who had promised, in about 1848, to grant women the right to vote had
failed to live up to his word.

On 19 March 1911, over one million people marked, for the first time,
International Women’s Day by attending massive rallies to demand women’s
rights – the right to vote and to hold public office; the right to work;
the right to vocational training; and an end to discrimination on the job.

Our democracy might be young, but International Women’s Day on 8 March is a
day on which we should join the nations of the world in celebrating because
we have got something to celebrate.

I would like to briefly highlight some of the achievements of our young
democracy towards advancing equality amongst the people. As a nation we
have made strides towards redressing the imbalances that visited our
society, and in improving the quality of life of all citizens and freeing
the potential of each person. We have sought to promote the achievements of
equality, where nobody is discriminated against on the grounds of race,
gender, sex, pregnancy, or ethnic or social origin. We have sought to build
a society where gender imbalances that are a result of the kind of the past
we come from are deliberately corrected.

Our foresighted Constitution makes provision for the Commission for Gender
Equality, the CGE, whose function is to promote respect for gender
equality, and the protection, development and attainment of gender
equality. The CGE has the power to perform its functions, including to
monitor, investigate, research, educate, lobby, and to advise and report on
issues concerning gender equality.

This serves as an important mechanism for ensuring that we are constantly
seized with the task of transforming our society in its entirety, with
deliberate bias towards sections of our society that were discriminated
against, not only on the basis of their skin colour, but also on the basis
of gender. The CGE is clearly under a duty to monitor women’s access to
rights enshrined in the Constitution.

Our Parliament has the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of
Quality of Life and Status of Women, whose duty is to monitor and oversee
progress with regard to the improvement of the quality of life and status
of women in South Africa. It also aims to be an effective gender equity
vehicle with specific reference to the government’s commitments such as
those made in terms of the Beijing Platform of Action.

We also have the annual Women’s Parliament which involves a number of civil
organisations and ordinary civilians. In deepening the debate this morning,
we must look at the challenge of gender mainstreaming in the work of our
Parliament as being one of ensuring that decisions we take on behalf of our
people are reflective of the perspectives that women share.

It is understood that women and men have different approaches to problems
and priorities. Women’s perspective would be added to policy-making and
implementation by equal representation. However, we must acknowledge that a
focus on support and training for women politicians is extremely important
in order for them to make an impact and sustain that impact. If groups are
to share in policy outcomes, they must be part of the decision-making
process of that policy. So, women’s representation in the public sphere is
critical in placing women’s needs and interests on the policy agenda.

In the UN document Women in the UN of 2000, former UN Secretary-General,
Kofi Annan, wrote, and I quote:

  I cannot think of one single issue we deal with in the UN that is not a
  women’s issue. Women are every bit as much affected as any man by peace
  and security, by human security and human rights. It is, therefore, right
  and indeed necessary that women should be there to work towards these
  goals, with equal strength and in equal number.

We have moved to ensure that in our Parliament women occupy positions that
enable them to be part of the decision-making. We have ensured that we
increase the numbers of women we bring to Parliament so that we could
realise gender equity as an integral element in the transformation of our
society. Parliament occupies a central role in our democracy and in
directing the future of the country; hence, it is extremely important that
women occupy space in this important institution.


Earlier on, I said that we may be a young democracy, but we have advanced
in terms of ensuring that our democracy is an inclusive one at all levels.
We have a Parliament that, in 1994, saw it fit to put a woman at the helm
of the National Assembly. We have the current Speaker and Deputy Speaker of
the National Assembly, and the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP – all of them
women. Surely, we can teach a thing or two to many of the parliaments of
the world, including the centuries - old US Congress which celebrated the
election of the first-ever female Speaker of the House of Representatives
earlier this year.
We celebrated International Women’s Day knowing that, as the voice of the
people, we have worked tirelessly and continue to do so to ensure that
through maintaining a gender mainstreaming perspective, we involve women in
all aspects of our institution. To ensure that they participate as leaders
and beneficiaries of development ...

... asijiki, siya phambili [... we are not turning back, we are going
forward].

Ons onderskryf die waardes waarop die totstandkoming van ons demokrasie
gevorm is. [We subscribe to the values which gave rise to the realisation
of our democracy.]

Thank you. Ke a leboga. Baie dankie. Enkosi. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I must bring to your
attention that we have ascertained precisely what the problem is with our
sound system. The person who is up there is new and is not sleeping. It is
an overstatement. He is an official and he deserves respect. He is new and
he has just been left in that situation without guidance. It is not a
political issue. The admin will take note of that. It is important that I
must express it on record on behalf of the House.

Hone members, we are having a very important debate in the history of our
country; an important debate which is constituting one of the fundamental
aspects of our transformation – gender mainstreaming in the work of
Parliament. But the hon members of this august House will note that whilst
we are talking about gender mainstreaming the speakers’ list is not gender
sensitive. It is something we may have to look into in future, because
gender transformation is about the transformation of power relationships.
It is not about putting one gender up against the other. I call upon hon D
Robinson.

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, hon members, molweni nonke [good morning to you
all]. Today we celebrate International Women’s Day and also recognise the
progress that has been made in the lives of women in South Africa. However,
we also acknowledge that much remains to be done, and that many prejudices
that negatively impact on the lives of women need to be changed.

Now, what exactly is gender mainstreaming? It is defined as the process of
assessing the implications for women and men of any planned action,
including legislation, policies or programmes in all areas and at all
levels of public sector planning processes.

It entails developing strategies to ensure that both women and men’s
concerns and experiences constitute an integral dimension of the design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programmes in all
political, economic and social spheres so that women and men benefit
equally and that inequality is not perpetuated.
The ultimate goal is to achieve gender equality, not only in the law but
also in the home, at work and in this House. It’s not just about the number
of men versus women.

We need to examine all the organisational policies and practices of
Parliament closely, to see how they impact on men and women so that we can
really determine whether the policies are equitable and nondiscriminatory.
There should be monitoring and evaluation, particularly of something like
the Domestic Violence Act as gender-based violence is very common,
considering the latest official statistics which record an average of more
than 150 reported rapes per day. In addition to rape, there are other forms
of gender-based violence, including domestic violence and the more subtle
threats of psychological violence and intimidation.

There are, however, a couple more questions to ponder. Should Parliament
not have a sexual harassment policy? Are the working hours of
parliamentarians family-friendly? As legislators, we need to consider to
what extent the budgets that we pass allocate sufficient resources to
achieve gender equality and empowerment of women.

Let me focus for a moment on the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development as it is of particular importance in enforcing the maintenance
system and also in addressing gender-based violence. Can we claim, hon
Sibiya, that the country is truly free; that human rights and dignity of
all are respected when women and children suffer daily because of the
nonpayment of maintenance, because of the failure of the court system to
implement the laws and protect women and children from neglectful and
uncaring fathers?

We need to question why there are staff shortages; why the court system is
in shambles; why magistrates and prosecutors are overworked and
demotivated, thus not able to provide the kind of services that we should
expect in a proud democracy.

A desperate mother who had not received any maintenance payment for two
years wrote to me asking where are the additional court investigators who
are essential to maintenance cases. What has happened to the specialised
magistrates and trained prosecutors? And yet we read in the newspapers
yesterday that the justice department had underspent their budget by R600
million.

The 2004 annual report of the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development stated that the Child Maintenance Act was one of their flagship
projects. The annual report of 2005-06 reported the launch of Operation
Isondlo and its substantial success in raising awareness, and in tracing
maintenance defaulters. It records the appointment of maintenance clerks,
officers, interns, and so on, and yet chaos still continues.

Now, despite this flagship status and all the supposed activity, there is
no mention of maintenance in the 2007-08 Estimates of National Expenditure,
ENE. Why is there no mention of allocations or initiatives to address the
problems investigated by the task team? The ENE of 2006-07 states that the
Legal Aid Board sees women involved in divorces, maintenance and domestic
violence as a priority group, yet the reports give no statistics.

Government budgets are the technical instruments through which commitments
should translate into monetary terms. As legislators we need to question
whether our budgets are gender sensitive, gender neutral or perhaps gender
blind! Are we ensuring that government has allocated enough money and
people to implement gender-sensitive policies? Is our court system
functioning effectively?

Unfortunately, the answer is a resounding no, and women are the victims in
this day of freedom.

Do you know that there is a backlog of one year in the office of the family
advocate? That means that if there is a dispute about the custody of
children, there is no chance of a settlement for more than a year, as a
starting point. I know of a woman who has waited for five years for a
resolution, and still there is no payment. There is no food on that table.

Most men would pay if dealt with firmly and quickly, but the lax and tardy
approach of the courts teaches them the tricks of getting away without
paying. Maintenance is often withheld to punish women, it’s used as a tool
to exert power over them, but it is also the children who suffer and
struggle to survive.

There is a need for us to deepen the debate on democracy and on gender
mainstreaming as legislators and, as members of the NCOP, we are
particularly tasked with the job of oversight. We need to look at our
budgets. Do they take account of the special needs of women and children?
Do they ensure that there is indeed equality between women and men?

Let us look again at the implementation of our laws so that we do not fail
the mothers and children of this country. International Women’s Day must be
marked by determined initiatives on our part to make sure that we sort out
some of these problems that mean that people are not able to enjoy the
fruits of the true democracy. I thank you.

Mrs E S MABE: Hon House Chair, firstly, I would like to respond to whatever
Mrs Robinson was trying to say in terms of the emancipation of women and
seeing women being bettered. This is not a new norm; it is an old school of
thought.

Allow me to take you through the thoughts of a young black woman who once
wrote in a magazine, the 24th issue of Agenda. She said:

  In the old South Africa, there were two forms of separate development
  operating simultaneously. At the top of the power pyramid were white
  males. [You were not there.] At the bottom of the pyramid were black
  females and somewhere in-between were black males and white females.


You were somewhere in-between.

She went on to say that it is perhaps arguable as to which of these two
middle groups was relatively more discriminated against. Therefore, you
cannot come here and point fingers at other women instead of - at least -
joining hands with them in trying to make sure that women are emancipated.
[Interjections.]

Allow me to continue. As a black South African woman, let me begin by
appraising our Constitution, especially Chapter 9, the equality clause
under the Bill of Rights, without the implementation of which some of us as
women wouldn’t be afforded this opportunity. The core of our Constitution,
which is the equality clause, opens channels for us as women to participate
equally with men in decision-making originating from the Freedom Charter.

Since 1994, we have been honoured with a Constitution that is globally
recognised for its strong promotion of democracy and equality. The battle
of addressing gender imbalances became manageable through the role played
by our Chapter 9 Institutions, which became the custodians of our democracy
and equality.

Allow me to allude to our late Comrade O R Tambo when he said: “South
Africa will never be free as long as women are not free”. International
Women’s Day was declared in 1977 by the United Nations General Assembly and
it has been marked since then. It is a day for women’s rights and
international peace.

The principle of gender equality, as framed within the principle of
nonsexism, is central to the ANC’s programme of the National Democratic
Revolution. In fact, many activists have acknowledged that the basis on
which to judge the liberation of a country is to note the extent to which
women are free.

The concept of gender mainstreaming was designed to change structures of
gender discrimination. It was popularised at the 4th World Conference on
Women in Beijing in 1995, after democracy.

Democracy became a fundamental principle to achieve equality and requires
that all citizens, women and men alike, participate and be represented
equally in the economy, decision-making, socially, culturally and in civil
life. The European Union, EU, worked throughout the conference to have
gender mainstreaming given a prominent position in the conference’s final
focal point.

Believing that there is lack of emancipation if women are not represented
equally, the notion of gender mainstreaming became an established concept
in EU ever since.

During the early 1950s, the ANC developed new initiatives to assert women’s
rights as human rights. The Women’s Charter of 1954 was a landmark in the
process of asserting the rights of women and demanding freedom from
discrimination on the basis of gender.

Comrade Charlotte Maxeke, at a conference in Fort Hare in 1930, described
movingly and vividly what became known subsequently as the triple
oppression of a black woman. Women were discriminated against on the basis
of gender, race and also as labourers. As the ANC, when we talk about the
liberation struggle, we mean the fight against all three kinds of
oppression.

During the past two decades, we witnessed a renewed engagement by women in
political parties and the state. It is leading to an increase of women in
business, political representation and decision-making.

Internationally, today Rwanda is an extraordinary country where women who
were targeted for rape and infected with HIV during the genocide are
uplifting themselves and contributing towards the development of their
country. Rwanda became committed in the fight against gender discrimination
to such an extent that they have the highest percentage of women lawmakers
in the world today.

Liberia became the first African country to have a woman as President: Ms
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf. We have a woman as President of the Pan-African
Parliament, Gertrude Mongella. Our Deputy President in South Africa is a
woman, Mrs Pumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka. We have remarkable women who head
Ministries, and even some of the Premiers in our provinces are women.

In the National Assembly both positions of Speaker and Deputy Speaker are
filled by women. We have a Deputy Chairperson in the NCOP who is also a
woman. Lastly, but not least, the NCOP Secretary is also a woman.

The ANC Constitution underpins the notion of gender equality; that women
should be represented equally with men at all levels of government.

The South African government committed itself both in the Convention on the
Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women, CEDAW, and the
Beijing Platform for Action with the objective of improving the quality of
life and status of women.

Parliament’s Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
and Status of Women has made remarkable interventions in terms of improving
the status of women. It has participated in legislation and policy
drafting. It has the powers to review the passed legislations and analyse
issues that are gender sensitive.

The Joint Monitoring Committee had a mandate to monitor the use of applied
language of legislation to determine if it is gender sensitive. Thank you.

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Chairperson, hon Premier of the Free State, hon Members
of Parliament and all protocol observed. Through democracy, power relations
are transformed. Praxis has led to this popular agenda. However, we
continuously, with constructive critical observance, view into the three
dimensions of identity. They are social, organisational and political in
relation to this popular agenda.

Our debate today concerns gender mainstreaming in the work of Parliament.
Yet, there is a need to reach out constantly to include women beyond our
own social and organisational network. It is essential that we broaden our
sense of potential groups of women who share our interests and can enrich
our vision.

We are here for identifying a generative theme. By assessing the forces, a
clear view is required of the dominant agendas and synthesis of popular
agendas. A sequence is being anticipated and explored in more depth,
bringing us to the question: How many traditional hierarchies have changed?
The ID assumes that today’s topic in this House includes multiculturalism
which refers to promoting harmony.

We applaud and commend what has been done so far in relation to gender
issues, but the percentage of rape cases that are being investigated,
prosecuted, trialled and convicted is not satisfactory.

A paper presented at the national workshop on Enhancing the Participation
of Women in the Lawmaking Process held at the Old Assembly Chamber in
Parliament from 25 to 26 July 2001, reported that in other countries where
women play a bigger role in decision-making a serious constructive impact
is observed.

To translate these policies and declarations to become a reality in women’s
lives, is still a challenge.

With regard to violence against women, can we in Parliament play a positive
part by increasing our oversight role on this sphere in women’s lives? The
budget for the Commission for Gender Equality is to be looked at in a
critical way.

Before I say thank you, on a much lighter note for International Women’s
Day, the census says that there are more women in the country; so, why
doesn’t majority rule? Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Chairperson, hon Premier of the Free State, hon Acting
Premier of the North West, hon special delegates and hon members of this
House, let us deepen the debate. Hon Robinson, if we were all interested in
the welfare of our people and not engaging in political gimmicks, we would
all be in the know that maintenance is, firstly, a constitutional issue and
defaulters are pursued through magistrates’ courts. Most importantly, those
who defraud the government in this respect are pursued, arrested, charged,
prosecuted and sentenced. For further information, if you are interested,
please get in touch with me or the Department of Social Development. After
this sitting I can offer you the contact details. [Laughter.]

Let us deepen the debate. Today, we are celebrating International Women’s
Day throughout the world. We are celebrating the victories of ordinary
women as makers of our history.

We also note the first observation of a national women’s day in 1909 as per
declaration of the Socialist Party of America at the time. We honour all
further declarations brought about by various international gatherings and
formations in the movement for women’s rights and to assist in achieving
universal freedom for women.
We, at this time, realise the new dimensions of the gender debate within
our global dispensation. As we develop as a people, and as a globe, new
issues keep on emerging within the gender arena. These issues require
responses - responses aimed at normalising a society along gender roles.
These responses can only be helpful if they are thought through thoroughly,
debated properly and operationalised effectively.

South Africa can proudly proclaim to the world that we have made concrete
strides in empowering women and girls, making sure that 30% of black
economic empowerment funding is allocated to women; that the Expanded
Public Works Programme and community-based public works dedicate 50% of
their projects to women, for example, Women in Construction; passing
progressive legislation, for example, the Constitution and the Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act as the foundation of
our legislative framework; and establishing meaningful gender
representation within decision-making structures, especially within
government and legislatures. Hon Mabe has already alluded to that.

Today, we have achieved more than we ever had on the women’s front. Yet,
despite all this, we still feel a void when it comes to issues affecting
women in South Africa and the globe in general.

When we apply our minds to literature and relevant reports, it is evident
that women still bear the brunt of the social ills of our society. The only
way to ensure that we liberate half of our populace from the shackles of
gender oppression is to talk about it. Talk about it at our dinner tables,
in church gatherings, at social clubs, in our executive boardrooms and
bedrooms, and yes, even on those luscious green golf courses.

Let us deepen the debate on crime. Violence against women is in the worse
way possible. Yes, masijule ngengxoxo [let’s deepen the debate]. Violent
crime and rape are the thorns in the beautiful flowerbed of South African
women. We emphasise the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender Violence at the
end of each year. I congratulate the Deputy President as yesterday they
were launching the 365 Days of Action to End Violence Against Women and
Children.

We emphasise the 16 days by launching the campaigns through awareness
programmes, but what do we do during the other 300-odd days? Are we
allowing the thorns to rip through the flesh of our daughters and mothers,
painfully raping them of all dignity and worth?

The effects of crime are placing a silent, though urgent call on every one
of us to reach out and actively become part of the fight. Let us not wait
until it is on our doorsteps before we join the community policing forums
and other similar structures. Let us be proactive and start today.

Let us deepen the debate on patriarchy. The South African society is
characterised as a divided society along many lines: gender, race, income,
etc. We have been socialised in a male-dominated society with patriarchy as
the driving force in all spheres of our existence. We need to unlock the
effects of patriarchy on our societal system, and invent and create new
ways of conversing with the gender debate.

Let us deepen the debate on poverty. Rural women, prejudiced by
geographical location, find themselves as the most isolated group in our
society - isolated from basic services, information and debate. Together we
need to find the solutions to these difficult questions. As business,
government, gender machinery, the NGO sector and community-based
organisations we must unite to alleviate the plight of South African rural
women.

The South African gender reality should boldly be reflected within the
strategic plans of our government, departments and state-owned enterprises;
within the growth and development strategies of our provinces; within the
integrated plans of our municipalities; and within corporate boardroom
discussions and agreements. It should be supported by meaningful budget
allocations and implemented and monitored by ourselves. Let us deepen the
debate on slavery. [Time expired.]

Debate concluded.
The House adjourned at 11:31.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           WEDNESDAY, 7 MARCH 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

    (a)    Postal Services Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2006] – Act No 22 of
         2006 (assented to and signed by President on 25 February 2007).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:

        (a)      Government Notice No R.146 published in Government Gazette
             No 29644 dated 20 February 2007: Amendment of Treasury
             Regulations in terms of section 76 of the Public Finance
             Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Draft Rules submitted by the Rules Board for Courts of
             Law, in terms of section 7(2)(c) of the Criminal Procedure
             Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 42 of 2003).


        (b)      Draft Rules submitted by the Rules Board for Courts of
             Law, in terms of section 79(3) of the Promotion of Access to
             Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)     Amendment to Eskom’s pricing structure, tabled in terms of
        section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
        Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003) and supporting documents required in
        terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    a) Report on withholding of remuneration of Magistrate K Suliman, in
       terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
       of 1993).

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Immigration
   Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 6 March
   2007:

   The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the subject of
   the Immigration Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
   75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
   section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
   the South African Airways Amendment Bill [B 35B – 2006] (National
   Assembly – sec 75), dated 7 March 2007:

   The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having  considered
   the subject of the South African Airways Bill  [B  35B-  2006]  (National
   Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by  the  Joint  Tagging
   Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

                           THURSDAY, 8 MARCH 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 6 March 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6)(c), classified the following Bill as a section 77
         Bill:


         (a)     Finance Bill [B 5 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for
             2007 to 2010 [RP 23-2007].

        (b)      Strategic Plan of the National Development Agency (NDA)
             for 2006/07 to 2010/11 [RP 15-2007].
        (c)      Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency
             for 2007 to 2010   [RP 16-2007].

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

        (a)      Report of the National Commissioner of the South African
             Police Service (SAPS) for the period of July 2006 to December
             2006, in terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence
             Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).

        (b)      Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             of the President’s Fund for 2004-2005 [RP 25-2006].

        (c)      Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             of the President’s Fund for 2005-2006 [RP 252-2006].

    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2007
             to 2010.

                            FRIDAY, 9 MARCH 2007



ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Appointment of members to Standing Committee


    (a)     The following members have been appointed to serve on the
        Standing Committee established by NCOP Rule 256:


        Ms P M Hollander
        Kgoshi M L Mokoena
        Ms N Ntwanambi
        Mr A Watson
        Dr F van Heerden

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
        2007 to 2009.


2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the year
        ended June 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for the
        year ended June 2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


 1.    Report of the Joint Budget Committee on 2007/8 National Budget, dated
                               09 March 2007:





1.    INTRODUCTION

The Minister of Finance tabled the Budget for 2007/8, including the MTEF
for the 2008/9 and 2009/10, on 22 February 2007.The Committee’s mandate
regarding the Appropriation Bill requires it to consider the allocation of
available financial resources against government policy. This mandate is
distinct from that of the Portfolio and Select Committees on Finance, which
deliberate on the macro-economic, fiscal and intergovernmental dimensions
of the Appropriation Bill respectively.


The Committee has interpreted its mandate to mean that  it  should  consider
the following:
    • The expected impact of expenditure allocations  on  the  effectiveness
      and efficiency with which  departments  can  respond  to  government’s
      stated policy priorities; and
    • Whether departments are making the tough choices  required,  tailoring
      their  planned  expenditures   to   priorities,   choosing   effective
      strategies and seeking efficiency in implementation.

After studying tabled documents and conducting hearings the Committee also
reviewed earlier processes on the Budget, including the Medium Term Budget
Policy Statement during it’s deliberations on the Appropriation Bill.





2.    THE PROCESS

The Joint Budget Committee, the  Portfolio  and  Select  Finance  Committees
held joint hearings on the budget that started  with  the  briefing  by  the
Minister, the Director General and  the  Commissioner  of  Revenue  Services
(SARS). Between 27 February and 5 March 2007 the Committee received  further
submissions  from  National  Treasury  and  SARS,  economists  and   a   tax
specialist, organised labour and business  as  well  as  the  Department  of
Transport  and  Department  of  Health.  Due  to  changes  in   parliament’s
programme the Departments of Sport and Recreation  and  Public  Service  and
Administration were unfortunately unable to attend. These submissions  dealt
with the full range of issues raised in the Appropriation  Bill  2007/8,  as
well as other related issues. Specific  emphasis  was  given  to  issues  of
expenditure, infrastructure, capacity/skills and human  resources  as  these
have been identified as the major focus areas for governmental spending.

    • The capital expenditure budget in government has seen a sharp increase
      over the  recent  period.  Capital  expenditure,  which  is  currently
      directed  towards   massive   infrastructure   development,   provides
      government with the opportunity to grow the economy at a higher  scale
      to reduce poverty and  create  jobs.  As  such,  the  2010  World  Cup
      provides  government  with  a  valuable  opportunity  to   invest   in
      development, to address the priority of poverty alleviation.

Having applied the mandate to the Appropriation Bill and after applying  its
mind, the Committee has made several recommendations.


3.    MACRO-ECONOMIC ISSUES

Although macro-economic issues do not fall within the mandate of the Joint
Budget Committee, their impact on financial management and expenditure
requires the JBC’s consideration.  Increasing efficiency of revenue
collection has caught up with the State’s capacity to spend. The present
surplus results from revenue collection outstripping projections as
reflected in the Budget Review of 2006. This development provides an
opportunity for allocating more funds to infrastructure, social services
and crime prevention. The committee is of the opinion that the current
capacity challenges may constrain the efficient, effective and economical
expenditure of these increased funds.





4.    SUBMISSIONS TO THE JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE


Briefing by the National Treasury

The Minister of Finance  and  the  Director-General  (DG)  of  the  National
Treasury briefed the Committee on the 2007/08 Budget on 22 February 2007.

The minister and his team highlighted the key aspects of the Budget
2007/08. He noted that increased revenues and steadily improving economic
growth enabled greater expenditure in key policy areas, which included
investment in social and economic infrastructure, improvement in the
education and health services, the modernisation of justice and
administration services as well as long-term investment in social security.
Critical concerns raised by members included the design of the social
security reform, methods to improve the current shortage of skills needed
for economic growth and the need to improve export performance. Concerns
were also raised over the continued inaccessibility and lack of integration
of transport services, despite existing and planned improvements in
transport infrastructure.


National Treasury stated that government expenditure  had  grown  by  9%  in
real terms, due to the steady growth in revenue collection. This led  to  an
improved fiscal position and a recorded surplus for  the  current  financial
year. The committee welcomes this improved position resulted in  a  net  tax
relief of R12.4 billion and the abolition of retirement  fund  tax.  Greater
investments in health and education  to  improve  the  skills  capacity  and
improved remuneration of teachers and health workers are also welcomed.

The new reforms would need to include unemployment benefits, disability  and
death benefits, and savings  and  pension  would  be  based  on  a  standard
payment log of 15 to 18% percent of income of  all  workers  in  the  formal
employment sector.  A  wage  subsidy  would  be  introduced  for  low-income
earners to encourage employment creation and the improvement in the  working
and living conditions of low-income earners. This would  offset  the  social
security contribution of this group. The total cost of this system would  be
around R20 to R30 billion.


The Impact of the Allocations of the Division of Revenue

The recommendations by the FFC, and the responses thereto  by  the  National
Treasury, were considered by the JBC in respect to the Division  of  Revenue
2007 and taken into account as they related to the Appropriation  Bill.  The
Division of Revenue  aim  to  strike  two  critical  balances:  one  between
executive authorities and administration and  the  other  between  executive
authorities across spheres. The JBC  also  noted  the  recommendations  that
government did not implement. The JBC  believes  it  is  critical  that  the
confusion over the concurrent functions and responsibilities  of  provincial
governments and municipalities should be speedily resolved. There is also  a
need for greater coordination between spheres of government as  well  as  an
improvement in the monitoring and spending of conditional grants.



National Treasury briefed the Committee on the DoR and the 2010  FIFA  World
Cup Stadiums Development Grant, and the Bulk Infrastructure  Grant.  Clauses
were also refined to facilitate the project registration  of  the  Municipal
Infrastructure Grant.




Efficiency Group Briefing

The Efficiency Group’s submission  focussed  on  taxation,  which  is  being
dealt with by the Portfolio Committee  on  Finance.   The  Efficiency  Group
highlighted that the  increase  in  social  expenditure  in  health,  social
development, education and housing stood at 43% in real terms  in  1994  and
has increased  to  50%  in  this  budget,  which  represents  a  significant
increase.  it  further  noted  that  this  increase  with  the   significant
reduction in debt has increased funds available for public expenditure.


Bureau for Economic Research (BER) briefing

Bureau for Economic Research stated that there were  sound  fiscal  finances
and there were generally stable expenditure and tax  ratios,  implying  that
there were no dramatic fiscal effects. Attention  was  being  given  to  the
issue of savings and Government’s own savings were positive. There was  some
evidence of delivery in terms of infrastructure spending, but it  needed  to
be stepped up. On the downside,  the  combination  of  a  ‘dovish’  monetary
policy and a ‘stable’ fiscal policy at this  point  may  not  be  enough  to
address macro-economic imbalances reflected in the  current  account,  which
implied risk.


Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) Briefing

The Industrial Development Corporation stated that domestic demand had  been
a key driver behind the sector’s recovery in the past  three  years,  mainly
due  to  buoyant  consumer  spending  and  manufacturers  had   increasingly
switched to the lucrative domestic market. The remarkable recovery in  South
Africa’s overall economic performance since 1994  had  not  translated  into
significant job creation in  the  formal  non-agricultural  sectors  of  the
economy. The economy  had  become  less  labour-intensive  over  the  years,
although some reversal in this  trend  had  been  observed  in  more  recent
years.


The Impact of Issues of Taxation

The Portfolio Committee on Finance is dealing  with  the  briefing  made  by
Mallinicks and BUSA due to  its  focus  on  macro-economic  issues.  In  the
Committee’s opinion the resulting increased revenue  arising  from  economic
growth and robust collection will be  utilised  by  government  to  increase
expenditure in prioritised areas.

Department of Transport

The Department stated that the economy is growing and as part of a
concerted commitment towards the 2010 World Cup and the expansion of public
transport, a sharp increase in capital expenditure has been planned. The
department placed an emphasis on the revitalisation, maintenance and
expansion of existing and new infrastructure. The committee stressed the
importance of ensuring that the infrastructure development creates a
lasting legacy beyond 2010. In order to address commodity price concerns,
the department has, together with the Department of Trade and Industry put
macro-economic processes in place around the acquisition of materials.
Other strategies include improving local manufacturing to circumvent some
costs; local assembling; as well as securing up-front commitments where
bulk purchases are to be made.



On the issue of the alignment between government departments to maximise
the utilisation of funds, the department confirmed that interdepartmental
coordination and the cluster system is followed. These measures have
brought about much closer cooperation between various departments, although
this must be done at an accelerated pace.  The committee raised its concern
around the low integrated approach between departments in service delivery.




Key policy areas of the Department of Transport regarding infrastructure

    • World Cup support: public transport infrastructure
    • Scaling up of EPWP in the road sector with a budget
    • Improvement of strategic secondary road network
    • Regional road infrastructure development
    • Passenger rail
    • South African National Road Agency


The department expressed its satisfaction with the budget, which shows a
54% increase. Furthermore it raised the issue of the lack of the skills
needed in order to implement some of its key priorities.



The JBC considered the following:

    • In terms of transfer expenditure the department  is  doing  reasonably
      well and outcomes are dependent on the implementing agencies  such  as
      provinces, municipalities among others
    • In this regard JBC is concerned about the  lack  of  capacity  of  the
      implementing agencies to spend
    • The JBC further observed that the monitoring of implementing  agencies
      by the national departments are minimal
    • The pace to meet the deadlines, in particularly  the  2010  deadlines,
      may be hindered by lack of capacity
    • The EPWP are indeed labour intensive and  as  such  creates  jobs  and
      develops skills


After considering the above observations the JBC believes it is important
to monitor the expenditure challenges monthly, where possible and otherwise
quarterly and when necessary obtain departmental briefings to assist in the
committee’s oversight in these areas.



The Department of Health

The committee did not share the Department of Health’s optimism in regards
to the pattern of accelerated expenditure in the last quarter, which led to
a possible problem of fiscal dumping, notwithstanding the department’s
point that March transfers have been moved to December.



The department stated that though hospital revitalization has improved in
totality, funds allocated to revitalization are only sufficient to spend on
projects that have already been awarded tenders. Among the challenges they
face, are rollovers that are awarded too late for, as the DG stated,
effective expenditure, this includes provincial transfers. Furthermore, the
department assumed that the presentation of business plans would lead to
the required allocation of funds; given the emphasis placed on providing
business plans in previous years. The committee believes that the increase
of funds without the capacity to spend effectively and efficiently is not
the solution.



The JBC intends scrutinising the processes that led to these problems
raised by the department, in a joint engagement with Department of Health
and National Treasury, so that corrective measures can be taken to avoid a
recurrence of these problems.



The department noted an increase in a conditional grant allocation for
HIV/AIDS that led to more than 245 106 patients being treated in 2006/07
compared to the 28 393 treated in December 2004. The committee welcomed
this improvement. The department made it clear that this figure is small,
relative to the challenge the country is facing and pointed out that the
demand for resources is greater than the supply and noted that the time
will come when the system will not cope. The current policy requires that
the department provide treatment to all those patients who present
themselves and the DG noted the impact that the increasing numbers will
have on the department’s medium term expenditure projections. However the
department did indicate the role poverty plays and the importance of
supporting medication with proper nutrition.



GENDER CONSIDERATIONS IN THE BUDGET

The JBC also considered how far women, who are the greater percentage of
poor people, are directly taken into account in department’s allocations.
In this respect the submission from the Community Agency for Social Enquiry
was also considered when deliberating on the budgets. The Committee agrees
that there are weaknesses in making linkages between the various steps of
the planning, budgeting and monitoring processes.


The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development’s budget makes no
mention of maintenance in the 2007/08 ENE. The sexual offences courts are
not mentioned in the 2007/08 ENE apart from a target conviction rate, as in
2006/07, of 70%. The JBC believes that all departments and the EPWP, which
is one of government’s key programmes to address poverty alleviation,
should consider increasing their focus on women. The Department of Health
vote in the 2007/08 ENE states that 7 795 caregivers were trained in HCBC
in 2005/06, but does not state whether this was done as part of the EPWP.
The Department of Social Development, which also supports HCBC as part of
the social sector EPWP, provides no budget or performance figures on
delivery in this area in the ENE.


The JBC identified two aspects of the 2007/08 budget which are  particularly
supportive from a gender perspective. Firstly, the  increased  attention  to
bursaries and increased salaries for teachers,  nurses  and  social  workers
will benefit women because these areas  of  work  are  female-dominated.  To
date, the salaries paid to these workers have been far lower than for  other
jobs that require equivalent education and training.  Secondly,  the  above-
inflation increases  in  the  social  security  grants  will  benefit  women
because it is they, disproportionately who benefit from  the  grant  system.
However the JBC remains concerned at the lack of  gender  disaggregation  of
targets and indicators in the Estimates of National Expenditure.


6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

The recommendations focus on infrastructure and capacitation in its
broadest sense.

Infrastructure

    • The national departments should strengthen their monitoring strategies
      on provinces, municipalities and the agencies
    •  Parliament  should  prioritise  oversight  in  all  departments  with
      significant infrastructure allocations which should furnish parliament
      with detailed plans with spending projections that are linked directly
      to timeframes and monitor and evaluate monthly expenditure trends  and
      conduct robust on site oversight function particularly  on  the  major
      projects
Capacitation

    • DPSA should monitor and  evaluate  the  government’s  current  general
      personnel retention guidelines. It should also identify  the  existing
      limitations  in  addressing  the  current  challenges  that  exist  in
      obtaining and retaining strategic professional scarce skills
    • Departments should adopt innovative approaches within  the  parameters
      of the conditions of service
    • National Departments must provide  uniform  norms  and  standards  and
      service delivery plans to monitor
    • Parliament welcomes increased allocations. The critical responsibility
      is for parliamentary committees to strengthen their oversight  with  a
      focus on value for money, sustainability of  projects  and  impact  on
      communities.




BRIEFINGS & SUBMISSIONS RECEIVED


National Treasury
Financial Fiscal Commission
Efficiency Group
Bureau for Economic Research
Industrial Development Corporation
Community Agency for Social Enquiry

Report to be considered


