---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 23 October 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-10-23
---

                          TUESDAY, 23 OCTOBER 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:11.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                     SWEARING IN OF PERMANENT DELEGATES

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I wish to announce that as
a result of the floor-crossing period there were changes to the composition
of the Western Cape provincial legislature. Subsequent to the conclusion of
the floor-crossing period, the provincial legislature, as required by the
Constitution, had to appoint their permanent delegates to the National
Council of Provinces.

The following members were sworn in as permanent delegates in the NCOP in
the Chairperson’s boardroom on 19 October 2007. They are the following
members: the hon N D Ntwanambi, the hon N J Mack, the hon F Adams, the hon
H Lamoela and the hon W M Douglas. Mr Douglas is a new member. Where are
you, Mr Douglas? Stand up; let’s see you. [Applause.] Mr Douglas is from
the ACDP – am I correct. Alright.

                        SWEARING IN OF MS D ROBINSON

                               (Announcement)

Due to unavailable circumstances, the hon Ms Robinson was not sworn in with
the rest of the Western Cape delegation. I would like now to call on the
hon Ms Robinson to approach the Table for the swearing in.

Hon members will be aware that this is a very complicated system in the
NCOP. If there is a change in the legislature, even if one member is
replaced, all old members in the NCOP must be sworn in. But, anyway,
because it’s a change in that particular legislature therefore everybody
has to be sworn in again.

Ms D Robinson was sworn in as a permanent delegate.

          WELCOMING OF GRADE 10 LEARNERS FROM ST JOSEPH HIGH SCHOOL

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, before we continue with our
business, I want to announce the presence of Grade 10s from St Joseph High
School in the gallery. [Applause.] Quite a number of them have expressed
the wish that they want to be politicians one day. So be very careful, they
are watching you from the gallery. They want to know what it is like to be
a politician.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Norman Mashabane)

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, I rise on behalf of the ANC to move a
motion without notice:

    That the Council notes–

      1) with a great sense of loss the untimely passing  away  of  Comrade
         Fellow Fighter Norman Mashabane on that fateful Wednesday  evening
         of 10 October 2007;


      2) that  Comrade  Norman  Mashabane  was  a  member  of  the  Limpopo
         Provincial Legislature at the time of his passing away and that he
         served in our new democratic government in various  capacities  in
         his lifetime, including being an MEC  in  Limpopo,  Ambassador  to
         Indonesia and special adviser to the Premier;
      3) that Norman Mashabane cut his teeth in politics in the early 1970s
         and became part of the founding pioneers of the Congress of  South
         African Students, the founder and  leader  of  the  South  African
         Youth Congress and part  of  the  first  crop  of  the  leadership
         machinery of the African National Congress Youth League after  the
         unbanning of the liberation movement;


      4) that he  contributed  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  ANC  and  SACP
         structures and served  in  various  leadership  capacities  within
         these structures within Limpopo;


      5) that, as a  son  from  a  working-class  background,  Norman  also
         participated in and led  the  trade  union  movement  through  the
         National Union of Mineworkers;


      6) that he had a good grasp of the relationship between the  national
         and class contradictions within our national democratic revolution
         and appreciated the dialectic of unity and  the  struggle  of  the
         opposites which defines the tripartite alliance; and

      7) that Comrade Norman is survived by his wife and four children.

Mokgapa o mogolo o wele, dithaga tša lla botsororo. Ke a leboga.
[Chairperson, I so move. I thank you.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     CONGRATULATIONS TO SPRINGBOK RUGBY TEAM ON WINNING RUGBY WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

     1) congratulates Amabhokobhoko on winning the Rugby World Cup in France
        last Saturday;


     2) notes that the welcoming  of  the  team  today  at  O  R  Tambo  was
        electrifying;

     3) further notes the role that this winning has played in unifying  our
        nation;

     4) pledges to work for the sustenance and development  of  that  unity;
        and

               5) thanks the nation for  the  unwavering  support  for  the
                  team.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, Chairperson. I was going to rise
on the same motion, but our Rules don’t allow that – although I was going
to do it on a much higher note than what Mr Tolo did. [Laughter.]

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, I am rising on a very high note. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Not on the same motion, please!

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                            (The late Lucky Dube)

Mr E M SOGONI: No, I am rising on a very low note, Chairperson. I move
without notice:

   That the Council –

     1) notes –

        (a)      the brutal and senseless murder of one of the outstanding
               sons of Africa and a great ambassador of our people, Lucky
               Dube;


        (b)      that he was a legend who for many years preached peace,
               compassion and goodwill through his music and continued to
               inform the peoples of the world about the brutality of the
               apartheid regime and its forces; and


        (c)      that his music, which embodied his creative spirit, borne
               out of love for his country and the determination for a
               better South Africa, has earned him many accolades and
               captured the hearts of many people across the world; and


     2) takes this opportunity to express to the Dube family, especially
        his wife and children, its deepest condolences and to wish them
        strength in this trying and difficult moment.

May his soul rest in peace and his music and loving memory console us.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   ELECTION OF ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON

The Chairperson called for nominations.


Ms Elizabeth Dipuo Peters, seconded by Mr Ebrahim Rasool, nominated Mr
Phaswana Sello Moloto for election as Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces.


The Returning Officer reported to the Chairperson that the nomination paper
had been properly completed.


There being no further nominations, the Chairperson declared Mr Phaswana
Sello Moloto duly elected Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces.

The ROTATING DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON (Mr P S Moloto): Thank you very much, hon
Chairperson. The leadership of the National Council of Provinces and all
hon members of the House, it is my pleasure and privilege to be addressing
you on this occasion on this important day of the election of the Rotating
Deputy Chairperson of the House.

Obviously, this is not a new thing and I’m not the first to be elected. I’m
going to learn from my colleagues who preceded me. I’m looking forward to
hearing more about what the job entails when Mr S’bu Ndebele gives his last
speech. Thank you. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF KWAZULU-NATAL (Mr S Ndebele): Chairperson, I am happy to
endorse the person that Premier Elizabeth Dipuo Peters and Premier Rasool
proposed and we want to wish the new Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP a happy term of office.
When the hon President, Thabo Mbeki, was addressing the NCOP earlier this
year he said that it is our duty as the NCOP to inform citizens about the
work of Parliament, to provide citizens with an opportunity to see
Parliament in action and be able to speak to its members and members of the
executive directly, to make citizens aware of the impact that public
participation can have on political processes and to enhance the ability of
the NCOP to oversee the implementation of national policies and programmes.

With the leadership that we have and the addition of Premier Moloto we are
confident that this process will go forward powerfully. I wish to add my
voice and thank you and thank the members for the support and understanding
that I had in my stint as a Rotating Chairperson of this House. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Nksz B N DLULANE (Egameni leNkulumbuso yaseMpuma Koloni): Mgcinisihlalo,
ndisukumela ukuthetha egameni likamama uNkulumbuso, uNosimo Balindlela.
Siliphondo laseMpuma Koloni sithi “Huntshuu!” kuwe, Nkulumbuso Moloto.
Singa esi sihlalo sijikelezayo onyulelwe kuso singade sizale into,
mhlawumbi iqale ngawe lo.

Kudala sibanyula oosihlalo ababolekisana ngesikhundla, asizange khe sibone
namnye kubo esiza kuthetha nathi. Ngoko ke siyiMpuma Koloni siyayinqwenela
into yokuba kude kwenzeke into, singaninyuli nje kungabi kho nto yenzekayo.
Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)
[Ms B N DLULANE (On behalf of the Premier of the Eastern Cape):
Chairperson, I rise to speak on behalf of Madam Premier, Nosimo Balindlela.
As the Eastern Cape province, we say: “All the best” to you, Premier
Moloto. May this rotating position that you have been appointed to bring
with it new changes, beginning with your tenure.

We have been appointing rotating deputy chairpersons for quite a while now,
but none of them has ever come here to address us. Therefore, as the
Eastern Cape, we wish that something good could come out of your
appointment, so that we do not just appoint you and nothing comes of it.
Thanks. [Applause.]]

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, on behalf of the Free State I would like to
congratulate the hon S Moloto, the Premier of Limpopo, on his election as
the Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP and wish him everything of the
best. Thank you, Chair.

Mr M NKOMFE (Gauteng): Comrade Chairperson, may I tender an apology for the
Premier of Gauteng who could not be here. We take this opportunity to
congratulate Premier Moloto on being elected as Rotating Chairperson of the
NCOP.

We do want to raise two things: firstly, in the context of broadly
reviewing our governance sector, we think that we should assess the impact
and the effectiveness of this institution of Rotating Chairperson of the
NCOP so that we suggest ways in which it could be effective. Members will
know that the original purpose was also to bring the executive into the
scene, so that it is briefed and mobilised with regard to what is happening
in the NCOP. That we want to raise quite sharply.

Secondly, we want to strengthen our newly adopted six-week cycle in order
to give provinces sufficient time to comply with their rules and those of
the National Council of Provinces.

Once again, hon Premier Moloto, congratulations on your election as new
Rotating Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr T Makwetla): Thank you very much for the
opportunity, hon Chairperson. Hon members of the House, our Ministers, I
also join the voice of those who have just congratulated the Premier of
Limpopo, Phaswana Sello Moloto, on his appointment as Rotating Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP. In the same breath, I also want to congratulate
the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal, the hon S’bu Ndebebele, on what he considers
a successful stint in the Chair. [Laughter.]

The business of today’s sitting, I believe once again, as the comments that
have just been made, brings discomfort to many of us, members who are full-
time delegates and the special delegates of this House. I say discomfort
because of what one can refer to as a contradiction between theory and
practice of the NCOP, a contradiction between the constitutional design and
mandate of the NCOP as an institution and what has been established as
practice over time.

We are here today to elect the Rotating Deputy Chairperson. The question
that must be asked is: For what good reason is this House deciding to do
so? I believe there must be a good reason why the Rotating Chairperson was
conceived to be a necessary role-player in the proper functioning of the
NCOP. But the practice, of course, has still to reveal the motive why, in
the crafting of this institution, there was wisdom in having a Rotating
Deputy Chairperson.

I have not learned, in the last three years that I have been a premier,
much to understand what it is that the Rotating Deputy Chairperson does,
such that, should I also be privileged to hold this seat, I’d actually know
what is expected of me. [Laughter.]

When we celebrated the tenth anniversary of the NCOP, it gave many of us
hope that some of these questions would be entertained and answers provided
such that we actually got the NCOP to function in a manner in which we all
understood, instead of just doing our duties by simply going through the
motions.

Talk of a review of the 10 years offered us hope because, indeed, to avoid
this discomfort that we are feeling here today, it is important that we do
something that begins to add value to the institutions responsible for the
democratic dispensation of this country. I believe that when the NCOP was
conceived, it was with a very good reason that it would bring value and
enrich our democracy, and this means that the challenge still remains.
There is work to be done by the premiers who are leaders of the provincial
delegates, the special delegates who from time to time visit these Chambers
here and our full-time delegates. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, premier. By the way you were the
only one from the North West who was at our summit for the whole two days,
and once more I thank you for attending the summit. Your participation was
great and I think together we can achieve a lot. Thank you very much.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Ms D Peters): Chairperson, like my
colleagues, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Premier of
Limpopo, Mr Sello Moloto, on his election as the Rotating Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, and equally so I would like to really understand
the role of this position. I also want to join others who are saying that
we are in this ceremony called the “hello and goodbye ceremony”, saying
hello to the new Rotating Deputy Chairperson and goodbye to the outgoing
one.

I also still have to learn and to hear about experiences and lessons learnt
by the previous Rotating Deputy Chairpersons. I would want a situation in
which we can really have a platform from which we can hear from those who
came before you, hon Sello Moloto, so that we will be able to say we can
make a meaningful input through this particular Chairperson.

Premiers are leaders of delegations. Is it enough for us to come to the
opening of Parliament, to come when there are joint sittings, to come when
it is the NCOP outreach programme when the Deputy President or the
President addresses the public and we go there and speak? We don’t even get
feedback on the issues we raised on those particular platforms. I think it
is important that we understand what the roles are of all the things we are
doing.

It is important that we not only have a platform from which we can share
experiences, but that we also share through your office - the office of the
rotating Deputy Chairperson - inputs into the Rules Committee of the NCOP,
because it is through that platform that the inputs of the executives in
the provinces can be heard. I think it is important that we really start
making meaningful inputs through the Chairperson’s or the Rotating Deputy
Chairperson’s office.

I want to take this opportunity to congratulate you and to wish you well so
that this time next year when we elect the next Rotating Deputy Chairperson
we should not say once more “another rotating position” and then we just
come here and say “I was once a Rotating Deputy Chairperson”, because one
day we will arrive at a situation in which somebody says, “Thank you for
nominating me, but I beg to decline” and we wouldn’t want to be in that
position. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Premier. Next year this time we
will be letting the Premier of Mpumalanga ... [Laughter.] ... be the next
Deputy Rotating Chair.

Moruti P MOATSHE (Bokone Bophirima): Modulasetulo wa Khansele ya Bosetšhaba
ya Diporofense ke tlisa maitato a Tonakgolo ya Bokone Bophirima. O
reteletswe go goroga mo kokoanong e go tlisa malebo le masego ka ntlha ya
mabaka a a se nang bothibelo.

Re le porofense ya Bokone Bophirima, re rata go tlisa keleletso masego go
Tonakgolo Sello Molota ka go fiwa manno a go tshwara jaaka Motlatsa-
Modulasetulo wa Thefosanyo, mme ra re go ena, tloga tloga e tloga kgale
modisa wa kgomo o tswa natso sakeng. Tshwaragano ke maatla, tlhaeletsano ke
lesedi. Pula! [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana speech follows.)

[Rev P MOATSHE (North West): Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, the Premier of the North West Province apologizes that due to
circumstances beyond her control, she could not make it to this House to
thank and to wish the Rotating Deputy Chairperson good luck.

We, the North West Province, wish Premier Sello Moloto good luck on his
appointment as Rotating Deputy Chairperson, and we are saying to him, “The
earliest bird catches the fattest worm”. Unity is strength, communication
is the key. All of the best! [Applause.]]

The PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Mr E Rasool): Chairperson and delegates to
the National Council of Provinces, I join you in congratulating the Premier
of Limpopo on being elected the Rotating Deputy Chairperson of this House.
I also take the opportunity to thank his predecessor for holding this post,
and if there is a measure of success it must be that he has not succeeded
in his term to shift this House to KwaZulu-Natal. [Laughter.]

I want to join in the discussion on the logic of this position. What did
those who conceived this position understand when they said that a member
of the executive should hold this position? I think that the hon Premier
Moloto assumes this position at a very important moment and can change the
history of the position. I think that never before has the country
discussed the role of provinces as much as it is doing now.

I think that there is a discussion that, to a large extent, takes place in
the popular media about the number, the sizes and the combinations of
provinces. I think that if there is an influential role for a member of the
executive to use in this House, it is to bring this debate right into this
House so that issues around functions, roles and a variety of other matters
- financing, revenue generation and those kinds of things - precede the
issues of form that are shaping this debate.

I think that this is a matter that the House should grapple with, and I am
hoping that the Rotating Deputy Chairperson will make it his business to
ensure that this debate takes place in this House. I fear, though, that if
he doesn’t do that, then the decisions will be imposed for us by some
department called Treasury, which is beginning already to shape the future
of the role of provinces. [Laughter.] I’m not here to pick a fight with the
Minister of Finance, because history has taught me that you don’t make a
judge angry and, in this case, Treasury should not be made unduly angry.

But, hon Rotating Deputy Chair, I think that this is a debate that should
be held and the moment has never been better for it. So, if everyone is
asking what your role is, I am putting an item on your agenda and you can
make great history in bringing that debate to this House so that we can all
discuss it objectively. Thank you very much and congratulations.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Premier Rasool. Hon members, that
concludes the election proceedings, but that does not mean to say our hon
premiers must leave. We are now getting to a very important session and
that is questions to the Ministers. You are allowed to participate by
asking follow-up questions. That is part of the job of a leader or a head
of a delegation, so you are allowed to do that.

Debate concluded.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

       Countermeasures to curb baggage theft and pilferage at OR Tambo
                            International Airport

115.  Mr C J van Rooyen (ANC) asked the Minister of Transport:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the seemingly frequently reported incidents
          of baggage theft and pilferage at the O R Tambo International
          Airport, the Airports Company of South Africa (ACSA) has taken
          any countermeasures to curb criminal activities; if not, why not;
          if so, what measures;

      (2)   how is his department assisting in this regard?         CO539E

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Thanks, Chair. Let me join the House in
congratulating Amabhokobhoko – Viva, Mabhokobhoko, Viva!

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: The reply to the question is as follows: Baggage
handling at airports involves three main parties, namely the airlines, who
are responsible for accepting checked baggage and have to ensure that it is
returned to the relevant passengers; baggage handling companies that are
contracted by airlines; and the Airports Company of SA, Acsa, that provides
infrastructure.

Acsa, in particular, recognises baggage pilferage as an issue of major
concern and works closely with all airlines, the SA Police Service and
baggage handlers in a co-operative way to ensure that passenger baggage is
secured. Due to the significant passenger growth at all Acsa airports of
around 16% this year and increased volume of bags, additional security
measures were introduced. These include, among other things, regular crime
blitz operations. Personnel involved in criminal activities are being
arrested and dismissed, their work permits confiscated and blacklisted,
ensuring that they will not be allowed to work at the airport again.

At O R Tambo International Airport, all airside staff members make use of
single-gate entry and exit, where they are searched on entry and exit. We
also use X-ray machines so that their belongings can be checked. A new
access permit system has also been introduced, allowing only authorised
individuals access to baggage areas.

Ongoing prevention operations include visible policing at all baggage
screening points as well as undercover operations. Covert closed-circuit
television cameras are installed in all baggage areas and all staff members
wear uniforms which contain a company code and personnel number for better
identification in the surveillance system.

Airlines are also encouraged to let their own staff supervise the loading
of aircraft baggage containers and to escort containers to and from
aircraft. Baggage statistics are compiled and received from the airlines
regularly, which assists in analysing trends and planning.

A baggage reaction unit and pilferage committee continually works with all
airlines to improve Acsa’s security performance. The Department of
Transport, through the Chief: Civil Aviation Security is constantly giving
Acsa strategic direction on addressing all those challenges. This is done
through the strengthening of the local airport security committees.

The Chief: Civil Aviation Security is also, at present, engaged in a policy
direction on how to define the future roles of private companies, airlines
and Acsa in an attempt to minimise the number of activities of private
companies handling the baggage at our airports. Thank you.

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Chairperson. I just want to check with the
Minister whether Acsa as a company is willing to provide, as an extended
security measure or surveillance system, the closed-circuit televisions,
because some of us that have lost luggage through pilferage, when we
checked, were told that such a system was not available and that the
employees there were not really identifiable either. The actual question
is: Is there any plan for Acsa to provide the closed-circuit televisions so
that they are actually able to identify the culprits? If so, how soon can
that be done?

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, I indicated in my reply that those
CCTV cameras are available and that staff members – even those that come
from the private sector - have to wear their uniforms with company codes so
that we can identify them. That system has been installed, especially at O
R Tambo International Airport, and is being installed in other airports as
well.

    Challenges faced by communities forming a trust other than a communal
                            property association

116.  Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for Agriculture  and  Land
      Affairs:
      (1)   (a) What challenges were faced by communities that decided to
           form a trust other than the communal property association after
           successfully claiming back their land and (b) how will her
           department advise communities in the future;

      (2)   whether she will make a statement on the matter?   CO2458E

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Hon Chairperson, the
response to part 1(a) is: The challenges of a trust other than a communal
property association are the nature of the trust, where the board of
trustees sometimes makes decisions without consulting the claimant
community, which is unacceptable, and possible fraud and self-enrichment by
the board of trustees sometimes result from that.

Secondly, to address these challenges we arranged training workshops for
legal entities of the relevant claimant communities. The training includes
issues of governance, leadership, financial management, organisational
development, group dynamics and technical assistance.

We are advising claimant communities to opt for a communal property
association precisely because the Communal Property Associations Act, Act
28 of 1996, gives the director-general of the Department of Land Affairs
the power to intervene should there be problems within the CPA. This is not
the case with a trust, because it is almost impossible to intervene in a
trust. The response to the second part of the question is: no. Thank you,
Chair.

  Reports of abuse of farmworkers in North West involving unfair dismissals
                                and killings

117.  Ms M P Themba (ANC) asked the Minister of Labour:


      Whether his department has had any reports of abuse of farmworkers in
      North West involving unfair dismissals and killings; if not, what
      measures are in place to prevent unfair labour practices in respect of
      farmworkers; if so, what steps has his department taken to (a) follow
      up on the matter and (b) prevent these incidents from happening in the
      future?     CO2459E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, I also want to congratulate my Premier
from Limpopo on being nominated and elected as the rotating Chair. I hope
he is going to rotate very well ... [Laughter.] ... because this reminds me
of a young boy who was dodging school when I was still a teacher. When I
asked him why he was dodging school, he said he was waiting for the school
because the geography teacher said that the earth was rotating. [Laughter.]
So, it may well be that we will wait for Sello to rotate, and until that
happens you won’t see him again.

The department has received reports of abuse of farmworkers in the North
West province, allegedly involving some unfair dismissals and killings. The
reports of abuse are received from time to time at different labour
centres. Some of the cases of abuse are reported to labour inspectors and
dealt with during inspections.

Basically, as an ongoing measure to prevent and address the complaints, the
inspectors are continually visiting farms to provide advice and information
to farmworkers and farmers, as well as to conduct routine inspections. In
some instances, we have what we call reactive inspections that we conduct
when we receive specific complaints.

In addition, proactive inspections in the form of what we call blitz
inspections are conducted. The recent ones were from 3 September to 7
September this year. In the department in the North West, the blitz was
conducted in the agricultural sector, and during that period we managed to
visit over 300 farms. We found that some of the farmers actually are not as
bad as others. We found many good farmers, but there are also bad farmers.

I raise this deliberately because it is important that we expose the bad
farmer, so that we don’t tar all the farmers with the same brush. That is a
very dangerous thing to do.

In instances in which farmers are found not to be complying with the laws
and regulations relating to safety and other conditions of employment,
relevant contravention notices and compliance orders are issued. In some
cases, the police are involved and prosecutions are sometimes recommended.

Coincidentally, the blitz was conducted just around the period during which
the reports of killings, cases of abuse and unfair labour practices on
farms were circulated by Cosatu in the media. Ultimately, Cosatu also
served the North West department of safety and security with a memorandum
highlighting the cases of abuse, evictions and other complaints pertaining
to farmworkers.

There are many examples that I can give. One of them was raised by Cosatu
in their memorandum – I am just saying to hon members that I spend a lot of
time also reading memorandums that are delivered to my office, and we do
something about them. Those who are communists will know that communists do
something about any criticism that they may get. We don’t defend ourselves.
We do something about it. If you do defend yourself, you are not a proper
communist.

A complaint was made regarding assaults of certain farmworkers with regard
to Mr Pitse. The department confirmed that a charge of assault was laid
with the police on this matter. The farm is in the area of Delareyville. I
am trying to avoid De La Rey, in case you think of the song.
On 3 October 2007 the inspectors visited this farm to investigate possible
labour-related issues. Due to the ongoing court case and other commitments,
we have secured an appointment for 18 October 2007. So, this farm will be
visited again, because currently he is ping-ponging between his farm and
the court.

Also, a case concerning the death of a farmworker, Mr Jan Molefe, was
reported to the department directly and a preliminary investigation was
conducted on 20 September 2007. A formal investigation is currently under
way, and we hope to finalise this matter by the end of this month. As you
know, we would then forward the report to the Director of Public
Prosecutions for a final decision on the way forward, as is normally the
case with all fatal workplace incidents.

A case involving unfair dismissal and eviction of Mr Motswapuleng and Mrs
Ditsebe was also reported. In some cases, like this one, the employees do
not come forward to report and it takes a while before the department is
able to acquire full details of the issues and parties. The report
regarding illegal evictions has been brought to the attention of the
Department of Land Affairs.

We also have the case of Bereng versus Van Heerden. This is another example
of a recent case that was investigated and forwarded to the Director of
Public Prosecutions for a final decision. The case was about a fatal
incident in which a farmworker was killed by a revolving, not rotating, PTO
shaft at a farm in the Stella/Vryburg area. The incident happened around
June 2006. The judgment in this matter was delivered on 15 October 2007.
The accused in the matter was acquitted of a charge of culpable homicide
and found not guilty.

These are some of the things that we sometimes experience. Unfortunately, I
don’t control courts; I don’t control judges. You all know what judgements
judges can deliver and they will always claim that they know the law
better, even if a person died. It doesn’t matter how many witnesses you
have.

But the deceased in the Bereng case was below 18 at the time of his death.
While the state was requested to include a charge of child labour, the
technicalities and seriousness of the culpable homicide matter could not
allow, at the time, enough time to prepare for this charge, because this is
something to be further pursued now that the case has come to an end. We
will then pursue the other charge of employing a child. We are trying to
really make sure that this Van Heerden goes to jail. We will do whatever it
takes under the sun to bring the case back, because he did employ a child.

Two years ago there was also a case of child labour detected and
investigated by labour inspectors in the Vryburg region, where the employer
was convicted and given an option of a fine of R15 000, of which R8 000 was
suspended for five years, or a one-year jail sentence. Only those who work
in those areas, like Chief Mokoena, understand them. I don’t understand
what it means when there is an option of a fine of R15 000, with R8 000 of
it being suspended for five years. I do not understand those things as I am
a just a primary school teacher. So I don’t understand such scary things.
[Laughter.] But we did our work. [Interjections.] I am a registered
teacher, my brother.

As part of strategies to address labour-market-related issues, the
Department of Labour in the North West established a tripartite structure
in 2003, which we call the North West Labour Market Co-ordinating Forum, to
promote dialogue and foster co-operation among the members.

The main purpose of this forum is to co-ordinate the effective
implementation of labour legislation in the province. It consists of
government, represented by the Department of Labour, the CCMA, labour,
represented by Cosatu, Nactu, Fedusa, as well as business, represented by
various chambers in the province, which include Agri North West, BMF,
Nafcoc and Westvaal. This forum meets on a regular basis.

In conclusion, as a way of directly addressing the current issues, the
provincial executive manager of the North West province and his team held a
meeting with the chief executive officer of Agri North West on 26 September
2007 to discuss and seek solutions to the  challenges that face the
agricultural sector in that province.
Amongst other issues raised was the need to create a structure consisting
of Agri North West, organised labour, the Department of Labour and other
sector departments like Land Affairs, Justice and the SAPS, to deal
specifically with issues of abuse, evictions and retrenchments on the
farms. I will table part of the answer, Chairperson. Thank you.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, it is interesting for me to hear what the
Department of Labour is doing around the Brits constituency. But I have
some reservations in that the farmworkers around the area are not being
served accordingly by the Department of Labour. There are really serious
problems where there is no communication between the labour department and
the workers on the ground.

I would ask the Minister whether it will be allowed for one to ask for the
reports from the labour department quite often so that we, as
constituencies, can do follow-ups of the incidents happening around the
area. This would also enable us to do oversight over the department, so
that work is done on the ground.

I have requested the department several times to visit in order to do some
checkups. I have realised that when that is not done, there are no regular
checkups, even in business areas in town and other areas as well, and
people are really crying very hard. Thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, I want to advise hon Members of
Parliament to do what I used to do when I was working in the informal
settlement of KTC. I was a policeman, a judge, a social worker, a teacher
and virtually everything. If there was a problem of crime, I used to get in
touch with the commander of the police station in the area. They know me
very well - that there is that MP who used to give us problems.

I used to visit workplaces in the area. There are not many, but in the
Philippi area there were a number of farms that we used to visit. There
were even cement works there, and the manager knew who Mdladlana was. I
don’t have a beautiful surname, and that probably scares people.

I will advise Members of Parliament that it doesn’t help to wait for the
Department of Labour when South Africa has 47 million people. We only have
8 000 staf, and out of that there are only a mere 1 000 inspectors. The
only route that can help us, as I was indicating, is a body like Cosatu,
for instance, which submitted documentation to us and in terms of which we
were able to follow it up. That is all that I need.

Members of Parliament do not even have to go to the offices of the
Department of Labour. They have access to 120 Plein Street, Number 18,
where they can submit a dossier and we will follow it up. There are many
Members of Parliament who have done that. If they are willing to stand up,
they can testify to this effect. I respect the information that I get from
them and I will not quote their names. We just follow up on the things that
hon members give us. That’s all.

We will only succeed if we work together. For instance, here we are
proposing that there must be a forum which will involve Agri North West,
organised labour, the Department of Labour and other sectors, because in
some of these forums we find people evicted from the farms, and that has
nothing to do with the Labour Relations Act per se. It therefore means two
departments must work together.

When I went to the north of KwaZulu-Natal, to places such as Dannhauser,
Newcastle and Vryheid, I actually discovered that some of the farmers in
that area are members of the SAPS and some are also magistrates. Therefore,
you report to your buddy ... You know what I mean. And then, as a result,
we end up with this difficulty.

I crisscrossed that area together with the late MEC for agriculture in
Kwazulu-Natal, Dumisani Makhaye - may his soul rest in peace. It helped.
The only absence was from the police. People in those areas still want the
police to come, together with labour and agriculture, and in some way we
will manage to rock that area.

I know that we have not managed to resolve all the problems there. So, I am
really appealing that we work together in order to resolve some of these
problems that affect our people. The cherry on top is that all I will need
from you - any Member of Parliament in the constituency in which he or she
is - is to say you have collected workers in your area and you want an
official of the Department of Labour to come and address them about their
rights.

I will provide a car and accommodation for the official, never mind what
the DA says about how much we pay and how much we pay for the teas that we
provide them. I will provide them with accommodation because that is our
job ... [Interjections.] ... and lunch as well, yes Ma’am. [Laughter.] I do
not control prices either. That a loaf of bread was R30 last year and this
year is R60 is not a matter that is controlled by me, but it helps me to
implement socialist policies in future so that I can control prices. Thanks
to the DA for giving me an idea.

But, otherwise, all Members of Parliament can invite us. We are more than
willing to assist you in your constituency. Just provide people and tell us
where they are. The ANC Women’s League has done it; the ANC’s Youth League
has done that. I can name all other people who have done this. Please do
it. [Interjections.] Everybody did it.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, I am also a farmer, so I was quite delighted
to hear that there are some good farmers as well. What I would like to know
from the Minister is: How does the Minister judge the farmers in general as
a percentage? How many are good farmers, and how many are bad farmers? I
would also like to ask him why the bad farmers aren’t charged in court. Why
do we see so few of these farmers actually being put in front of a
magistrate or a judge? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, I hope the hon member ...

... het lekker geluister ... [... listened nicely ... ]

... if there is such a word in Afrikaans.

Ons moet luister. [We need to listen.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hulle sê “goed luister,” nie “lekker” nie.
[They say “goed luister” (listen carefully) and not “lekker luister”
(listen nicely).]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Goed! Aandag! Gedagtes! Dit maak ons oop! [Good!
Attention! Thoughts! Open your minds!]

I did say that we have taken these farmers to court and I did say some were
fined, and I did say some received sentences suspended for five years. I
did say that. Therefore we do take them to court, but there are other
problems that you find in court. When a person receives a suspended
sentence for killing someone, what do you do? There’s nothing that I can
do. However, there is work that you and I can do, because if we don’t work
together and talk to our people together, we are going to get into
difficulties, because you yourself will become a bad farmer because of a
bad farmer.

So, the good one must influence the bad one. That is why I don’t preach the
gospel of hell. I preach the gospel of heaven. I don’t want to participate
in anything that has hell in it. So, if you are a good farmer, work with me
so that we promote the things of the Kingdom of God. Those other farmers
will come back when they see the good that we ourselves do.

We indicated also, hon member, that in the visits to the North West
province, we inspected over 300 farms. We found that 252 farms were making
a great attempt to comply with the law, but we have these 113 which are
creating the problem out of the 366 farms. Therefore, we must deal with
these 113, because the media does not pick up on the 252 that are doing
well. It picks up on the 113 that are doing badly, because that is what
sells in the media. That is what is juicy for journalists, and not the good
stuff.

I hope that, one day, I will go with some of the journalists to heaven.
Hallelujah!

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I hope this falls within the scope of the
question raised. There is a member who was dismissed from the labour
department in my constituency, and the matter was taken to the Commission
for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration. This person managed to receive
a ruling that he must go back to work, but the department appealed to the
Labour Court – I don’t know the wording they use, “revision” or something
like that. This dragged on for about three to four years before it could be
taken up - until the time that this person came to the constituency offices
to report this matter to us. Then I had to help this person so that the
matter could be revived once more.

It was taken to the Labour Court where the Labour Court decided that the
person should be reimbursed for at least 12 months, but should not be
reinstated. We had a problem with that – that he was not to be reinstated.
But it is now about six months later and the money that was agreed would be
paid to this person has not been paid, even up to now. That gives me a very
serious problem as a person working in a particular constituency, trying to
help the people at that level. I mention this because it is really
frustrating.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I don’t want to go to hell. I want to go to
heaven, but that follow-up question has nothing to do with the question
before us. In my good-spirited heart, I want to ask the Minister whether he
really wants to get into that, but it has nothing to do with the question
before us.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: You’re right, it has nothing to do with the
question. I am just as frustrated as he is. What frustrates me is what he
says, because I have made an offer. However, I have some idea about the
case so, honestly, if it is said, hon member, that that person must be
refunded or reimbursed but not re-employed, I have no control over some of
these court issues. The only thing I can offer, if this House were to allow
me, is that I will tell this House what that person has done. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You don’t have to get into that.

  Measures to ensure continued utilisation of noncore assets disposed of by
                           state-owned enterprises

118.  Ms M P Themba (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      Whether, in light of the fact that state-owned enterprises are now
      focusing on their core businesses and embarking on the disposal of
      noncore assets, any measures are in place to ensure that the disposed
      assets continue to be utilised in order to keep services accessible to
      the people through sustainable job creation; if not, why not; if so,
      what measures?
            CO2460E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Chairperson, I must echo the words of the previous speakers
by extending condolences to the Dube family and, indeed, call on the nation
to come together and unite in fighting crime in this country.
I also want to congratulate Premier Moloto on taking up the Rotating Deputy
Chairpersonship of the NCOP. Hopefully, as the representative from the
Eastern Cape indicated, it will be a different kind of rotation.

Last, but not the least, I would like to congratulate Amabhokobhoko, as a
mother, for their invaluable contribution to nation-building.

Chair, I want to make a request upfront, that members must feel free to
come up with follow-up questions. If they are very difficult for me, I will
note them down and pass them on to the Minister.

The response to the question is as follows: The disposal of noncore assets
provides a key opportunity to create employment and reduce poverty,
particularly through advancing broad-based economic empowerment.

As the custodians of a significant proportion of state property, the
department and its state-owned enterprises are committed to implementing
deliberate measures to increase black participation in the economy and to
ensure that the benefits from asset disposal are broad-based. We hope that
they are broad-based in the true sense of the word and that no fronting is
happening, because that is a problem: fronting; rent-a-black. It’s
happening even in Minerals and Energy.

In this regard, the department developed broad-based black economic
empowerment guidelines to direct the disposal of noncore assets, which are
available on the website of the department. Any enterprise bidding for
state-owned enterprise property will need to supply a broad-based black
economic empowerment verification certificate from an accredited
verification agency.

Alternatively, until such time as accreditation by Sanas, the SA National
Accreditation System, of BEE verification agencies has taken place,
enterprises may self-verify under oath using the DPE self-assessment tool -
linzima eli gama [this is a tongue twister] - toolkit, which is also on our
website, or obtain assistance from a verification agency or BEE consultant.

To ensure transparency and maximise participation, the noncore properties
for disposal will be advertised extensively in tender bulletins and local
newspapers. Thank you very much, Chair.

        Developments regarding the financial stability of SA Airways

119.  Mr D D Gamede (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      Whether there has been any positive developments regarding the
      financial stability of the SA Airways in view of the focused effort to
      meet the funding requirements and to recapitalise the turnaround
      strategy for SAA; if not; why not, if so, what are the relevant
      details?                                                 CO2462E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Mr Gamede, the answer to your question on SA Airways is as
follows: The SA Airways management has compiled a corporate plan for the
financial years 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10, which contains a forecast for
business based upon the implementation of the turnaround strategy.

The interim results of the SAA for the six months ending on 30 September
2007 indicate positive financial results in that the SAA has achieved a
profit of R136 million from ongoing airline operations. I think the
Minister of Finance is listening with interest because we are talking
profits here, and not deficits.

In comparison with the previous year, revenues have increased by R1,4
billion, whilst operating costs have only increased by R556 million.

After depreciation, amortisation, interests and forex adjustments, the
bottom line of R136 million compares favourably with the loss for the same
period last year of R691 million, and is R374 million better than budgeted.
After once-off restructuring costs of R56 million, relating primarily to
retrenchment costs, the airline is reporting a bottom-line profit to date
of R80 million.
The cash position of the airline has also stabilised. On 30 September, it
amounted to R2,8 billion.

There are nearly 70 significant restructuring projects currently under way
at SAA. Several of the smaller projects have already been implemented with
great success. However, SAA will start to see the results of the more
significant projects between now and the financial year ending on 31 March
2008.

The two most significant items in this period are related to labour
restructuring and the grounding of the remaining five Boeing 747-400
aircraft. Discussions regarding the B747-400s have reached an advanced
stage.

The senior management of SAA is currently in negotiations with the SA
Airways’ unions regarding conditions of employment. I hope that Minister
Mdladlana is involved or is aware of these negotiations.

The SA Airways believes that it has taken the first steps towards financial
stability and the creation of a commercially focused airline business,
which, in the long term, will be financially sustainable. I so respond.
Thank you, Chair.

    Measures taken and challenges encountered in implementing settlement
                 agreement made with Richtersveld community

120.  Ms M P Themba (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      (1)   What measures has his department taken to expedite the
           implementation of the settlement agreement that was made on 22
           April 2007 with the Richtersveld community;


      (2)   whether his department has encountered any challenges in
           implementing the settlement agreement; if so, how were they
           dealt with?                                              CO2463E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Chairperson, the representatives of the Richtersveld
community, Alexkor, the Department of Public Enterprises and their
respective legal representatives set up a settlement implementation
committee on 12 June 2007. This committee assigns responsibility within
delineated timelines to ensure the efficient implementation of the
settlement and has been meeting regularly to monitor progress made on the
various activities.

These activities include the following: Firstly, a four-person committee
contemplated in the deed of settlement was appointed and has finalised an
inventory of all movable agricultural and maricultural assets of Alexkor to
be delivered to the Richtersveld community. The transfer of these assets is
imminent.

Secondly, interim managers have been appointed by the Richtersveld
community and have been given access to the farms in order to prepare for
the planting season. Funds for the project costs of the interim management
of the agricultural enterprises are at R700 000 and this has been paid in
trust to the attorneys of the Richtersveld community.

Thirdly, the R50 million development grant has been paid in trust to the
attorneys of the Richtersveld community, subject to conditions set by the
Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs and accepted by the attorneys.
These monies are earmarked for recapitalisation of the agricultural and
maricultural enterprises, and such other purposes, to the advantage of the
Richtersveld community, as the investment holding company may deem fit.

Fourthly, funds for the Richtersveld community’s rehabilitation research
project, in the amount of R1,331 million, have been paid in trust to the
attorneys of the community. Payment of these funds was necessary to enable
the project to be launched in order to gather seeds of indigenous plants
during the present season.

Environmental specialist consultants have been appointed by Alexkor and on
behalf of the Richtersveld mining company, to process the amendment of the
environmental management programme – the EMP - as contemplated in the deed
of settlement. It was necessary to start with the amendment of the EMP in
view of the fact that the conversion of the old-order mining right of
Alexkor and the transfer of that right to the community are dependent upon
such amendments.

In terms of the deed of settlement, the parties agreed to form a pooling
and sharing joint venture, PSJV, between Alexkor and the Richtersveld
mining company. The settlement provided for the appointment of an interim
joint board to pass a unanimous resolution on the formation of the PSJV on
the basis agreed. The interim joint board passed a unanimous resolution on
31 August 2007 and this was confirmed by the principals on the same date.
The preliminary establishment phase of the PSJV will commence shortly.

With regard to the second part of the question, the hearing of the
application to make the deed of settlement an order of court in terms of
section 38(B)(5) of the Restitution of Land Rights Act of 1994, was set
down for 25 September, 26 September and 27 September 2007 in the Land
Claims Court. However, during the period leading up to these hearings, nine
individuals within the Richtersveld community gave notice that they would
intervene and oppose any proceedings to have the settlement made an order
of court.

As a result of this application, the court ruled that the proceedings of 25
September to 27 September would be used to argue the acceptability of the
deed of settlement, whilst the issue of whether the settlement was duly
approved by the community was reserved for 8 October to 10 October 2007.
After hearing counsel for the parties and by consent between all of these
parties, all proposals by this group of individuals were addressed and the
deed of settlement was confirmed by the Land Claims Court on 9 October
2007.

In making the deed of settlement an order of court, the court was satisfied
that the deed of settlement was clear and enforceable, that it was properly
executed, that it was not against public policy and that the prescripts of
the Restitution of Land Rights Acts of 1994 were met by the settlement
agreement. Thank you, Chair.

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I have no follow-up questions, but would just
like to make a plea to the Minister to make the written response available
to us.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Yes, Chair, I will make it available
with immediate effect.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It is also available in Hansard.

   Steps taken to attain employment equity in decision-making positions in
                                    Denel
121.  Ms M P Themba (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      In view of the employment equity statistics in Denel’s 2006-07 annual
      report (details furnished), what has his department done to ensure
      that affirmative action is utilised effectively to attain employment
      equity in decision-making positions in Denel?

                  CO2464E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Chairperson, if this is not redeployment ... [Laughter.]

The response to the question is that steady progress has been made to
effect employment equity in key management decision-making positions within
Denel. On technical management positions, this has been and remains a
challenge due to the general shortage of skilled persons in this category.
Denel has a strategy in place to source, develop and retain its staff, and
employment equity ratios are beginning to indicate a marginal improvement.

There is, certainly, a lot of room for improvement. There is still more
that needs to be done. In addition, Denel has implemented a performance
management system where employment equity, as part of Denel’s overall
transformation efforts, is managed in line with business objectives. All
entities have been contracted to achieve entity-specific transformation
objectives.

The executive management team of Denel, consisting of nine members, is
providing direction to the rest of the group with a profile in which 45%
are women and 55% are black. I will read the composition and will also give
the hon member the written response to the question. The table that I have
here indicates 55% are male and 45% are female. I don’t understand the rest
of the coding here. Please appreciate the fact that I am just trying to
help the Minister. Thank you very much.

         Progress made in implementing Integrated Business Strategy

122.  Mrs E S Mabe (ANC) asked the Minister of Labour:

      What progress has his department made in implementing its Integrated
      Business Strategy?                                       CO2466E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, the process of reorganising,
integration, alignment and co-ordination is a continuing one.

    Position regarding alleged shortage of qualified accountants in South
                                   Africa

   126. Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister of Finance:
   127.
      Whether there is a shortage of qualified accountants in South Africa,
      as alleged in a recent media report (details furnished); if not, what
      is the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        CO2472E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, the question relates to whether we
have a shortage of accountants in South Africa or not. The answer is,
obviously, yes. There are 26 905 members of the SA Institute of Chartered
Accountants, of whom about 6 080 are nonresident. So we have 20 000
registered chartered accountants in this country.

It is interesting also to look at the breakdown of that number: 6 477 are
accountants in what is considered to be public practice. These are people
who do audits for other people. Those who may be deployed by the Auditor-
General to do the books of the office of the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal would
be included in the 6 477. It is a rather small number. If we look at the
total number of chartered accountants in South Africa, the race and gender
composition, I think, reflects some of the difficulties encountered.

Of the total of roughly 20 300 who are resident in South Africa, 311 are
black women and 545 are black men, 199 are coloured women and 252 are
coloured men, compared to 625 Indian women and 1 221 Indian men, and 4 061
white women and 13 585 white men. The battles for transformation which are
being led by Saica, the SA Institute of Chartered Accountants, led by
President Ignatius Sehoole, are admirable but it will take a long time to
reach anywhere close to a satisfactory level.

The institute has a programme running, primarily in the Eastern Cape and
Limpopo provinces, focusing on schools, called Thuthuka, which tries to
encourage the learning of maths and science in schools, so that a love for
figures can be generated and inculcated at school level, and then the
streaming of young people into the profession. But we have too few
accountants and I think the race and gender composition leaves much to be
desired. Thank you very much, Chair.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Mr Minister, thank you
very much for your answer. Seeing that you have all the money in the world,
don’t you think we should have very special bursaries for these professions
where there is such a shortage of skills, not only as far as chartered
accountants are concerned, but also as far as engineers and other
professions are concerned in which we don’t have enough people?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chair, the first point to make is that there are
global shortages of some skills, in fact of many skills. I was looking at
some numbers, because we all fly around quite a bit. India, for instance,
has fewer than 3 000 pilots, but by 2025 will need 12 000. China needs to
find an average of 2 200 new pilots every year. The large international
airlines do not train more than 400 between them.

You can see that there is a huge shortage building up there. You can look
at doctors, lawyers, accountants and engineers – country by country. In
fact, in the United States 80% of people who qualified in engineering in
the US more than five years ago have left the profession.

There is an enormous difficulty, and what these wealthy countries are doing
is that they merely come to developing countries like ours and offer
horrendously high salaries, and so we continue to lose people. It is a huge
difficulty even when you look at the situation inside the country.

I was in discussion with people in the civil engineering industry just
recently, and they said that they offer bursaries to young people who are
leaving school, both for universities and technikons. In order to get some
returns, they then bond people for something like three to four years after
graduating, to remain in the firm so that they make a contribution. Larger
firms come from elsewhere and buy these young people out of bond. If you
say that the bond is worth R500 000, they offer them that amount and
another R500 000 to join the big firm.

I think that the Minister of Labour, not exclusively, must lead this
process. I addressed a conference on this matter in Washington this past
Sunday. It is a very big issue, and South Africa is not alone. In some
respects, we do better than other countries.

If you look around this country and at the number of non-South African
Africans who are now in professional categories in this country, you will
then begin to understand how we have actually just taken people from
elsewhere on the continent. It doesn’t matter whether we are talking about
engineers, actuaries, accountants, doctors and teachers. We have taken
people from elsewhere. So all the investments these countries, poor as they
are, have made in their people have actually not realised a significant
change.

It is an enormously difficult issue. Part of the call that we are making is
that there needs to be an international conscience about this. Perhaps the
Minister of Education, who is in Paris at Unesco at the moment, could take
this matter up, because it is a very big issue for us.

Clearly, a number of government departments are offering bursaries. One of
the key areas in which we are offering bursaries now is in respect of
health workers, especially nurses. The other key area in which we are
offering bursaries is in respect of teachers. We will come to the point
where the Philippines is now. In respect of nurses, the Philippines trains
40% over their planned requirements, because they know that their nurses
are going to be recruited elsewhere in the world.

For poor countries, such training is enormously expensive. I wish I had the
number at hand to tell you what it costs to train a doctor. People train
and do their year of community service, and they are gone. It is a
difficult challenge that confronts us. Thank you.

   Progress made in resolving challenges faced by Mothlothlo community in
                                   Limpopo

123.  Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      (1)   What progress has been made to resolve the challenges faced by
           the Mothlothlo community in Limpopo caused by the Anglo Platinum
           Mines;

      (2)   whether eviction is still continuing against the will of the
           community; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether the needs or demands of the community will finally be
           met before they are relocated; if not, why not?    CO2467E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, the process of relocation
was an agreement between the community and the mine. This process started
some time ago, and there is evidence of that in terms of information that
is available.

After a dispute arose between two main faction groups within the community,
Premier Moloto established a task team that consisted of five members from
each group and various government departments that would include the
Department of Minerals and Energy. It was agreed upon that the relocation
would continue - starting with the people closer to the mine - whilst the
task team would be discussing the short-term and long-term concerns.

The department was not part of the initial relocation negotiation which
started, apparently, in 1993 during the former Lebowa government. Surely we
were not yet born as this democratic government. But this is an indication
that this process is a very, very old one.

Where evictions continue the people are leaving willingly, and none of
those already relocated were reported to have been forcefully removed. The
needs of the people, as indicated in writing and captured in the relocation
agreement, are an obligation which the company has committed to and
therefore must adhere to, unless there are new demands which are not in the
relocation agreement.

I do just want to pick up a few points on meetings that were held,
especially the recent ones, so that we can begin to appreciate the dynamics
of this particular matter. A meeting held and chaired by the premier on 21
June noted that there were two groups which also had similar problems
around tribal and relocation issues - what these two groups were fighting
about. But within the same meeting, the people who were against relocation
did not even live in the area and they had their own agendas. That is what
came through in the meeting that the premier chaired, and I hope that he
will testify to this. He is here.

The second thing that was said was that the lawyers should not form part of
this relocation process and could only be used for court representation –
because it appeared as if the lawyers were very much involved in these
matters. It was decided in the meeting that short-term and long-term issues
should be identified. The short-term issues related to relocation, and the
decision was taken that people who were closer to the danger zone should be
relocated first. The long-term issues related to royalties and post-mine
operations. At the meeting it was also agreed that the current task team
would exist until the completion of the relocation process.

The response from the mine was that all issues raised by the task team
would be dealt with. Compensation to the task team will continue. The mine
also agreed that the process needed to be fast-tracked. Sustainability will
be considered with regard to community projects. So, there is also a
commitment that the company has made to respond positively to all the
issues that I have raised.

The premier, in his wisdom, realised that there needed to be a structure
that would oversee this process. This structure included the Office of the
Premier, the SA Council of Churches, the Department of Land Affairs, the
Department of Minerals and Energy and the Mogalakwena Municipality.

They were to address the following, that is the brief of the task team was:
the payment for graves to go up from R1 500 to R3 000; the relocation
amount to be increased from R20 000 to R35 000; the kraals to form part of
the new relocation area - ungabushiyi ngemva ubuhlanti bethu [so don’t
leave out the kraals]; legal agreements to be discussed; and in terms of
labour issues 30% of the labour force should come from the community. That
was the mandate given to the task team.

At another meeting at which the task team came back to report, the
following items were discussed: the relocation plan; the relocation budget;
the labour desk; the phase 1 relocation plan; terms of reference of the
task team; stipends – all of those matters were discussed in that meeting.

In discussion with the representative from the Office of the Premier, it
was clear that the situation had improved markedly. Where once hate speech
and tension existed, there is now relative calm. I will end my response
with that point.

I think there was a letter from a Mr Richard Spoor who was accusing the
Office of the Premier of favouritism and he was threatening legal action
against relocation. I take it that I have to end my response. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thanks, Chairperson. Let me thank the Minister for the
response to my question. Let me also agree with the Minister that the
matter is so complex that trying to address some of the issues here might
take much of our time. Maybe what I can say – I have consulted with my
opponent delegates here - is that there are recent developments that are
not talking exactly to what the Minister is saying. But we have agreed as a
delegation that we will talk to the Minister in her office. Thanks, Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Do you want to
comment on that, hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: No. I have just noted that. Hopefully,
the premier has also noted that because we are involved in this matter as a
collective in trying to resolve it. I don’t think we should leave the
premier out of this process. He has been very directly involved in it. As
somebody who is in the province, he is even closer than the Minister to the
whole process and the situation. So, while I appreciate and invite them to
come and meet me, we will inform the premier so that in the process of
trying to solve the problem, he is well appraised of any information that
is new.

 Measures to address allegations of mismanagement and nepotism at SA Airways

124.  Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      (1)   Whether any measures will be put in place to address the
           challenges at the SA Airways (SAA) in order to deal with the
           allegations of mismanagement and nepotism; if not, why not; if
           so, (a) what measures and (b) what will happen to those who are
           responsible for mismanagement;

      (2)   whether the leadership of SAA are able to deal with those
           challenges; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details;

      (3)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         CO2468E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Thank you very much, Chair. The response to the question is:
SA Airways is not aware of mismanagement and nepotism as alleged. The
Minister has full confidence in the board and the management of SA Airways.
At present a complex restructuring process is progressing in the right
direction, but it is expected that full restructuring will take more time,
especially when it comes to profitability. On the third part of the
question: no statement will be made. Thank you, Chair.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thanks, Chairperson. While we appreciate the response
from the Minister and while we are trying to ensure that we do not incur
unnecessary losses at SAA, could the Minister address this House and assure
us that steps will be taken against those very senior officials who, on the
one hand, are saying that they are trying to save money for the government,
but on the other hand are using helicopters to go to meetings, from Sandton
to Pretoria and from Sandton to the airport? When they were questioned they
said it was because of heavy traffic in the morning. Thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Chairperson, it is a bit difficult, as I said earlier on. I
have taken note of the question. I suppose that there should be something
in the turnaround strategy, some mechanisms to look into the matter that
the hon member has raised.

I will forward the question to the relevant Minister. I would suggest that
the member concerned bring back the question so that when the Minister is
here, he will be able to engage. He seems to have details which I cannot
immediately respond to. Even the Minister might not have that information.
I think bringing back the question, if it includes some other information
that you want to solicit from the Minister, would go a long way in helping
in this situation. Thanks.

  Results of final settlement agreement reached with Richtersveld community

125.  Ms J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:


      Whether the final settlement agreement with the Richtersveld community
      (a) addressed the concerns of sections within the community with
      regard to the manner in which the settlement agreement was negotiated,
      (b) provides for the rehabilitation of the land granted to them and
      (c) lends itself to returning Alexkor to profitability; if not, why
      not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                             CO2471E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Terblanche, in answer to your
question - thank God this is the last one – yes, the concerns raised by the
nine individuals who joined the court proceedings related to consultative
procedures regarding the Richtersveld community, not the manner in which
the settlement was negotiated. All proposals by this group of individuals
were addressed. On 9 October 2007, the state, the Richtersveld Community
Property Association and the nine individuals jointly approached the court
to confirm the settlement as an order of the court.

The answer to part (b) of the question is: The settlement provides for the
revision of the existing environmental management programme, both in
respect of the rehabilitation of the existing historic environmental
disturbance and in respect of future prospecting and mining. Alexkor is
financially responsible for all rehabilitation of historic environmental
disturbance and the community’s mining company is responsible for
rehabilitation of future prospecting and mining disturbances, including
mine closure. Outstanding responsibilities of Alexkor still existing at the
date of eventual mine closure remain the financial responsibility of
Alexkor.

The answer to the third part of the question is: The settlement brings an
end to the uncertainties thus far faced by Alexkor and presents the
opportunity to exit noncore activities and restructure and focus the
business. The settlement provides for land mining rights to be transferred
to the Richtersveld community while Alexkor will continue to own the sea
mining rights. I think this is a great achievement for South Africa and the
black people of this country.

Alexkor will terminate noncore activities when it transfers its
agricultural and maricultural assets to the community. In the medium term,
Alexkor will pool its sea mining resources with the land mining resources
of the community in the form of a pooling and sharing joint venture with
the Richtersveld community. The operations of the pooling and sharing joint
venture will be based on a mining plan to be developed by experts in this
field. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister. The hon Terblanche is not in the House. Is there any follow-up
question?

Mr J W LE ROUX: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you very much, Minister,
for a very comprehensive reply. There is a problem, I imagine, with the
skills base of Alexkor. Is it possible, in your opinion, that they will
have to get a partner from outside to be able to become profitable again? I
thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister for Public
Enterprises): Again, Chairperson, it is a bit difficult, but I think it is
an option that they will always look at. When we do not have capacity, we
outsource the function. I think it would be prudent for Alexkor also to
look at that option, given that you cannot keep this entity for a long time
without it delivering. It has to deliver to the people concerned. So surely
they will look at the option of outsourcing the functions if their own
capacity is limited. I would think so.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister. Is there any further follow-up question? Hon members, we will
proceed to Question 127 to the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism. Oh, I’m informed that the question will stand over since the
Minister and the Deputy Minister are not available. Therefore we will
proceed to Question 128.

             Assistance to people regaining land in mining areas

128.  Nkskz N D Ntwanambi (ANC) ubuza uMphathiswa weZimbiwa naMandla:


        (a) Ingaba isebe lakhe libanceda njani abantu ekubuyekezweni
        kwemihlaba kwiindawo ezinezimbiwa kunye (b) bangaphi abantu (i)
        abasele bencediwe kule mihlaba kunye (ii) abasalindele ukuncedwa
        ngale mihlaba?                             CO2480X
(Translation of isiXhosa question follows.)

[128. Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

        (a) How does her department assist people in regaining their land
        in mining areas and (b) how many people (i) have regained their
        land in those areas and (ii) are still awaiting settlement?
                                       CO2480E]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I thought the Minister of Land Affairs
would help me with this one, but it’s okay. The commissioner for the
restitution of land claims of the Department of Land Affairs is the one
mandated with the responsibility of processing applications for land
claims. In terms of the current Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development
Act, the mineral and petroleum resources are the common heritage of all the
people of South Africa, and the state is the custodian thereof for the
benefit of all South Africans. Thank you.

          Number of women involved in mining industry in provinces

129.  Nkskz N D Ntwanambi (ANC) ubuza uMphathiswa weZimbiwa naMandla:
        Mangaphi amakhosikazi akwishshini lezimbiwa kwiphondo ngalinye?
                                              CO2481X
(Translation of isiXhosa question follows)

[129. Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:


        How many women in each province are involved in the mining industry?
                                                                    CO2481E]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Hon Chair, the response to the
question is that in Limpopo we have not given it in terms of the number of
physical bodies that are participating in the mining industry in terms of
women, but we have presented it in terms of companies. These are the
statistics as requested by the hon member. In Limpopo we have more than 10
women-led companies; in Mpumalanga we have five; in the North West we have
four; and in the Western Cape we have two.

However, I think that I need to add that we have the SA Women in Mining
Association. One of the pioneers in establishing that association is the
Minister. She was very involved when she was still Deputy Minister of
Minerals and Energy. It is a very strong movement of women. They have
organised themselves, as an association, so that they can access
opportunities that accrue from the transformation that is happening in the
mining industry.

They are coming up very well. The numbers are increasing in terms of
membership, and they do have some investments, which I can’t disclose,
which look very good. Indeed, there is still a lot of room for improvement.
For instance, here in the Western Cape there are still very few women
participating in mining.

I’m sure people are wondering what I am talking about when I talk about
mining in the Western Cape. Indeed there is mining of sand, which is a
mineral, according to our law, and anybody mining sand must have a licence.
It is a business that people can venture into, and, if anything, we would
have wanted to see more women in it. So there is a lot that we still need
to do.

In the Eastern Cape there is lime, for example. We need to create
opportunities, especially within the programme of small-scale mining. We
need to concentrate more on that programme, so that we have more women
benefiting from the transformation of the mining industry. Thank you,
Chair.

Nkszn N D NTWANAMBI: Sihlalo, njengoko uMphathiswa esitsho ukuba zimbini
kuphela ezi nkampani, ngaba ikhona na into eseza kwenzeka? Ngaba zise khona
na ezinye iindawo apho abantu banokuphinda benze izicelo ukuze bafumane
iziza ukwenzela ukuba babe ngoosomashishinana njengokuba usitsho,
bokuqalisa lo msebenzi wokomba isanti? Kaloku sithetha apha ngolwakhiwo
lwebala lezemidlalo lase-Green Point kunye nezindlu kweli phondo lethu.
Enkosi.

UMPHATHISWA WEZEZIMBIWA NAMANDLA: Eneneni, lungu elibekekileyo, amathuba
akhona wona, kodwa ingxaki nje esinayo ngokwangoku yeyokuba la mathuba
asekwizandla zegcuntswana, ngakumbi elabantu abangootata abamhlophe. Loo
nto ke ithetha ukuba amathuba asavalelekile kumakhosikazi, ngakumbi
amnyama. Ngoko ke kusafuneka size nesitshixo esikhulu, sivulele
amakhosikazi. Ndinedinga ke nalo mbutho bendithetha ngawo, ukuze sigwadle
ukuba siza kwenza njani na ukubheka phambili.

Omnye umkhuba ekufuneka siwulwile, kwalapha kwakwezi ofisi zethu, ngowokuba
kuthi ukuba kukho inkampanana yomntu omnyama eqalisayo ukusebenza,
ichukelwe ngezinto ezininzi, kuthiwe hayi ayiphathi kakuhle
okusingqongileyo, kodwa eyommelwane ephethwe ngumntu omhlophe kungathethwa
nto ngayo namgona isenza ezingentla izinto ezingalunganga. Andiyithethi le
nto kuba ndisandisa ucalucalulo, ndizama nje ukuzoba umfanekiso wento
eyenzekayo apha kweli leNtshona Koloni.

Loo ngxelo izile ke kum, kwaye siyawuphanda lo mba kuba omnye wabantu
abanalo mkhuba ulapha e-ofisini yam, apha kweli phondo. Ukubangaba ke
simfumene enetyala, iinyawo zakhe ziza kujonga ngaphambili izithende
zifulathele umnyango, kuba kaloku asina kuyithwala into yokuba sithi
ngexesha lolawulo lwentando yesininzi kube kusekho abantu abasenocalulo.

Ndithi ke, lungu elibekekileyo, amathuba akhona, nto nje kusekukhulu
ekusafuneka sikwenzile ukuvula lo mnyango ukwenzela ukuba abantu bakwazi
ukuthatha inxaxheba, ngakumbi amakhosikazi, kuba ngawo achaphazelekayo xa
kuthethwa ngendlala. Enkosi.

Nkszn N D NTWANAMBI: Mphathiswa, into endifuna ukuyiqonda, njengoko usithi
niceba ukuba nentlanganiso, kukuba ngoobani abamenyiweyo kulo ndibano?
Ingaba abanye abantu abanomdla nabanqwenela ukushishina bangavumeleka na
ukuba beze kuloo ntlanganiso?

UMPHATHISWA WEZEZIMBIWA NAMADLA: Ngokuqinisekileyo asingekhe sikhethe
abantu abambalwa. Kaloku ulawulo ngokwentando yesininzi yinkonzo ekhulula
wonke umntu ukuba athathe inxaxheba.
Siza kuwenza umpoposho oza kwenza into yokuba wonke umntu azi ukuba le
ntlanganiso iya kuba nini, siza kuyibambela phi kwaye siza kuxoxa ngantoni
na, ukwenzela ukuba wonke umntu abe nokwazi ukuba senzani, siyenza njani
na.

Kaloku abantu abangathathi ntweni asingabo bakulo mbutho ndiwukhankanyileyo
kuphela, kodwa ngabantu bonke belo Mzantsi Afrika. Noxa ke siza kube
sidibene nabantu bombutho, kodwa iza kube iyinto evuleleke kumntu wonke.
Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, as the Minister has indicated that there
are only two such companies in this province, then what is next? Are there
any places where people can go to reapply for sites, so that they can set
up their small enterprises, as you say, and start mining? Indeed, we are
talking here about the construction of the Green Point stadium and houses
around this province of ours. Thanks.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: In fact, hon member, the opportunities
are there, but the problem is just that at the moment these opportunities
are in the hands of a minority, specifically white males. That means these
opportunities are still inaccessible, particularly for black women.
Therefore, we have to unlock these opportunities for women. I have an
appointment with the organisation in question, so that we can chart the way
forward.
We also have to deal with the bad habit, which has been identified as
emanating from someone in one of our offices, of the harassment of small,
black-owned companies, on the basis that their activities are not
environmentally friendly whereas a white-owned, neighbouring company that
is guilty of worse offences is let off the hook. I’m not saying this
because I’m motivated by racism; I’m just trying to draw a picture of what
is happening in the Western Cape.

This complaint came to my attention, and we are investigating it because
one of the people accused of this kind of conduct is in my office, in this
province. If we find the person guilty of this kind of conduct, we will
show the person the door, because we cannot tolerate racist behaviour 13
years into our democracy.

So, I’m saying, hon member, that the opportunities are there, but that we
still have a lot to do to unlock them so that our people, particularly
women, because they are the ones adversely affected by poverty, can
benefit. Thanks.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Minister, what I would like to find out – as you said
that you are planning to hold a meeting – is, who is invited to the
meeting? Are other people, who are interested in setting up their own
businesses, invited to the meeting?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Definitely, it cannot be a meeting for
a chosen few. Indeed, democracy has opened up the space for everyone to
participate.

We are going to publicise the details of the meeting regarding the the
date, venue and topic to be discussed, so that everybody can know what we
are doing, and how.

Indeed, poverty is not limited to the members of the organisation in
question only, but affects all the people of South Africa. Although we will
be meeting members of this organisation, the meeting will be open to the
public. Thanks.]

Nksz A N T MCHUNU: Ngiyabonga mhlonishwa ngalokhu osusibekele khona.
Ngicela ukubuza ukuthi abekho yini asebemba laphaya KwaZulu-Natali ngoba
siyazi ukuthi sinawo umcako nehlabathi? Umhlonishwa akaze abale lutho
laphaya kwelakithi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms A N T MCHUNU: Thank you, hon Minister, for your report. I want to ask
whether there are people who are already digging in KwaZulu-Natal, because
we know that we have white ochreous stone and sand there. The Minister has
not mentioned anything in my area.]

UMPHATHISWA WEZEZIMBIWA NAMANDLA: Mhlalingaphambili, bekufuneka ndazile
ukuba ndiza kubantu abamele amaphondo. Into endiyivuyelayo nje, yoyokuba lo
mbuzo sele ndiwuphendule phaya kanye kwiphondo, kwaZulu-Natala. INkulumbuso
yephondo yandibizela phaya, yandiqokobhisa. Ewe, asikenzi nto ingako, yiloo
nto besithi ihamba phaya kude le nto yemigodi kwezinye iindawo. Ndiyambona
noTata uSikhakhane undimamele ukuba ndiza kuthini na, ngoba bathi ihambela
ngaphaya, ayizi KwaZulu-Natala.

Siwuphethe ke lo mba, kanti naphaya KwaZulu-Natala sijonge izinto ezininzi,
ezinjengamalahle phaya e-Richards Bay, nalapho sifumanise ukuba ambalwa
kakhulu amakhosikazi nabantu abamnyama abathatha inxaxheba kolu shishino.

Ndikhe ndazama ukudibana nabachaphazelekayo ukuze ndithethe nabo ngalo mba,
bandithembisa ukuyilungisa le meko. Ndinethemba ke lokuba ndiza kuthi xa
ndiphinda ndibuyela phaya, kube sele kungcono. Kodwa akukabikho nto
icacileyo yenzekayo phaya, ngoko kusafuneka silungisile. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, I should have known that
I was coming to visit people who represent provinces. However, I’m just
happy that I have had the opportunity to answer the question at provincial
level, in KwaZulu-Natal. Yes, not much has happened in this regard, and
that is the reason they are saying that this seems to be happening only in
other areas, far away from them. I see that Mr Sikhakhane is listening
attentively, because he is one of the people who feel this way.
We are dealing with the matter. Regarding KwaZulu-Natal, we are considering
a number of options, such as coal in Richard’s Bay, where we also found
very few women and black participants in the industry.

I tried to meet the relevant stakeholders so that we could talk about this
matter, and they promised to look into it. I just hope that when I go back
there, things will have improved. But nothing concrete is happening there,
so we still have a lot to do.]

       Progress made in the installation of electricity in rural areas

130.  Nkskz N D Ntwanambi (ANC) ubuza uMphathiswa weZimbiwa naMandla:

        Ingaba isebe lakhe lisazibophelele na ekuphuculeni ubomi babantu
        abahlala ezilalini ngokuzisa iinkonzo zombane emaphandleni; ukuba
        akunjalo, (a) kutheni kunye (b) ziyakuziswa nini ezinkonzo; ukuba
        kunjalo, (i) maxa lindawoni ngoku isebe nezinkonzo kunye (ii)
        zithini iinkcukacha ezithe vetshe?
                       CO2482X
(Translation of isiXhosa question follows.)

[130. Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

        Whether her department is still committed to improving the lives of
        the people living in the rural areas by bringing electricity to
        those areas; if not, (a) why not and (b) when is it going to install
        electricity in the rural areas; if so, (i) what progress has been
        made in this regard and (ii) what are the further relevant details?
                             CO2482E]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, since the inception of
the electrification programme in South Africa, approximately 4 500 000
households have been connected to the national grid. Access to electricity
has increased from approximately 30% in 1990 to 73% in 2006.

It is also fair to mention that electrification has contributed
significantly to socioeconomic status, local economic development, job
creation and poverty alleviation of the majority of historically
disadvantaged communities in South Africa. The success of the
electrification programme in South Africa is premised on several factors
relating to the existing electricity infrastructure and human settlements.

During the 1990s the electricity network capacity was such that more
households could be connected without building large bulk infrastructure
systems to open areas for electrification, as the majority of the areas
were closer to networks and human settlements were such that more
connections could be achieved. I think that’s where I will end. Thank you
very much.

Nksz N D NTWANAMBI: Mphathiswa, ndiyabulela ngale mpendulo, kwaye ndiyakuva
ukuba uthini na. Kodwa ke, lo mbuzo wam ugxile kakhulu phaya ezilalini
zokwenyani, kude needolophu, apho uthi nokuba ufuna ukuya kuzinceda phaya
phandle, woyike kuba awuboni nomnwe lo wakho.

Mhlawumbi kungcono kwiindawo ezikufutshane neendlela ezinkulu
kwaneedolophu, kodwa kukho abantu abangaboni noomabonakude aba, abayiva
ngembali le nto kuthiwa ngumabonakude. Mhlawumbi endlwini uba nalo
mabonakude kuthiwa “ngumkhwetha”, kuba uza kusebenzisa ilahle
likamabonakude ongasebenzisi mbane, ubone imifanekiso emnyama namhlophe.
Enkosi.

UMPHATHISWA WEZEZIMBIWA NAMANDLA: Eneneni, lungu elibekekileyo, ngumba
obalulekileyo lo uza nawo. Kaloku apha sisasebenza ngeengxaki esazishiyelwa
ngurhulumente wocalucalulo, apho ke iindawo zasemaphandleni yayiziindawo
ezingakhathalelekanga. Ngoku ke sizama ukutshintsha loo nto. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Minister, thank you for your reply, and I get your
point. However, my question relates specifically to the real bundus, far
away from the urban areas, where, even if you want to go outside to relieve
yourself at night, you get scared because it is so dark that you can’t even
see your finger in front of you.
Maybe things are better in areas alongside national roads and close to
urban areas, but there are people who can’t even watch television, to whom
watching TV is just a dream. In some cases one just has a “black-and-white”
TV, which is battery-operated. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Truly, hon member, this is a very
important issue that you are raising. Remember, here we are dealing with
the problems which were left for us by the apartheid government, whereby
rural areas were just neglected. Now, we are trying to change that.]

The neglect of the rural areas meant that there was no infrastructure
developed for electrification. So, the problem is even bigger in the rural
areas, because you can’t connect without the necessary infrastructure.

As a result, as the Department of Minerals and Energy, we have had to make
sure that, because we need to continue with electrification ...

... kuza kufuneka ukuba sithathe enye imali yethu siyise kuphuhliso
lweziseko zophuhliso. Njengokuba ndithetha nje, siphawule iindawo ezithile
esiza kuzakhela ezi zinto kuthiwa zizikhululwana zombane ezilishumi kulo
nyaka ukuze size kukwazi ukufakela umbane.

Kodwa ke loo nto inciphise imali yethu yokufakela umbane, kuba kaloku
asikwazi ukufakela umbane kungekho ziseko zophuhliso; kuyanyanzeleka ukuba
sakhe iziseko zophuhliso kuqala. Ukuba asizakhi ezi ziseko zophuhliso,
abantu bathi sibanika umbane ongufinya-futhi, othi xa kukho umoya uvele
ucime nje, pam, kuba kaloku awuxhaswanga ziziseko zophuhliso. Ngoko ke
kuyanyanzeleka ukuba siqale kule ndawo kufuneka siqale kuyo.

Eneneni ke, lungu elibekekileyo, andifuni kungena kwiphulo lokufuna imali,
kodwa umcimbi wemali kuya funeka siwulungise ukuze sikwazi ukuba nemali eza
kujongana nolwakhiwo lweziseko zophuhliso. Le mali ili-150 leebhiliyoni
zeerandi ejongene nolwakhiwo lweziseko zophuhliso igxininise ekwakheni
izikhululo zombane nezinye izinto ezifana namandla e-nuclear, njalo njalo,
hayi ulwakhiwo lweziseko zophuhliso. Kuyafuneka siyilungisile ke loo nto.

Siyathetha neSebe lezeziMali ukuba malisibonelele ukwenzela ukuba
singalinciphisi inani lethu lezindlu ekufanele sizifakele umbane. Xa imali
ili-150 leebhiliyoni zeerandi, noko oko kwenza kube lula ukufezekisa
injongo yethu yokuba kuthi xa kufika unyaka wama-2012 sibe sesilibonelele
ngombane lonke inani labantu abangena mbane. Loo nto ke iyafuna
ukulungiswa.

Kodwa ke, mandigqibele ngelithi singurhulumente, sizibophelele kwaye
asijiki: Unyaka wama-2012 ngunyaka aya kuthi wonke umntu acofe eludongeni:
qhakra, kube mhlophe endlwini, kusetyenziswa umbane osemgangathweni.
Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... we will have to take some of our money and transfer it to the
improvement of infrastructure development. As I speak, we have identified
certain areas where we will build ten of what we call electric sub-stations
this year, so that we should be able to install electricity.

But that has reduced our money for electricity installation. Because we
cannot install electricity when there is no infrastructure development, we
are forced to deal with infrastructure development first. If we do not deal
with infrastructure development, people complain that we provide them with
weak electricity, which just goes off when there is wind, because it is not
supported by the infrastructure. Therefore, we have to start from where we
are starting.

Truly, hon member, I do not want to get involved in a money-seeking
endeavour, but we do need to correct the money issue so that we have money
that will be for the building of infrastructure. This money, which is R150
billion which is used for the building of infrastructure, should be mostly
used for the building of power stations and other things like nuclear
power, etc not the building of infrastructure. We have to correct that.

We are communicating with the Department of Finance to assist us so that we
do not reduce the number of houses in which we have to install electricity.
When we have R150 billion, at least that makes it easier for us to fulfill
our intention of providing everyone that has no electricity with
electricity by 2012. That needs to be corrected.

But, let me conclude by saying that, as the government, we are committed
and we are not going to change: 2012 is the year that everybody is going to
just press against the wall: light! The house becomes bright, using
electricity which is of good quality. Thank you.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

My follow-up question will be in Sesotho sa Lebowa, so I will give the
Minister an opportunity to prepare that interpreting gadget while I am busy
with a commercial break. [Laughter.] I think she is ready now.

Modulasetulo, ke leboga karabo ya mohlomphegi Tona ya gore bjaloka kgoro ba
ikemišeditše go thuša setšhaba sa gešo. Potšišo ke gore go na le nako moo
batho ba botšwago gore gore ba hwetše mohlagase go nyakega gore ba koleke
mašeleng a itšego, e be gona ba kago go o fiwa; mola ka go le lengwe go
hwetšagala gore Morena Koekemoer yo a dulago a nnoši kua thabeng o kgona go
latelelwa ke mohlagase gona kua a dulago gona, o feta ka godimo ga batho
bao ba dulago kgauswi le yena, o latelela yena a nnoši gomme go thwe gore
batho bao ba o hwetše ba swanetše go o kolekela pele. Na e ka ba
mohlomphegi Tona a ka re hlakodiša? Mošate! (Translation of Sepedi
paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, I thank the hon Minister for the response in terms of which
as a department they are prepared to help our people. Sometimes people are
told that in order for them to get electricity, there is an amount of money
they have to pay, whereas it is evident that electricity is supplied to the
dwelling of Mr Koekemoer who is living alone on a hillside. The electricity
cables run over the dwellings of people living next to him, straight to his
place but people are instructed to pay in order to get the same service.
Would the hon Minister be of assistance in this regard? Thank you!]

UMPHATHISWA WEZEZIMBIWA NAMANDLA: Kuyinyaniso, lungu elibekekileyo, ukuba
zikhona izinto ezinjalo. Yiyo loo nto kubalulekile ukuba sikhawulezise
ulwakhiwo lwezinto ekuthiwa zii-RED, ii-Regional Electricity Distributor.
Kaloku into yokukhupha imali ukuze kufakelwe umbane iyaqhubeka kweli
jikelele; iyenziwa kwa-Eskom nakoomasipala. Abathethi nto enye ke: abanye
bayahlawulisa, abanye bangahlawulisi.

Kakhulukazi oomasipala bazenzela imali ngokubonelela ngombane. Asizi kuthi
mabayiyeke ke loo nto, kodwa masingathi xa sizisa iinkonzo ebantwini
sibenze bahlwempuzeke nangakumbi. Kaloku, ... (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Hon member, it is true that there are
issues like those, and that is why it is so important that we build
regional electricity distributors or REDs as soon as possible. Budget
allocation is currently being done for supplying electricity around the
country by Eskom and the municipalities. They work differently though,
because some expect payment whilst others do not.

This is because some municipalities raise funds by supplying electricity.
We therefore cannot stop them from expecting payment, because they are
rendering this service as that would leave them more bankrupt.]

... these are basic services which are meant to give a better life to our
people. They are supposed to be a catalyst out of poverty, and if then in
the process of delivering these services we are further impoverishing our
people, it means that we have not achieved our main goal as government of
giving this better life to our people.

Indeed, we have realised this. As we speak, we have 2 000 kinds of tariffs
in the country. The people who are not serviced in the process are the
poorest; they are actually subsidising you and me and the industries, and
that situation needs to change, even with regard to the tariffs. That is a
problem.

We are working on that problem. That’s why I am saying the restructuring
that is happening needs to happen very, very fast. We will investigate that
matter, and I would appreciate it if you could write me a letter and
present that as a problem that we need to attend to.

Again, we are available on floor 7, 120 Plein Street, any time, but not
after 12 o’clock midnight – any time during office hours.
The last point that I should have raised is that we have committed
ourselves to electrifying all the schools in South Africa during the three-
year term - there are about 7 000 in South Africa in total. This is long-
hanging fruit that we can be able to harvest.

As far as clinics are concerned, there are just 400 of them, which we are
also prioritising. It looks as if by the end of the financial year we will
have eradicated that backlog. It is not that bad and we are getting there.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Ms D Peters): Chairperson, Madam Minister
...

... ke lebogela tšhono ya go botsa potso ya tlaleletso mo ntlheng ya go
fitlhisa motlakase kwa bathong ba rona ba kwa magaeng. Potso ya me ke gore
a tirisanyo magareng ga Lefapha la Temothuo le Merero ya Mafatshe le
Lefapha la Dimenerale le Maatla e tseneletse ka ntlha ya gore batho ba rona
ba ba kwa magaeng ba ba ikaegileng thata ka “sustainable agricultural
livelihoods” ba itumelela go nna le motlakase?

Batho ba ba re ba lemogile gore go tlisiwa ga motlakase go tlile le
diphetogo di le dintsinyana. Ba lemogile gore ga go tlhola go na le mekoko
e e lelang ka ura ya boraro gonne mekoko e tlhakane tlhogo, ga e sa tlhole
e itse nako. Ga twe dikgomo le tsona ga di bone bosigo le motshegare.

Ba kopa gore lefapha le ba thuse gore fa motlakase o tla, o se
tlhakatlhakanye diphologolo tsa bona, mme di tswelele go ata. Ga re batle
go senya “sustainable livelihood” ya batho fa re ba tlisetsa botshelo jo bo
botoka. Batho ba batla go iphidisa ka mokgwa o baneng ba ntse ba iphidisa
ka ona. Le rona re batla gore ba tswelele go bona botshelo jo bo botoka.

Tona re ya go thusa jang nkoko kwa magaeng yo o itseng gore o tshwanetswe
go tsoswa ke mokoko le kgomo ka ura ya boraro? Re ya go kgona jang go
netefatsa gore motlakase ga o sitise diphologolo tsa kwa magaeng? Ke a
leboga. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[... thank you for the opportunity to ask a supplementary question about
access to electricity in rural areas. My question is as follows: Are there
intensified co-ordination measures in place between the Department of
Agriculture, the Department of Land Affairs and the Department of Minerals
and Energy, because the rural community that depends heavily on a
sustainable agricultural livelihood needs electricity?

The community has realised that electricity has resulted in several changes
in the environment. They have further realised that hens no longer cackle
at three o’clock because they are confused and no longer know what the time
is. Even the cows no longer know the difference between day and night.

They urge the department to assist them, so that when the electricity is
installed it must not confuse their livestock so that they continue to
breed. We don’t want to spoil people’s sustainable livelihoods when we give
them a better life. People want to continue to live in the same manner they
were living before. We want them to continue to reap the fruits of a better
life.

Minister, how will a grandmother who knows that she must be woken by a hen
and a cow at three o’clock in rural areas be assisted? How are we going to
ensure that electricity does not interfere with livestock in rural areas?
Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: You know, this needs the wisdom of a
reverend, and there is only one reverend and one professor in the House.
This reminds me of the time when we were campaigning, I think, in 1999 in
Transkei. When I got to this village, I came across umama wethu wesiXhosa
[a traditional Xhosa woman], and her house was the only one that had not
been connected. I got so angry because the whole village had been
connected, but not this woman.

Fortunately, I came across her and talked to her. Then I asked her: Mama,
what happened? Why are you the only one whose house has not been connected?
I mean, I was so passionate. She looked at me and said: “Mntan’ am, [My
child,] how am I going to interact with my ancestors with these lights all
over my house? I don’t want any electricity in my house.” So, it’s a big
challenge, Premier, and I think it needs a lot of wisdom.

It probably needs an awareness campaign that you can switch off the light.
Actually, switching off the lights in the evening will save you money,
while it will also ensure that the crow of the cock will happen so that you
will be able to wake up at three o’clock. I think it can be done.

However, in terms of the relationship with the Department of Agriculture,
we have a relationship with all departments. As you would know, while we
are organised as clusters, we are also a collective in Cabinet; we work
together.
Governance is dynamic, and there are new ideas every day. So, if there is
anything that people want to propose, especially in the context of poverty
alleviation, we could look at energy for poverty alleviation, working
together with the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs.

We are joined at the hip; she can’t get rid of me, even if she wants to,
and I can’t get rid of her. So, we are very close and we work very closely
together. So, any time there is any proposal, we can look at it together.
Thanks, Premier.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo nawe Ngqongqoshe ngiyezwa kuyakhulunywa nje ngombani
okufuneka uze ufike nasemakhaya. Ngqongqoshe, sengathi sibhekene nengwadla
impela ngoba umbani esinawo kulaba basemadolobheni usunenkinga ngoba sesiye
sitshelwe nokuthi asicime amagiza ngezikhathi ezithile nalokhu nalokhuya.
Ngenxa yokuthi amandla awasakhoni ukuphehla umbani owenele ngisho
namarobhothi nezibhedlela imbala kuyacisha. Ngakube uhulumeni uyakucabanga
yini ukuthi kuyoze kudingeke ukuba sigudlukele emandleni aphehlwa yilanga,
sithole amandla aphehlwa uNkulunkulu uqobo lwakhe ngoba asiyulokhu sithi
“Cishani lokhu, cishani lokhu”. Nalaba basemakhaya sebeyowuthola nje umbani
ngoba uyobe ubuya kuNkulunkulu. Ngakube umbani welanga siyawubheka
okuyiwona ongase usitakule kulolu taku? Wena wakoMkhulu! (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson and Minister, I hear what is being said about
electricity that should also reach rural areas. Minister, it looks like we
are facing a problem because even electricity that we have in urban areas
has a problem as well because we are told to switch the geysers off during
peak hours. Because of the fact that there’s not capacity to generate
enough electricity any more, even the traffic lights and hospitals run out
of electricity. Is government considering the fact that we may need to use
a solar system and get energy that is generated by God Himself because we
are not always going to say, “Switch this, switch that”? Even people in the
rural areas would be able to access electricity because it would be coming
from God. Are we considering solar energy, which could save us from this
problem?]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Mhlalingaphambili, mandiqale ngokutsho
ukuba ingxaki esinayo yokuhamba kombane, le nto kuthiwa zii-power outages
... [Chairperson, let me start off by stating that the problem of power
outages ...]

... is not about the source that we use for generating energy; it is about
infrastructure and the lack thereof. But I think I need to go back and say
that we have a positive problem. The economy has been growing consistently
by around 5% or more, which is putting pressure on the supply of energy
that we have in the country.

The supply that we have is on the margin with the demand that the economy
needs as we speak, and that is because of the growth in the economy. I want
to take this back, because there are some accusations that when we came in
we mothballed, in other words, we closed some of the power stations. Yes,
we did close some of the power stations because we had an excess supply of
energy.

But now we have also gone back to reopen those power stations. I think we
need to start there so that we combine the two. While we had closed the
power stations, we are beginning to open them again because we need more
energy. At the same time, the reason we have those power outages is that we
don’t have enough supply of energy for the demand that exists ...

... ngenxa yohlumo kuqoqosho lwethu. [... because of growth in our
economy.]

That is the first thing. And what have we done as the government? We are
building power stations.

Esinye besiye kusivula apha eAtlantis ... [We opened one in Atlantis ...]

... just very close here we opened a power station.

Kukho esinye esakhiwayo phantsi kwento ekuthiwa yiProject Majuba, eLimpopo.
[There is one being built as part of Project Majuba, in Limpopo.]

All this is an effort by government to build the necessary infrastructure
so that we have the necessary supply that you are talking about. Yes, the
solar system is part of the source that we are going to use for energy
generation, but there are three sources that we have identified. There is
coal, which we are using now for the generation of energy; we can’t get rid
of coal. But because coal is polluting the air, we are looking at clean
coal technology.

Majuba in Limpopo is one such power station that is going to use that
technology for the first time. I think part of Atlantis also has this
technology. While we are using coal, we must not have too much emissions.
We are also looking at nuclear energy, which is also going to give us
around 20 000 megawatts by 2016.

The third source is solar energy. The problem with solar energy, which we
are piloting at this stage is that ...

... abantu bayakhala, Baw’ uMzizi, bathi ubuthathaka. [... people are
unhappy about it, Mr Mzizi, saying that it is weak.]

So, we are looking for ...

... amacebo okuba siyiqinise le solar ukuze isinike ... [... mechanisms to
help us strengthen solar energy so that it can provide us with ...]

... the quality of electricity that we want in the country. The tendency
for us is to take solar energy to the poorest people in the rural areas.
And I don’t think that would be correct.

UMgaqo-siseko uya kusimangalela kwaye siya kugwetywa ukuba senza loo nto.
[To do that would be tantamount to going against the spirit of the
Constitution and the laws of this country.]

We need to give people equal quality of services. So, we are listening to
what the people are saying, because ...

... eNtabankulu siye saqalisa ukusebenzisa isolar phaya. Bayakhala bathi:
Hayi, ibuthathaka le solar yenu! [... at Ntabankulu we started implementing
the solar system. They have expressed dissatisfaction with it, saying: Your
solar system is too weak!]

So while we have agreed that we are going to use it because it also gives
us clean energy, at the same time it must be of good quality. That is what
we are working on; we are working with a number of countries. Belarus is
one country that we are learning from. I will be sending people for
training in Belarus very soon. Even the wind farms we have not abandoned,
but again ...
... nazo zinengxaki yomgangatho ophantsi wombane eziwuvelisayo. [.. they
too are faced with the problem of producing poor quality electricity.]

Again, we are learning from other countries so that by the time we massify
the programmes, at least they will give us the best. Thank you.

   Measures to ensure that government buildings and other fixed assets use
                            electricity sparingly

131.  Ms A N T Mchunu (ANC) asked the Minister of Public Works:
      Whether, in light of Eskom urging consumers to use electricity
      sparingly so as to reduce the demand and assist in minimising load
      shedding, her department has measures in place to ensure that
      government buildings and other fixed assets managed by her department
      also use electricity sparingly; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                                  CO2485E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chair and hon members, electricity
supply is very topical. We have spoken so much about it this afternoon.

My reply to the question is that a White Paper on Energy Policy was first
published in 1988, focusing mainly on the central government. Since then
the Department of Public Works has been actively involved in bringing about
a reduction in energy consumption, as well as limiting maximum demand to
the buildings and facilities in the National Property Portfolio. In recent
years, this was assisted by the drive and involvement of the Department of
Minerals and Energy – we have heard the Minister speaking about this a lot
- which includes all sectors of government and the private sector.

The Department of Public Works has taken a two-pronged approach to this
problem. The first approach is addressing the problems that are found in
new buildings. When we start building new buildings we normally take into
account the issue of electricity supply so that we install measures that
will assist in reducing the usage of electricity. We look at the
possibility of reducing dependency on electrical energy to the minimum. The
equipment that is fitted there should be equipment that will also assist in
the reduction of the usage of electricity.

I just want to give some examples of problems that we have with regard to
electricity supply. The Minister has indicated a lot about that. When you
look at a building that has offices – or any other facility that has
offices - that we use, it becomes very problematic if we enjoy only
switching on whatever equipment we want to switch on, and it becomes
unpleasant to switch it off. I think the Minister has touched on the issue
of switching on. It is nice to switch on, but at the same time it must also
be nice to switch off. I will come back to that later on.
In respect of new buildings we take into account that what we put in there
should be modern equipment so that we don’t have to have the problems of
heavy usage, but with regard to the existing buildings that we have, we
know there is a big problem there. We have a programme that is in place
which has been running for about 10 years.

The emphasis is placed on the heavier consumers of electricity in the
National Property Portfolio. Buildings are assessed to establish the
potential for savings. Those with the best potential are prioritised.
Through tender procedures, the contractors are appointed to optimise
current electricity consumption as far as the building and infrastructure
allow.

If this is possible, it is expanded and we hold the contractor responsible
for keeping this idea in mind when they do the maintenance and other
things. You will know that when we refurbish or renovate old houses we will
always look at the electricity side of it so that we can fit in the modern
equipment that will help us to reduce electricity. We have heard about the
bulbs that we are using in our offices - the ones that save electricity. We
encourage this so that all of us can benefit from the electricity.

I just want to say one thing about misuse. If you have an office that you
don’t use every day, or a store room, where the curtains and the doors are
closed, and you still leave the lights on, it doesn’t really make sense.
Obviously, we use electricity for some purpose. If you use electricity in a
store room when you are not there, it is a waste. We are trying to breach
this so that all of us can assist in bringing down the usage of
electricity, so that we don’t have these power outages, as far as possible.
This is the answer I can give.

          Programmes to assist people illegally evicted from farms

132.  Mr M A Mzizi (IFP) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land
      Affairs:


      Whether, in light of illegal farm evictions, she will consider
      programmes to assist such evictees with immediate relief where they do
      not have immediate access to accommodation in order to prevent them
      from becoming illegal squatters; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                            CO2491E

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, the answer to
Question 132 is as follows: there should be no illegal evictions in the
first instance, because these are criminal offences. However, in cases in
which illegal evictions are reported to the Department of Land Affairs, the
department submits an urgent application to court for an order to reinstate
the rights of the evictees. The department also works with municipalities
to secure temporary shelters where long-term solutions are sought.
On Sunday, 21 October 2007, I launched the Land Rights Awareness Campaign
as well as the Land and Agrarian Reform Project. These were launched in
Rawsonville in the winelands district of the Western Cape. The main
objective of the Land and Agrarian Reform Project is to improve access to
land, to ensure security of tenure and agricultural production, and also to
reaffirm, as government, that this is our top priority.

The second objective is to focus more sharply on increasing access to land,
increasing the participation of historically disadvantaged persons in the
formal agricultural sector, in food production and in generating rural
employment, thereby contributing to more accessible food supplies.

The Land Rights Awareness Campaign aims, firstly, to create awareness in
the public and specific target audiences about their land rights. Secondly,
it aims to provide farm dwellers and farmworkers access to a network of
services relating to tenure security.

Furthermore, the Department of Land Affairs is in the process of
establishing a Land Rights Management Facility that will assist both
farmers and farm dwellers to facilitate the resolution of any dispute,
firstly, through mediation, and, secondly, through the courts, if need be.
It will also assist those who have no means of paying for legal services in
cases in which they have to go to court.

Lastly, the Land Rights Management Facility will operate a temporary call
centre for free and easy access to the Department of Land Affairs. This
service is for those who will need to report any cases of abuse and who
need to know about the procedures to be followed in the case of an eviction
situation. We are going to operate this toll-free centre and it will be
initiated at the beginning of November this year. Thank you.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo nakuNqgongqoshe ngempendulo eshaya
emhloleni. Ngiyakuzwa Ngqongqoshe, empeleni kunjalo.  Akuyona into enhle
ukuthi abantu bakhishwe ezindaweni ngoba nakhu abanini bamapulazi
kungabantu abanezimali abangakwazi ukuthola abammeli abanamandla. Thina
asinabo labo bammeli abanamandla. Ngaleyo ndlela-ke bese sithola ukuchithwa-
ke, njengoba sewushilo ukuthi kuzoba nalowo mnyango ozovuleka. Ukuxoshwa
kwabantu emapulazini insakavukela umchilo wesidwaba. Lokhu ngikusho ngoba
lapha eMpumalanga Koloni kukhona udaba olunjalo. Ngabe lokhu kusemthethweni
noma cha? Laba bantu baba ngondingasithebeni.

Okwenzeka ukuthi umninipulazi akabiyile ngocingo ngakho izinkomo zomunye
wondingasithebeni zazihamba kuyo yonke indawo ezelusile. Kwavele kwafika
umninipulazi wakhomba enye yezinkomo ngezulu lezandla - induku yamagwala -
kodwa wangayinemba ngamabomu. Wayesethi kuye ngokuzayo ngeke adubule inkomo
kodwa uyodubula yena ukuze kuphele icala. Yikho lokhu okushoyo ukuthi ngabe
ondingasithebeni abanjalo bayabonelelwa yini? Imininingwane eminingi
nginayo kimi ngoba lo muntu ulaphaya eMpumalanga Koloni. Ake ngizwe
uNgqongqoshe ukuthi ngabe uphendula uthini lapho. Ngiyabonga.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZOLIMO NEZOMHLABA: Ngiyabonga kumhlonishwa. Ngifuna ukuthi
siyavumelana naye njengoba sengishilo empendulweni yami yokuqala ukuthi
lenkinga yokukhishwa kwabantu emapulazini isikhathi esiningi ayihambi
ngokomthetho. Sinomthetho lapha ekhaya. Yikho ngithi manje sizoqala
lomshikashika wokwazisa ngamalungelo omhlaba ngoba sithola ukuthi isikhathi
esiningi abantu le emakhaya abayazi le mithetho namalungelo abo. Yikho
lokhu sithi-ke kulo mkhankaso sizosebenza nemiphakathi kanye namalungu ethu
ePhalamende.

Sifuna futhi nokusebenza nezinhlangano kanye nezinyunyana zabasebenzi
basemapulazini nabahlali basemapulazini, ukwenzela ukuthi sikwazi
ukubathola futhi sifinyelele kubo bonke abantu abathintekayo kulolu daba.
Ngifuna ukuthi sinamaphoyisa njengoba umhlonishwa azi ukuthi ukubulala
inkomo kungeyona eyakho ukuphula umthetho lokho. Ukusabisa umuntu ngokuthi
uzombulala nakho kuyicala.

Ngingajabula ukuthi umhlonishwa lezi zinto sizibike emaphoyiseni noma-ke
anginike imininingwane anayo nami ukuze ngakolwami uhlangothi sikwazi
ukuhlangabezana ukwenzela ukuthi lomnumzane ophule umthetho nalo mnumzane
ohlukumeza abantu kabuhlungu kangaka akwazi ukuhlangana nabomthetho.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A M MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson, for the straight answer. I hear you,
Minister. In fact, it is exactly as you put it. Evicting people is not a
good idea just because farmers have enough money to afford powerful
lawyers. We do not have those kinds of lawyers. As a result, we get evicted
from the farms. As you have already mentioned that door is opened and
people get evicted because they cannot afford lawyers. The eviction of
people from the farms is prevalent. I am saying this because in the Eastern
Cape there is a similar situation. Is this legal? These people become
destitute.

What happened is that the farm was not fenced and, as a result, the cattle
belonging to one of the destitute people trespassed on the farm while he
was looking after them. The farmer came and pointed a gun at one of the
cattle – the coward’s weapon – but he intentionally shot away from the
animal. He, however, warned the owner of the cattle that next time he
wouldn’t shoot the animal but that he would shoot him once and for all. Is
that what you are saying about the fact that these people should be
assisted? I have details on this matter because the person I am talking
about is in the Eastern Cape. Let me hear how the Minister responds. Thank
you.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon member. I
want to say that we agree with him, as I have said in my first response
that this problem of evicting people from the farms, in most cases, is
illegally conducted. We have laws in this country. That is why I am saying
now that we are going to initiate the Land Rights Awareness Campaign,
because we have discovered that, in most cases, people in the rural areas
are not aware of these laws and their rights. We, therefore, will work with
communities and our Members of Parliament.

We also want to work with organisations, farmworker unions and farm
dwellers so that we are able to reach everyone concerned. I want to say to
the hon member that we have the police. So, as he would know, killing a cow
that does not belong to you is breaking the law. Threatening to kill
somebody is a crime as well.

I would appreciate it if the hon member could report these incidents to the
police or give me the details that he is in possession of so that we could
work together, in order to deal with the man who is victimising people.
Thank you.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Modulasetulolo, le nna ke tla ba le potšišo ya go
latelela go mohlomphegi Tona. Ke a tshepa gore bahlatholli ba gona kua
godimo gomme ba ntshwere ebile ba a hlatholla.

Mohlomphegi Tona, le šoma mošomo wo mobotse ebile re a leboga ka matsapa ao
le a tšeago go thuša batho ba gaborena gore e tle e re ge ba ntšhiwa ka
kgang mo dipolaseng, kgoro ya lena e kgone go ba sekegela tsebe gomme e ba
phuthe ka nako yeo ba lego mathateng.

Potšišo ke gore naa bona boradipolase ba ba go hloka tsebe bao ba
tshwenyago bana ba gaborena le ge ba ba šomela ka thata ka mokgwa wo, re ka
dira eng gore le ge kgoro ya lena e ba thuša, le bona ba kwe bohloko? Re ka
dira eng gore tše dingwe tša ditshenyagalelo tšeo di hlolegilego go kgoro
le bona ba di kwe gomme ba di rwale? Le ka se rwale mošomo wo mokaaka ka
lebaka la bona. Ba dira ka boomo ka go hloka tsebe ga bona. (Translation of
Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I would also like to ask the hon Minister
a follow-up question. I hope that the interpreters are interpreting what I
am saying at the moment.

Hon Minister, you are doing a sterling job and we appreciate all the
initiatives you are taking to help our people during the evictions from the
farms. Your department may be able to help when problems arise.

The question is: What punitive measures are in place, which your department
will be taking with regard to those farmers who ill treat our people even
if our people try their best to do their work? What can we do to let those
farmers share some of the department’s expenditure? You are not supposed to
carry this burden which does not even belong to you. They did this
purposefully because of their arrogance.]

LETONA LA TSA TEMO LE MOBU: Ke a leboha setho se hlomphehang. Jwalo ka ha
ke ne ke boletse hore re tlo kopa di-stakeholder ka ofela hore di kene ho
campaign e re qalang ka yona. Ho Land and Agrarian Reform Project re
shebile hore rebe le di-private-public partnership. Hobane moo mmuso o
shebileng teng re alocata budget e itseng e re tla mathang ka yona hore re
reke naha kapa mapolase hore batho ba dutseng ha bohloko ba sena security
of turner re ba relocate re ba ise mapolaseng tseo.

Re se re qadile maane Rawsonville Western Cape ka Sontaha re ne re le moo.
Moqebelo ona o tla ka 27 October 2007, Tonakgolo ya kwaZulu-Natal oa tseba
hore re tla be re le kwaZulu-Natal, Paulpietersburg maane pela Vryheid.
Moo, re tla be re tsamaisa campaign, ebile re tla be re fa badudi ba
mapolasing lefatshe kapa polase moo batla gonang ho sebetsa teng.

Seo re se buang ke hore, re batla dibanka, di-farmers’ co-operatives le di-
agri companies le tsona di kenye letsoho mona. Hobane rona re le mmuso re
tlile ka pele, mme rere seo re se etsang ke sena, mme re batla hore re
rekele batho lefatshe, re ba hlomphe, re bafe seriti ba fumane lefatshe ba
fumane thupello hotse Lefapheng le Temo, hore le bona ba ba kene, ebe
balemi ba tiileng, ba hodileng batla tlohang ho bo maithutwane hoya ho ba
dicommecial – bahwebi, ba ntano kena ho export market.

Hore re etse dintho tseo ka ofela re shebile hore, ba bang ba balemi ba
rona banang le goodwill ba ikemiseditseng ho sebetsa le mmuso, bateng le
bona, mme ba bangata hore ba re thuse ... (Translation of Sesotho
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank hon, member. As I
have mentioned, we are going to request all stakeholders to join the
campaign that we have already started with. At the Land and Agrarian Reform
Project we are looking at having private-public partnerships, because the
government wants us to allocate a certain amount of money so that we can
buy land or farms so that people who do not have security of tenure can go
and live on those farms.

We have started at Rawsonville in the Western Cape. On Sunday we were
there. This coming Saturday, 27 October 2007, the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal
knows that we will be in his province at Paulpietersburg near Vryheid. When
we get there we will be running a campaign, and we will also be giving land
to farm dwellers or farmers where they will be able to work.

What we are saying is that we want the banks, the farmers’ co-operatives,
as well as agricultural companies to participate. As the government we were
quick in approaching this and we want to buy land for the people, to give
them respect and to restore their dignity. They must get the land as well
as training about the Department of Agriculture, so that they can join in
and become true agriculturists who will emerge from being amateurs into
full-fledged commercial businesspeople and then from there they will be
able to enter the export markets.

The reason that we are doing all this is because we are aware that some of
our agriculturists have goodwill and they are prepared to work with the
government ...]
... to transfer their skills and to form joint ventures with our people so
that this programme can be a success for the good of all South Africans.
But we are also saying, “Can we please stop the evictions?” Government has
come forward ...

Mmuso o butse tsela, mme e fanne ka an olive branch hore to say rona re le
mmuso re nka boikarabelo ba hore re tla reka lefatshe, empa [The government
has held out an olive branch to say “We are the government, we take the
responsibility of buying land, but ...]

... we are also saying to those farmers that want to evict our people ...

... re feng nako re fihle moo re fihle re reke lefatshe. Re kwalle -friz di
evicition tsena ho fihlela re emela mmuso hore o fihle dibakeng tseo. Re ka
leka ho prioritise. Jwalo ka ha ke boletse hore ho tloha kwa-Zulu-Natal re
tla ya Freistata, re tla ya Mpumalanga re tlaya ho diprovinsi kaofela re
target di hot spots moo re nang le “most evictions and most cases of abuse
in the country” mapolaseng a rona. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph
follows.)

[... give us time to arrive there and buy land, so that we can prevent
these evictions until the government reaches such areas. We can try to
prioritize. As I have mentioned, from KwaZulu-Natal we will go to the Free
State; we will also go to Mpumalanga and to all the other provinces. We
will be targeting the hot spots or farmers where we have most evictions and
most cases of abuse in the country.]

Thank you very much, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): We have come to the end of
Question Time. I would like to thank the hon Ministers – the Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs – and convey our sincere thanks to them for
attending this session. I would also like to thank the special delegates,
particularly the premiers. Our Rotating Deputy Chairperson will also convey
the message that we thank them for participating in today’s session.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                           CO-OPERATIVE BANKS BILL
                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Chair, the Co-operative Banks Bill, 2007, seeks to create
an appropriate regulatory framework for deposit-taking, member-based
financial services co-operatives. The Bill promotes and advances the social
and economic welfare of South Africans by, firstly, enhancing access to
banking services under sound and sustainable co-operative banks; and,
secondly, ensuring the right of access to appropriate and affordable basic
banking services for all South Africans. The Bill achieves this by
empowering communities to establish, own and manage their own co-operative
banks under an appropriate regulatory and development framework.

The Bill represents sector-specific legislation that enhances public
confidence in community-owned banking institutions, allowing these
institutions to grow, flourish and be sustainable. The Bill provides
protection to depositors of these institutions by extending the lender-of-
last-resort facilities to such institutions, protections that in the past
were only available to depositors of commercial banks.

The Co-operative Banks Bill provides for the formal regulation and
supervision of co-operative banks. While also creating a development
framework to promote and support co-operative banks, the Bill does not
propose a new concept. Co-operative banks have been in existence and very
successful in countries such as Germany, Australia, the United Kingdom, the
United States, India, Brazil, Tanzania, Uganda and many others.

A significant number of adult South Africans still do not have access to
financial services. This requires community participation and government
intervention. The Bill achieves both. The Co-operative Banks Bill is
recognised by all as a step in the right direction. This is borne out by
the fact that the Bill was supported by all political parties during the
Second Reading debate in the National Assembly.

Chair, I hereby request the House to pass the Co-operative Banks Bill,
2007. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT - ACCESSION TO THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT FOR THE
  INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION ON RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OF GENERATION IV
                           NUCLEAR ENERGY SYSTEMS


Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chair, hon members are intimidating me.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please! Hon Adams, you are
out of order.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Please protect me, Chair.

Chairperson, hon members of this House and officials from the department –
I don’t see them - the South African government signed a loose agreement on
collaboration on research and development of nuclear energy systems in
2001. This is an international agreement that would be legally binding on
us, South Africans, if this House agrees and accedes to it.

Big powers, or big brothers, have already done so: the USA, the UK, France,
Canada and Japan. South Africa is not an active member. It has been
clarified by both the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development that there is no conflict with
international obligations and domestic laws, respectively. The approval by
Cabinet is there and the Department of Minerals and Energy will be the
implementing agent for South Africa.

We were briefed on the matter and made to understand that governments are
working together. One of the aims of the agreement is to have nuclear
energy systems available for international deployment by 2030 or even
earlier, as the Minister said when she answered one of the questions.
Failure to accede to the agreement will result in South Africa continuing
to be a nonmember and not receiving the potential benefits.

We are also one of the founders of this GIF, or Generation IV International
Forum, so it falls on us to be full members. Nationally, by being party to
this, we will enhance the effectiveness of South Africa’s nuclear programme
related to the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor project, as Minister Alec Erwin
has said earlier this year in this House. This will build confidence in the
PBMR-type technology as key elements of Generation IV nuclear technologies.
It will also give our country early and exclusive access to research
results arising from the specific research undertaken.

There will also be attendant benefits for the lead department and for the
Department of Science and Technology, the SA Nuclear Energy Corporation,
and other nuclear role-players as a result of acceding to this agreement.
Our committee chair requests this House to vote in favour of this
agreement. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon member. That
concludes the debate. I shall now put the question. The question is that
the report be adopted. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section
65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation
heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all
delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. There is none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
this Chair whether they vote in favour of, or against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Limpopo? Microphone, please, for
Limpopo.

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo seconds.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke wa rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): All provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, I’ve been requested
to announce that ANC members who belong to social services have an urgent
meeting in S12A immediately after we adjourn.

The Council adjourned at 16:59.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2007
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

  1. The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
         Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2006-2007.

  2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2006-2007
         [RP 123-2007].

  3. The Minister of Science and Technology

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
         Council (HSRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 128-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
         Natural Scientific Professions 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

National Council of Provinces

  1. The Chairperson


    a) The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated  6
       September  2007  to  the  Chairperson  of  the  National  Council  of
       Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment  of  the
       South African National Defence Force in the Central African Republic:


       EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR A  SERVICE
       IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE  REPUBLIC  OF
       SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC


       This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that  I  have
       authorised the employment of the South African National Defence Force
       (SANDF)  personnel  to  the  Central  African  Republic   (CAR),   in
       fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of  South
       Africa towards the CAR. The SANDF members will be  deployed,  amongst
       others, to assist with the capacity building of the  Central  African
       Republic Defence Force and to renovate military bases in the CAR.


       This employment was authorised in accordance with the  provisions  of
       section 201(2)(c) of  the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
       Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002  (Act  No
       42 of 2002).


       A total of eighty five (85) SANDF members will be employed as soon as
       all logistic arrangements have been completed. The deployment will be
       until 31 March 2008.


       I will communicate this report to members of  the  National  Assembly
       and wish to request  that  you  bring  the  contents  hereof  to  the
       attention of the National Council of Provinces.


       Regards
       signed
       TM MBEKI

                         TUESDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury
           for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
           the Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2006-2007 [RP 139-2007].

2.    The Minister of Labour

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
           Fund (UIF) for 2006-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 162-2007].



      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service Sector
           Education and Training Authority (PSeta) for 2006-2007 [RP 73-
           2007].

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
           for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
           on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

      (b)   Government Notice No 517 published in Government Gazette No
           30003 dated 21 June 2007: Repeal Part 1 of the Regulations
           published by Government Notice No. R2362 of 18 November 1977 in
           terms of the Trade Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).

      (c)   Government Notice No R.544 published in Government Gazette No
           30023 dated 6 July 2007: Compulsory specification for cement in
           terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      (d)   Government Notice No R.545 published in Government Gazette No
           30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment of
           levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
           specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
           (Act No 29 of 1993).
      (e)   Government Notice No R.546 published in Government Gazette No
           30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment of
           levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
           specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
           (Act No 29 of 1993).

      (f)   Government Notice No R.547 published in Government Gazette No
           30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment of
           levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
           specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
           (Act No 29 of 1993).
      (g)   Government Notice No R.580 published in Government Gazette No
           30050 dated 13 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
           Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      (h)   Government Notice No R.581 published in Government Gazette No
           30050 dated 13 July 2007: Incorporation of an external company
           as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Revere
           International Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act
           No 61 of 1973).

      (i)   Government Notice No R.582 published in Government Gazette No
           30050 dated 13 July 2007: Incorporation of an external company
           as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Delburne Holdings
           Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of
           1973).

     (j)    Government Notice No 643 published in Government Gazette No
           30074 dated 20 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
           Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).
     (k)    Government Notice No 644 published in Government Gazette No
           30074 dated 20 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
           Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

     (l)    Government Notice No 648 published in Government Gazette No
           30092 dated 20 July 2007: Companies and Intellectual Property
           Registration Office (CIPRO) – Intellectual Property Division:
           Notice in terms of regulations 3(7) in terms of the Copyright
           Act, 1978 (Act No 98 of 1978).

     (m)    Government Notice No 649 published in Government Gazette No
           30074 dated 20 July 2007: Repeal of Government Notice No 1322 of
           1 September 1995 and publishing of regulations in terms of the
           Trade Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).

     (n)    Government Notice No 698 published in Government Gazette No
           30144 dated 10 August 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
           Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

     (o)    Government Notice No 741 published in Government Gazette No
           30189 dated 17 August 2007: Incorporation of an external company
           as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Kotze Investments
           (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of
           1973).

     (p)    Government Notice No 781 published in Government Gazette No
           30225 dated 28 August 2007: Rules for the conduct of matters
           before the National Consumer Tribunal in terms of the National
           Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).

     (q)    Government Notice No 819 published in Government Gazette No
           30254 dated 7 September 2007: Proposed amendment of the
           Compulsory Specification for Vehicles of Category 03 and 04, in
           terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

4.    The Minister of Science and Technology
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
           Foundation (NRF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture
        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of Arts
           and Culture for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for 2006-2007.

                        WEDNESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted


    (1)     The Minister of Finance
          a) Molaotlhomo wa Lekgethwana la Thomelontle ya Taemane [M 22 –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

         This is the official translation into Setswana of the Diamond
         Export Levy Bill [B 22 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

         (b)     Molaotlhomo wa Lekgethwana la Thomelontle (Tsamaiso) ya
             Taemane [M 23 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


         This is the official translation into Setswana of the Diamond
         Export Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23 – 2007] (National Assembly
         – sec 75).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    Electronic Communications Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Communications. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF)
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 112-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
         Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
         Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2006-2007.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
         (RSR) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 94-2007].

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
         Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 146-2007].

    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
         Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2006-2007.

     g) Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of South
        Africa and Air Navigation Services Company for 2006-2007.
   2. The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
         (CGE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 116-2007].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
         Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 96-2007].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
         Group of Companies (CEF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group of Companies for 2006-
         2007 [RP 189-2007].

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
         Board Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 111-2007].

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
         Regulator (NNR) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 95-2007].

    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology (Mintek)
         for 2006-2007, including the Report f the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 109-2007].
    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
         Council for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 26-2007].

 3. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board for
        2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 210-2007].

                         THURSDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
         Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         132-2007].


   2. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
         Board for Auditors for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
    (b)     Government Notice No 824 published in Government Gazette No
         30264 dated 7 September 2007: Notice of allocations per
         municipality for Schedule 7 local government conditional grants, in
         accordance with sections 8(3) and 22(1)(a) of the Division of
         Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No 1 of 2007).


 3. The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
         Transport for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2006-2007.

 4. The Minister of Social Development

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
         Social Development for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 for 2006-
         2007 [RP 203-2007].

 5. The Minister of Communications

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
         Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial for 2006-2007 [RP
         169-2007].

 6. The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 51-2007].
     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education
         and Training Authority (Eseta) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 61-2007].

 7. The Minister of Public Works

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa for
         2006-2007.

 8. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department of
         Justice and Constitutional Development for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         23 for 2006-2007 [RP 119-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Presidents’ Fund for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 120-2007].


 9. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         27 for 2006-2007 [RP 80-2007].


10. The Minister of Minerals and Energy

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
         Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.
11. The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 147-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
         Authority (TCTA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

12. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
         Agriculture for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 25 for 2006-2007 [RP
         216-2007].

     b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of Land
        Affairs for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2006-2007 [RP 209-2007].

                          FRIDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bill submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Finance


        a) Bankwysigingswetsontwerp [W 12 – 2007] (National Assembly –
           proposed sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Banks
         Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec
         75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Foreign Affairs

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of Foreign
         Affairs for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 3 for 2006-2007.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
         International Co-operation Fund for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.


   2. The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 - Statistics South
         Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for Vote 13 for 2006-2007 [RP 104-
         2007].


   3. The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
         Provincial and Local Government for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         5 for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and  Financial  Statements  of  Municipal  Infrastructure
         Investment  Unit  (Proprietary)  Limited  (MIIU)  for   2006-2007,
         including the Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 27-2007].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Municipal  Demarcation
         Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 218-2007].

   4. The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
         Security Agency for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 100-2007].

   5. The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
         Communications for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2006-2007 [RP
         204-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
         Institute of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of  2006-2007  [RP
         185-2007].

 6. The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  10  –  Department  of
         Public Service and Administration  for  2006-2007,  including  the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of  Vote
         10 for 2006-2007 [RP 220-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  12  –  South  African
         Management Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2006-2007,  including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  of
         Vote 12 for 2006-2007.


   7. The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  17  –  Department  of
         Labour for 2006-2007, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 17 for 2006-2007 [RP 49-2007].




   8. The Minister of Public Works

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of Public
         Works for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 6 for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the  Independent  Development
         Trust for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 182-2007].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
         Environment (CBE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Construction  Industry
         Development Board (CIDB) for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


   9. The Minister of Health

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
         Health for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2006-2007 [RP 115-
         2007].

  10. The Minister of Housing

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
         (Proprietary) Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

  11. The Minister of Safety and Security

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Independent
         Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 for
         2006-2007 [RP 223-2007].

  12. The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South  African  Drug-Free
         Sport for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 148-2007].

  13. The Minister of Trade and Industry

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade
         and Industry for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2006-2007.

  14. The Minister of Science and Technology

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
         Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 215-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Academy of Science  of  South
         Africa for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

  15. The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  30  –  Department  of
         Minerals and Energy for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 30  for  2006-
         2007 [RP 35-2007].

  16. The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of Water
         Affairs and Forestry for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34  for  2006-
         2007 [RP 201-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Inkomati Catchment Management
         Agency for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 177-2007].

  17. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of  the  Land  and  Agricultural
         Bank of South Africa (Land  Bank)  for  2006-2007,  including  the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 219-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements  of  the  National  Agricultural
         Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007  [RP
         1-2007].

      c) Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological
         Products Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


                           MONDAY, 1 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Communications

         (a)     Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2007]
              (National Assembly– proposed sec 75) [Bill and prior notice
              of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 30307
              of 17 September 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Communications of the National Assembly, as well as referral
              to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in
              terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    (a)      Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Nuclear
         Regulator (NNR) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 95-2007].

        Please note: The abovementioned item is a correction of item 2(e)
        under the entry “Tablings” published on page 1898 of the
        Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 26 September 2007.

   2. The Minister of Housing


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  Vote  28  –  Department  of
         Housing for 2006-2007, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 28 for 2006-2007 [RP 113-2007].



3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Upliftment of the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr  M
         S Makamu, a senior magistrate at Benoni.


    (b)     Report in terms of section 13(4)(a)  of  the  Magistrates  Act,
         1993 (Act No 90 of 1993): Suspension of a  magistrate:  Mr  T  V  D
         Matyolo.

    (c)     Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in  terms
         of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of  1993):
         Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M F Mathe.

    (d)     Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in  terms
         of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of  1993):
         Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M K Chauke.

    (e)     Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in  terms
         of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of  1993):
         Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M F Mathe.

        f) Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament  in  terms
           of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act,  1993  (Act  No  90  of
           1993): Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr I X Masimini.


   4. The Minister of Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  Vote  15  –  Department  of
         Education for 2006-2007,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 15  for  2006-2007  [RP
         110-2007].


5.    The Minister of Science and Technology
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  the  Tshumisano  Trust  for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


                           TUESDAY, 2 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
       Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2007] – Act No 13 of 2007 (assented to and
       signed by President on 26 September 2007).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Report and Financial Statements of  National  Prosecuting  Authority
        for 2006-2007, including the Reports of the Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements for 2006-2007 and on the  Financial  Statements
        of the Criminal Assets Recovery Account for 2006-2007.

                          WEDNESDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Rules made in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of
         Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
    SANDF to Uganda, dated 14 September 2007:

       The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
       letter from the President on the employment of the South African
       National Defence Force (SANDF) to Uganda, referred to the Committee,
       reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


2.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
    SANDF to the Union of Comoros, dated 14 September 2007:

       The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
       letter from the President on the employment of the South African
       National Defence Force (SANDF) to the Union of Comoros, referred to
       the Committee, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
       thereon.


3.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
    SANDF within the Republic of South Africa, 14 September 2007:

       The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
       letter from the President on the employment of the South African
       National Defence Force (SANDF) within the Republic of South Africa,
       referred to the Committee, reports that it has concluded its
       deliberations thereon.


4.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
    SANDF to Zambia, dated 14 September 2007:


       The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
       letter from the President on the employment of the South African
       National Defence Force (SANDF) to Zambia, referred to the Committee,
       reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon


                           MONDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2007
ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Sport and Recreation


          a) Umthethosivivinywa Kazwelonke Wochibiyela Ezemidlalo Kanye
             Nezokuzithokozisa [B 17B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).




         This is the official translation into isiZulu of the National
         Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2006] (National
         Assembly – sec 75).


    (2)     The Minister of Housing


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Beskermingsmaatreëls vir Behuisings-
             verbruikers [W 6 – 2007] (Nasional Assembly – sec 76).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Housing
         Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill [B 6 – 2007]
         (National Assembly – sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  20  –  Department  of
         Correctional Services for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote  20  for  2006-
         2007 [RP 217-2007].

   2. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (a)    Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Perishable  Products
         Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.



3.    The Minister of Transport

    Letter from the Minister of Transport, dated 04 October  2007,  to  the
    Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)  of  the
    Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining  the
    delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports of  South  African  Maritime
    Safety Authority, the Cross-Border Road  Transport  Agency,  the  Urban
    Transport Fund and the Road Traffic Management  Corporation  for  2006-
    2007.
    WRITTEN EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING  OF  THE  ANNUAL
    REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN  MARITIME  SAFETY
    AUTHORITY (SAMSA), THE CROSS-BORDER ROAD TRANSPORT AGENCY (C-BRTA), THE
    URBAN TRANSPORT FUND (UTF) AND THE ROAD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT  CORPORATION
    (RTMC) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2007


    I write to inform Parliament that in terms of section 65(2)(a)  of  the
    Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No  1  of  1999),  as  amended
    (PFMA), I was unfortunately not able to table the  Annual  Reports  and
    audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March 2007   of  the
    South African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA), the Cross-Border  Road
    Transport Agency (C-BRTA), the Urban Transport Fund (UTF) and the  Road
    Traffic  Management  Corporation  (RTMC)  before  the  deadline  of  30
    September 2007.


    The explanation of the late tabling of the Annual Reports  in  question
    is that the SAMSA, C-BRTA, UTF and RTMC could not submit  their  Annual
    Reports in time, because unforeseen delays that have  been  experienced
    with the office of the Auditor-General  in  submitting  the  respective
    Audit Reports on the Entities’ Financial Statements for the year  ended
    31 March 2007 to be included in their 2006-2007 Annual Reports.
    Arrangements will, however, be  made  for  the  above-mentioned  Public
    Entities’ Annual  Reports  to  be  tabled  in  Parliament  as  soon  as
    possible.


    I trust that this will be in order.


    Kind regards
    Mr J T Radebe, MP
    Minister of Transport

4.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    Report of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate for 2006-2007.

                           TUESDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Government Notice No R.824 published in Government Gazette No
         30264 dated 7 September 2007: Allocations per Municipality in terms
         of Sections 8(3) and 22(1)(a) of the Act for the following Schedule
         7 Local Government Conditional Grants: (1) Bulk Infrastructure
         Grant, (2) Backlogs in Water and Sanitation at Clinics and Schools
         Grant, and (3) Backlogs in the Electrification of Clinics and
         Schools Grant in term of the Division of Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No
         1 of 2007).

      (b)   Government Notice No R.835 published in Government Gazette No
         30276 dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 1 (No.
         1/11344) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).


      (c)   Government Notice No R.836 published in Government Gazette No
         30276 dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 3 (No.
         3/619) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

      (d)   Government Notice No R.837 published in Government Gazette No
         30276 dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 3 (No.
         3/620) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

      (e)   Government Notice No R.838 published in Government Gazette No
         30276 dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 4 (No.
         4/306) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

   2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Gender
         Equality (CGE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 176-2007].

                          THURSDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2007
ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

           1. Assent by President in respect of Bills
           2.
      a) Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/08 Financial Year) [B
         37 – 2007] – Act No 16 of 2007 (assented to and signed by
         President on 1 October 2007).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Sport and Recreation

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of Sport
         and Recreation South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for
         2006-2007 [RP 106-2007].

                           FRIDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


         a) Bili ya ho Fana ka Matlataelo a Mekgwa-Tsamaiso ya Diprovense [B
            8 – 2007] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76).

         This is the official translation into seSotho of the Mandating
         Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8 – 2007] (National Council of
         Provinces – sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
   1. The Minister of Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
         for Educators (SACE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
         Assurance in General and Further Education and Training – Umalusi
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Withdrawal of tabling of draft rules

    (a)     A letter dated 18 July 2007 was received from the Minister for
         Justice and Constitutional Development, requesting the withdrawal
         of the draft rules made in terms of section 7(2)(c) of the Criminal
         Procedure Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 42 of 2003), tabled on 28
         February 2007.


      b) Correspondence received from Mrs J J C Thompson (nee Coetzee).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Members’ and Provincial
        Legislative Proposals.

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs  on
     the Annual  Report  and  Financial  Statements  for  2006/2007  of  the
     Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, dated 9 October 2007:

        The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having been
        briefed by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry on its
        Annual Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 for 2006-2007,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements of Vote 34 for 2006-2007, referred to it, reports that
        it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

                          TUESDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

      1) The Minister for Public Enterprises


           a) Mulayotibe wa Afrika Tshipembe wa u Bvisela Khagala Vhudipfi
              [M 14 – 2007] (National Assembly– sec 75).

         This is the official translation into TshiVenda of the South
         African Express Bill [B 14 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


      2) The Minister of Sport and Recreation


         (a)     Umthethosivivinywa Kazwelonke Wochibiyela Ezemidlalo kanye
             Nezokuzithokozisa  [B 17B – 2006] (National Assembly– sec 75).



         This is the official translation into isiZulu of the National
         Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2006] (National
         Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
         2007.

    (b)     Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank – 20
         September 2007.

   2. The Minister of Housing

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

 3. The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
         Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 167-2007].

                         WEDNESDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

    1) The Minister for Public Enterprises


            a) Molaokakanywa wa Broadband Infraco [M 26 – 2007] (National
               Assembly– sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Sepedi of the Broadband
         Infraco Bill [B 26 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 16 October 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     South African Express Bill [B 14B – 2007] (National
              Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.


         (b)     Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26B – 2007] (National Assembly –
              sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.

                          THURSDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 18 October 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 32B – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.


         (b)     Social Housing Bill [B 29B – 2007] (National Assembly –
              sec 76 (1))


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Public
         Services of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Safety and Security

    (a)     Proclamation No R.19 published in Government Gazette No 30162
         dated 10 Augustus 2007: Notification by President in accordance
         with section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy
         against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of
         2004).

    (b)     Proclamation No R.24 published in Government Gazette No 30252
         dated 7 September 2007: Notification by President in accordance
         with section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy
         against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of
         2004).

   2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Proclamation No R.21 published in Government Gazette No 30245
         dated 31 August 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

    (b)     Proclamation No R.22 published in Government Gazette No 30245
         dated 31 August 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

    (c)     Proclamation No R.23 published in Government Gazette No 30245
         dated 31 August 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

    (d)     Proclamation No R.25 published in Government Gazette No 30290
         dated 12 September 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).
National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

   a) Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) for the
      financial year ended 31 March 2006.


CREDA SCAN ATTACHED DOCUMENT – PAGES 1944-1968

                           FRIDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

      1) The Minister of Housing


           a) Wetsontwerp op Maatskaplike Behuising  [W 29 – 2007]
              (National Assembly– sec 76).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Social
         Housing Bill [B 29 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76).

          b) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Huurbehuising  [W 30 – 2007] (National
             Assembly– sec 76).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Rental
         Housing Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on the study tour
    to Algeria, dated 18 September 2007:

    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence having undertaken a study tour
    to the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria from 26 November to 1
    December 2006, reports as follows:


     1. Background: Algeria


        Algeria, in northwest Africa on the Mediterranean coast, is the
        second largest country in Africa after Sudan. The Sahara covers more
        than four-fifths of its territory, where the inhabitants are
        concentrated in oases. More than 90 percent of Algerians live along
        the Mediterranean coastlands on only 12 percent of the country’s
        land.


        Since antiquity Algeria has enticed settlers- Phoenicians, Romans,
        Arabs, Turks- and, in the 19th century, French farmers. The French
        organized Algeria into departments and disenfranchised native Arabs
        and Berbers. In 1954 Algerians rebelled. The war that followed took
        a million lives before independence in 1962 and a million French
        colonists left. This conflict forged a deep rooted sense of Algerian
        national identity. The Front Liberation Nationale (FLN), who led the
        liberation struggle against France, became Algeria’s only legal
        political party at independence (1962) resulting in Algeria becoming
        a socialist single-party state under the FLN.


    1.1     Relations with South Africa.


        Algeria remains SA’s strategic partner in North Africa based on
        economic and political criteria. Synergy at the executive level in
        terms of the AU and NEPAD has resulted in a Presidential Bi-
        national Commission. Bilateral trade and business links have
        developed slowly due to a difficult business environment and weak
        direct links between the two countries. Growing relations exist in
        the sectors of military technical and military industrial co-
        operation.


        Bilaterally, South Africa and Algeria have developed close co-
        operation in the field of defence and intelligence. South African
        defence companies are continuing projects with Algeria and tendering
        for new contracts. The second Joint Committee in charge of co-
        operation in the field of Defence was held in March 2006 where it
        was agreed to extend a range of interactions such as training
        programmes, joint exercises, technology transfer and exploring
        military production capabilities and partnerships.


    2.      Composition of JSCD Delegation.


          • Mr S D Montsitsi, (ANC), Chairperson and Leader of the
            Delegation
          • Mr  M A Mzizi (IFP)
          • Ms M D Nxumalo (ANC)
          • Mr J Schippers (ANC) and
          • Mr J Ramrock (Committee Secretary)


    3.      Objectives of the visit


        The objective of the visit was to study how Algeria was able to
        introduce a successful pension scheme system, including, programmes
        and projects that assisted and alleviated the plight of their
        military veterans. Algeria is also one of few countries on the
        continent leading with respect to creating and improving the best
        conditions for exit mechanism for military veterans.


     4. Findings.


    4.1     Meeting with Conseil de la Nation (Upper House of Parliament).


        The delegation was met and welcomed by the Acting Chair of the
        Committee on Defence, General A Cheloufi and other Committee
        members. General Cheloufi spoke of the warm relations between
        Algeria and South Africa and the common historical background
        (colonisation) shared by the two countries. Algeria fought a long
        and bitter war of liberation against France. Various military
        factions combined to form the National Liberation Front (FLN).
        Liberation forces were not paid a salary but were very committed.
        Dedicated former combatants were deployed into various governing
        positions after liberation. Patriotism played a major unity role
        including the move from a liberation army to a national army.
        Political involvement by defence force members was discouraged and
        those that wanted to participate in politic were asked to leave the
        army and join political parties of their choice. Transforming the
        army into a professional army became a big problem initially, but
        this was overcome later. A Ministry of Veteran Affairs was later
        formed.


      . Meeting with Assembly National Populaire (Lower House of
        Parliament).


        Mr Mouhamed Dif, Chairperson of the Committee on Defence, and other
        members of the Committee in the Lower House, addressed the
        delegation on the history of the Algerian Parliament including the
        different political parties and number of seats held by them.
        Pension payments are regulated by legislation that included in it
        the modernization of the Algerian army.


        The Ministry of Defence was responsible for the pension payment of
        liberation fighters who remained in the barracks after the war.
        There were two categories of fighters: those that fought in the bush
        and those that fought outside the bush. War veterans, including
        widows of war veterans, all received pension benefits. The number of
        years fought in the struggle is doubled for counting the number of
        years as experience.


        Priority was given to the setting up of centers for benefit payments
        to war veterans and, in particular, war orphans. Statistics were
        collected countrywide, one year after liberation, on the number of
        war orphans, including the sons and daughters of martyrs. They
        received free education, health and other social benefits. Females
        were assisted until they marry and those who stay un-married were
        provided with pension for life.
    4.3     Meeting with the South African Ambassador.


        The delegation met the South African Ambassador to Algeria, Mr R S
        Moloi, and his officials for a briefing session. The Ambassador
        reminded the delegation of the historical close ties South Africa
        shares with Algeria and what steps are in place to try and
        strengthen those ties. Algeria is a founding member of NEPAD and
        continues to give active support to the NEPAD Secretariat. President
        Bouteflika wants to be associated with South Africa, and believes
        that if the two countries are seen as close allies within the
        continent and beyond, it will assist him in driving his African and
        global vision domestically.


        The Algerian market holds substantial potential for South African
        investors. Hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals, infrastructural
        construction, the financial and manufacturing sectors offer
        lucrative opportunities. An incomplete transformation to a market
        economy in Algeria, limits the potential for Algerian direct
        investment and private sector involvement in South Africa.


        Algeria is also experiencing a serious security challenge in the
        east, where Islamic insurgents have staged frequent attacks
        targeting government buildings.


    4.4     Meeting with the Secretary – General of the Ministry of
        Moudjahidine (War Veterans)


        The Secretary – General of the Ministry of Moudjahidine (War
        Veterans) briefed the delegation on the historical reasons for the
        establishment of the Ministry. The war of liberation was very
        costly, in terms of lost of lives and other casualties. Over one
        million Algerians were killed and some 700,000 disabled. The first
        task of the Ministry of Moudjahidine was to identify and create
        files of those who died and those that were disabled. So, a file
        existed for each person in that category. All provinces in the
        country have special departments with full data on all martyrs and
        their beneficiaries. The disabled and the families of those that
        were killed were given preference on social and other state
        benefits. The widows and children of martyrs were provided with full
        pension payments, the same with the disabled depending on the
        severity of the injury. Medical coverage, including prosthetics at
        all military and state hospitals was free for all beneficiaries, the
        same with medicine from pharmacies. They were also provided with
        discounts on state transport, including sea, air, road and rail.
        Those with severe handicaps travelled free. Discount on house
        renting were also provided. Beneficiaries received physiotherapy and
        free accommodation at guest houses, including spas. Projects on land
        and agriculture, and mining exploration, were also availed to
        veterans.


        The 40th anniversary of Algerian independence (2002) became the cut-
        off date for registration of claims.


        4.4.1     Department of Heritage.


             The delegation also visited the Department of Heritage,
             responsible for the collecting, writing and distribution of
             reading and printing of books, documents and other materials,
             including films on the revolution.


        4.4.2     Data and filing section.


             The data and filing section contained case documents on each
             and every individual registered for benefits, some 7 km of
             material.
             Each beneficiary received an amount of 10,000 Lira (R1,000)
             every three (3) months. This is paid out at specific centers
             including post offices. Monitoring is done through the issuing
             of “living certificates” each year to beneficiaries that
             provide certified forms. The pension of parents who died is
             transferred to their children until they reach the age of 18
             years or 21 years if attending school/college/university.


             The budget for the Ministry of Veteran Affairs is the fourth
             largest of their National Budget.


        4.4.3     Cultural and Historical Heritage Directorate.


             The Cultural and Historical Heritage Directorate works very
             closely with the Department of Heritage. It also deals with
             the caption and recording of events related to the revolution.
             It is also responsible for the protection and maintenance of
             monuments and the grave sites of martyrs. This is in
             partnership with NGO’s in the various provinces, who also
             oversee museums. The Directorate is also responsible for the
             servicing of the National Wall of Remembrance situated in the
             capital, Algiers. The Wall contains the names of all martyrs
             and is commemorated each year. The Algerian calendar provides
             for nine different days to celebrate the Revolution.


     5. Meeting with Officials from the Ministry of Defence


        The delegation met with officials from the Ministry of Defence who
        re-iterated the views expressed earlier by other officials, on the
        system on pension and social security. When people within the
        Defence force retire they are provided with three months salary in
        advance. Pension is calculated according to the minimum national
        wage. The amount a person gets depends on the number of service
        years he/she has, for example. an ordinary soldier qualifies only
        after 15 years of service; someone with 25 years of service can
        receive a pension immediately.


        The pension retirement age for ordinary soldiers is 40 and for
        officers 60.


        Veteran’s pension payment depends on rank and number of service
        years. The revolutionary period is regarded as service years.


        Military service is compulsory to every citizen.


        Treasury has special agreements with commercial banks to stand as
        guarantors for military veterans when loans are sought, although
        granting a loan is not automatic.


        The Military Pension Act is going through review at the moment to
        fit the current situation and concerns of pensioners.


        There is also legislation in place that forbids any discharged
        military person from joining any security related company for at
        least five years.


    5.1     Visit to the Central Museum of the Army.


        Members of the delegation were also able to visit the Central Museum
        of the Army, which was created by a decree of the Ministry of
        National Defence and was inaugurated 1 November , 1984, the
        thirtieth anniversary of the Algerian Revolution.
        The Museum is a military institution managed by the Directory of
        Communication, Information and Orientation.


        The museum houses more than 3000 objects and works, including over
        2000 books, thousands of documents and archives that were collected
        in a decade. Through the history that it exposed, the museum is a
        vivid institution in which an attractive and spectacular evolution
        is exhibited, and also serves as a library for historical research.


        It periodically organizes exhibitions showing the different
        historical periods such as the different battles (naval and land)
        fought earlier.


    6.      Conclusion


        The delegation believes that it met its objectives with the study
        tour. The experience of the Algerian experiment in assisting their
        Military Veterans with sustainable and viable social security
        benefits is strongly recommended as a model to other African
        countries. South Africa has an opportunity to try and address and
        correct some of the challenges experienced by Military Veterans in
        the Republic of South Africa. The sacrifices made by these brave men
        and women of our country, beg for nothing more and nothing less.


        The Committee wishes to thank our Ambassador, Mr R S Moloi, for his
        hospitality and assistance to the delegation and for availing his
        officials, in particular Ms Roshan Dadoo, who played a sterling part
        in making the visit a success.


                           MONDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2007
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
    on the study tour to North-West, dated 11 July 2007:


The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
undertaken an oversight visit to North West on 20 – 24 November, reports as
follows:



1. Introduction



The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs undertook an
oversight visit to various prisons, Courts and police stations in the North
West from the 20th - 24th November 2006.



1.1 Composition of the delegation



The NCOP delegation was composed of the following:

         • Kgoshi L M Mokoena, (ANC) (Chairperson and  the  leader  of  the
           delegation)
         • Mr Z C Ntuli, (ANC)
         • Ms F Nyanda (ANC)
         • Mr A L Moseki, (ANC)
         • Mr N J Mack (ANC)
         • Mr A T  Manyosi
         • Mr L  Fielding (DA)
         • Mr M  Mzizi (IFP)
         • Mr Moiloa (NNW  Special  delegate)  Chairperson  for  Transport,
           Roads and Community Safety
         • Mr Baloyi, Member of the Provincial Legislature
         • Ms N G Dinizulu (Acting Committee Secretary)
         • Mr K Lobi (Committee Assistant)

Departmental Officials:

The delegation was accompanied by  Provincial  Commissioner  Beetha  (SAPS);
Regional Commisioner Tshivhase (Correctional Services);  Director  from  the
Department of  Safety  and  Security,  Mr  L  R  Motlogeloa  and  officials;
Director from the Department of  Correctional  Services  Mr  S  Mzanywa  and
officials; Department of Justice; Mr T Malema,  Regional  Head  and  Glenice
Nkotsoe, Director: Court Operations and court officials, Bailey  Mahlakoleng
from the Department of Transport Road and Community Safety.; and Mr  Baloyi,
Member of the Provincial Legislature.


1.2. Purpose of the study tour


            • To visit prisons to assess the extent of overcrowding and, as
              part of the oversight function, to see if the institution  is
              functioning properly.
            •  To  find  out  whether  there  are  situations  where  young
              juveniles are mixed with hardened criminals.
            • To check whether awaiting trial prisoners are a factor in the
              level of overcrowding.
            • To check whether  the  delays  in  the  completion  of  cases
              contribute to overcrowding.
            • To  understand  challenges  confronting  the  Departments  of
              Safety and Security, Correctional Services and Justice.
            • To monitor the implementation of laws passed  by  Parliament,
              and to identify obstacles in the implementation of such laws.
            • To check if there is any counselling offered to the prisoners
              and  finally  how  Parliament  can  offer  assistance   where
              necessary

The Committee has identified a number of  issues  that  need  attention  and
investigation, and these include:
    • The urgent renovation of existing dilapidated building  cells  by  the
      Department of Public Works.
    • Intervention by the committee in the recovery of the livestock that is
      held in Botswana.
    • Revisiting the working hours of the Small Claims Court.
    • Delimitations and reviewal  of  magisterial  jurisdictional  areas  so
      that, to the extent possible, they are  in  line  with  post-apartheid
      demarcate ring.
    •  Interaction  among  the  three  Departments:  Correctional  Services,
      Justice and Safety and Security to ensure a synergy  and  maximum  co-
      operation amongst these law enforcement agents.

2. CENTRES VISITED

The Committee visited the following Police Stations, Magistrates Courts  and
Correctional Centres:

Police Stations:
Rustenburg
Itsoseng
Lemanyaneng
Mafikeng
Zeerust
Lichtenburg
Tlhabane
Swartriggens
Nietverdient
Motswedi
Magistrates Court:
Lehutse
Lichtenburg
Mabatho
Bafokeng

Correctional Centres:
Ramotlana (Rustenburg)
Zeerust
Lichtenburg
Rooigrond
Mafikeng

3. BRIEFING BY CLUSTER DEPARTMENTS
The  Committee  was  briefed  by  three  departments,  namely,  Safety   and
Security, Justice and Correctional Services, which form part  of  the  Peace
and Stability Cluster. The  Head  of  each  of  these  departments  gave  an
overview of the state of their respective departments.

3.1 Briefing by Department of South African Police Service (SAPS)

Deputy Commissioner Mpembe mentioned that the major problem  the  department
is faced with is overcrowding in the holding cells. To manage this, they  do
not keep prisoners on awaiting trial in  their  holding  cells  after  first
appearance in court.   They  are  sent  to  other  prisons  where  there  is
sufficient accommodation.
These prisoners have to be placed in prisons not far from  the  court.  Most
of the stations in rural areas have the capacity to detain  prisoners.   The
stations must detain prisoners who committed serious  crime  such  as  heist
and they have to be placed in separate cells. One of the  challenges  is  to
transport prisoners from one  place  to  another  because  of  the  distance
between the police stations, prisons and the Courts.
Crime is highly controlled in the North West province. Currently  the  focus
is on strengthening the stations but  this  depends  on  the  allocation  of
staff which is done by the National Office.

3.2 Briefing by Department of Correctional Services

Most difficult challenges are overcrowding and HIV infections. The  solution
is to reduce the numbers  by  transferring  prisoners  to  their  respective
provinces. Another challenge is  that  of  foreign  prisoners.  It  is  very
expensive  to  maintain  them.  The  department  recommends   that   foreign
prisoners be transferred to their  respective  countries  once  their  cases
have been finalised.

The Minister launched operation Masibambisane and the Regional  Commissioner
introduced the project to the executive mayoral  committee  and  traditional
leaders, who are very supportive of the operation. The project promotes  co-
operation by all role-players.

The Commissioner is targeting 64 municipalities and has  engaged  the  House
of Traditional leaders in each province as well as councillors to assist  in
educating the community to accept ex-prisoners.

HIV/AIDS is a problem  in  prisons.  Prisoners  as  well  as  officials  are
encouraged to voluntarily check their status. The department is  engaged  in
discussions with the Portfolio Committee on Correctional services to  change
the system of recruitment in terms of age. They are proposing that with  the
recruitment of prison officials, the requirement should be 23 years  instead
of 18 years. They feel that at the age of  18  the  person  is  not  matured
enough to deal with the challenges in prison.

The budget allocated to the Province is R900 million and the  department  is
trying its best to spend the money effectively and efficiently.

3.3 Briefing by Department of Justice

The Department has appointed  staff  at  senior  levels,  with  the  aim  of
strengthening the courts. The  challenge  is  the  lack  of  human  capacity
needed for some courts to function effectively. At  the  moment  the  courts
have to operate with a lot of temporary staff.  The  Department  is  in  the
process of filling vacancies with experienced and skilled staff.
Courts have not been adequately equipped for the  new  challenges.  In  many
cases, mobile units are set up in order to cope with the situation. The  new
leadership promised to tighten the  security  in  Courts.  Customer  service
unit has been established to ensure that the  principle  of  Batho  Pele  is
implemented.
The holding cells in Klerksdorp are in a bad  condition.  They  need  to  be
upgraded and the matter has  been  reported  to  the  Department  of  Public
Works. Some courts cannot sit in the afternoon because it is extremely  hot.
Facilitates and equipment have been purchased to make the offices more  user
friendly. There are 33 courts in the province including the High Court.  The
budget allocated to the province is R149 million.

4. VISIT TO RUSTENBURG POLICE STATION

Rustenburg Police Station is in the  Marico  Policing  Area.  Currently  the
station has 364 members. The station has a  staff  shortage  of  34  members
according to the figures they obtained from  National  Office.  The  station
has 20 shifts of reservists, which are allocated 16  hours  per  week.  They
are being paid an allowance. The station is faced with  an  urgent  task  of
locating and arresting the ten most wanted suspects  for  drugs  and  repeat
offences.

The station is in the process of negotiating with the Municipality to get  a
site to build a police station. The cells were built in  1957.  An  approval
was granted to renovate the police station. Up to now nothing has been  done
to fulfil that undertaking.

Problems  that  the  station  is  faced  with   include   overcrowding   and
transporting  prisoners  to  different  police  stations.  Transporting  the
prisoners from point A to  B  only  to  be  told  that  the  case  has  been
postponed, leaves inadequate time for members to deal with crime,  which  is
their core business.

Currently the station has 66 vehicles and a shortage of 22 vehicles. When  a
staff member dies, the  resultant  vacant  post  is  reported  to  the  Area
Manager and the province.  They  are  responsible  for  the  employment  and
deployment of staff.
Case dockets are opened at the Community Service Centres and transferred  to
the Detective Services. They are received by the  members  on  standby.  The
Data Typist at Detective Services distributes dockets amongst the  detective
officers that must acknowledge receipt thereof.

Analysis: The movement of the  case  dockets  is  recorded  on  the  system.
Control registers are in place to secure the movement of  the  case  dockets
between  police  stations  and  courts.   The  police  station  building  is
secured, but there is a need for lockable steel cabinets for each  detective
to tighten security measures.

The Community Police Forum (CPF’s): CPF’s haven established  in  the  Police
area. CPF members are expected to adhere to a code of conduct.  There  is  a
Training Centre in Benoni to train some of the  reservists  to  do  clerical
work.

Successes: The Station has arrested one  member  who  was  selling  dockets.
Stock theft is not a problem for the Rustenburg  police  station.  The  only
place that experienced major stock theft is Madikwe which is  close  to  the
border.

4.1 Illegal Immigrants

The problem here is not  only  their  illegal  status,  but  they  are  also
involved in the      commission  of  their  crimes  such  as  heists.  These
crimes are viewed in the most serious light and the station  is  sensitively
handling the cases.

4.2 Crime Prevention

    • Rustenburg is a high labour intensive area.
    • The area is endowed with huge work opportunities.
    • There is an intensive patrolling system in place.
    • There is a unit responsible for policing farms
    • Victim Support program is also running well.

The Department is engaged with the preparations for the 2010  soccer  games,
training staff members on effective methods of protecting  the  public,  and
this making sure that there will be peace and order in South  Africa  during
that period.

5. VISIT TO RUSTENBURG COURT

5.1 Meeting with Magistrates and Senior Prosecutors from Bafokeng Court  and
Rustenburg Court

The Court was built 30 years ago. The Regional Court has  sufficient  space,
but they lack staff at different levels. Cases are  being  remanded  due  to
the shortage of staff. About 40 to 60 cases are reported on a  daily  basis.
Currently there are 42 cases that need to be dealt with.
Rustenburg is the fastest growing area in South Africa.  There  is  a  staff
component of 22 Prosecutors with one  Senior  Prosecutor  and  two  District
Magistrates. The posts which must be filled  before  end  of  the  financial
year have been advertised. The existing staff has performed very well  under
difficult circumstances.
The court is in need of a reception court. They also  have  a  mobile  court
standing on the premises. The court has a  good  working  relationship  with
the local police stations.

Rustenburg court is engaged in various projects, such as:
             • Automation of maintenance
             • E- Scheduler,  to measure statistics
             • Digital recording
             • Extension of Small Claims Court
             • System improvements plan

5. 2 Challenges facing the court

    • Most holding cells and ablution facilities  are  not  good  for  human
      habitation and use,
    • Some of the Courts are inadequate for the number of Judicial Officers;
    • Staff work under stressful conditions because of the staff shortage;
    • The Bafokeng Magistrates Court has to  streamline  the  operation  for
      beneficiaries to be paid maintenance more efficiently;
    • Operation Sondlo - the beneficiaries do not understand how maintenance
      works;
    • The Small Claims Court is very small and has few staff members to cope
      with its work;
    • The increase of informal settlements, with unemployed people,  results
      in an increase in crime in the area, and
    • Most of the people are unaware of their  rights  and  how  to  enforce
      them.

The establishment of a Municipal Court in Rustenburg has  allowed  Municipal
managers to separate municipal and traffic cases. Members of  the  Judiciary
proposed that shift work must  be  implemented  in  order  to  operate  more
effectively. The Bafokeng Magistrate Court already operates shifts  and  has
been successful.

In order for Magistrates to run courts  productively,  they  need  training.
Magistrates must be  in  control  of  Courts.  In  some  cases,  they  allow
Attorneys to arrive late, which results in the delay of cases.

Every cluster in the district must have cluster meetings.  Magistrates  must
take control and diarise cases for trial.  Two  prosecutors  per  court  can
make a difference.
Magistrate Courts must each have interpreters attached to  them.  The  court
has created a database for international languages used in South  Africa  to
ensure access to justice for all.

There is a discussion with the University of the  North  West  for  training
programmes on interpretation of languages especially sign language. This  is
done in conjunction with the Witwatersrand and Free State Universities.

6. VISIT TO TLHABANE POLICE STATION

Tlhabane policing area comprises  the  following  rural  areas:  Photsaneng,
Thekwane, Madikwe, Kanana, Tlapa, Rankelenyane, Mabitse and Lekgalong.

6.1 Problems facing the Station

    • Policing area is distant from the  police  station  and  this  has  an
      impact on reaction time.
    • Poor infrastructure, unemployment  and  overcrowding,  because  people
      have migrated from all  provinces  and  settled  around  the  platinum
      mines.
    • There has been a problem of ethnic clashes.

The main contact crimes prevalent in the area are:
    • murder,
    • rape,
    •  attempted murder,
    • assaults, and
    •  armed robberies

6.2 Establishment of CPF’s

CPF’s have been formed as well as sub-forums.  Sector  policing  and  sector
managers have been appointed and introduced to  the  communities.  Workshops
with regard to the concept of sector policing have been conducted among  the
community members.

The mine management  has  supplied  a  mobile  clinic  around  the  informal
settlement which provides health services periodically.

Problems with implementation of Sector Policing

    • More members are needed for effective sector policing as  there  is  a
      critical shortage of personnel power.
    • There are no vehicles allocated to each sector.
    • Members of the shift on duty also help with patrols at the sectors and
      this hampers the required standard of service delivery.
    • The influx of persons without documents to  employment  in  the  areas
      surrounding the greater Rustenburg also increases the rate of crime.
    • Re-alignment of police  areas  to  correspond  with  local  Government
      boundaries to achieve effectiveness and efficiency.

6.3 Strategies to reduce crime

    • The station has a joint operation with the specialised unit  and  Home
      Affairs around Tlhabane policing area. More patrols are  conducted  to
      identify possible persons involved in the commission of crime such  as
      housebreaking, rapes and robbery.
    •  Project:  Anti-rape  Strategy,  Victim  Empowerment  Programme-   for
      Domestic violence and Itlhokomele project are underway.
    • The station also makes use of local Radio on  Mondays  -  Friday’s  at
      13:30 to address the public on priority crimes.

6.4 Plans to address the problems

Most of the reservists are used to supplement the activities of  members  at
the sectors during operations. In cases of an  extreme  nature,  specialised
units are summoned for assistances for example, the Dog Unit, ACCU,  Highway
patrol and other specialised units.  More  personnel  will  be  deployed  in
future enlistments. Operations are  held  according  to  crime  pattern  and
crime threat analysis.

Through  the  engagement  of  Tlhabane  SAPS  management   and   the   Local
Government, a  place  for  the  relocation  of  the  community  of  informal
settlements was identified and the building of RDP houses  is  in  progress,
and it is hoped that this will definitely alleviate the  rate  of  crime  in
this policing area.
Due to proactive steps of raiding suspects, the station manages  to  improve
on the detection of  would  be  criminals  and  reduction  of  court  cases.
Registration and utilization of informers yield positive  results  in  terms
of arrests and court cases. The geographic size of the  area  and  the  long
distance between the service stations affect service delivery.

7. VISIT TO SWARTRUGGENS POLICE STATION

Swartruggens Police Station is 60 km  from  Rustenburg.  The  population  of
this Policing area is approximately to 54987 people. The station has a  well
established community Policing Forum. There is a good  working  relationship
between South African Police Service  and  Marico  Commando.  Both  security
structure works jointly to fight crime in the policing area. The station  is
surrounded by 2 high schools and 3 primary  schools.  There  are  7  primary
schools in the area around the station precinct.
The station also has  to  provide  security  to  several  high  schools  and
primary schools in the surrounding area.

7.1 Cases

The station handles between 60 and 100 cases  per  year.  There  are  active
farm watches in the area. The staff strength of the  police  station  stands
at 35, comprising the police, detectives and administration staff.

7. 2 Crime pattern analysis

Serious  and  violent  crimes  such  as   aggravated   robbery   are   rife,
housebreaking in residential and business premises, stock  theft  and  theft
of motor vehicles, etc. Less occurring crimes  are  attempted  murder,  rape
and assault. Crimes detected through police action:  Illegal  possession  of
firearm, drugs and driving under the influence of liquor and crimes  against
women and children: rape, domestic  violence,  indecent  assault  and  child
abuse.

7.3 Resources

Vehicles: These are available for all units, however there are  no  suitable
vehicles for patrols and farm visits.
Physical Resource: Accommodation available for all  units  of  the  station.
There is a though shortage of bullet proof vests and torches.
Skills: Members must be evaluated from time to time to assess skills  levels
and improve thereon.

8. VISIT TO NIETVERDIENT POLICE STATION

The station is situated about 60km from the town of  Zeerust,  and  is  near
the  border  of  Kopfontein,  60km  from  Gaborone,  Botswana.  The  station
services both local and international community visiting  RSA.  The  station
service 4 villages and farms. The following villages  are  serviced  by  the
station: Supington, Lekgopung, Mmasebudule and  Maroelakop  and  surrounding
farms in Nietverdient area. There are no informal settlements in this area.

8.1 Priority Crimes

These are priority crimes in the area:
    • Rape
    • Stock theft and
    • Assault
Crime is more rife at Supingstad and Lekgopung.

8.2 Problematic Crimes

For the past three months rape and stock theft had been problematic  crimes.
Stock theft is very prevalent and the stock is stolen from South Africa  and
taken to Botswana. There is no adequate fencing at the border gates.

8.3 Preventative measures

The station has established a Crime Prevention unit  which  consist  of  ten
reservists and one functional member to conduct visible policing  and  Crime
Prevention Operations, visiting farms and road blocks.

8.4 Problems encountered by the station

The station has a shortage of human resources. The  station  does  not  have
enough offices  and  accommodation  and  thus  members  and  reservists  are
travelling from as far  as  Zeerust.  The  station  serves  two  magisterial
areas, namely, Lehurutse and Zeerust. Members  encounter  difficulties  when
transporting witnesses and the accused to  court.   Telephone  communication
is a problematic, and the old infrastructure does not accommodate toll  free
number 10111, which makes it difficult for the community to report crime.

8.5. Crime Prevention
The station has visible patrols  and  stop  search.  Farm  visits  and  road
blocks are constantly conducted. Meetings are being held with the  community
members to educate the community on how to reduce stock theft by:

    • Visiting cattle post daily
    • Branding of livestock
    • Proper fencing
    • Counting of livestock and
    • Preventing high rate of crime  by  ensuring  that  sectors  carry  out
      patrols within the communities.

9. VISIT TO MOTSWEDI POLICE STATION

   The station is about 40km  from  Zeerust  and  is  in  the  Marico  Area.
   Motswedi police station is servicing up to 16 villages and, as a  result,
   the community is complaining that complaints lodged at the Police Station
   take a long time to be attended to.

1. Problematic Crimes: Robbery  at  shops  owned  by  Bangladesh  nationals,
   rape, housebreaking at residential and business  premises,  are  a  major
   problem. Operations are conducted to address the crimes and Hotspots  and
   these include monitoring the operations of taverns urging them to observe
   closing times, and visible policing.
   Day to day operations were also conducted and suspects were arrested  for
   reported crimes. Suspects in rape cases are tracked down and arrested.

2. Sector policing: Motswedi is divided into 4 sectors which are  not  fully
   operational. The reason is that there is a shortage  of  resources,  that
   is, human and logistical  resources.  Another  problem  is  that  pension
   payouts are conducted for two full weeks and Crime Prevention members are
   posted there. Also the CSC is only manned by 3 members and reservists per
   shift.


   Sector 4, which  includes  Supongstad,  Lekgophung  and  Mmasebudule  was
   previously     policed by Motswedi, but, due to distance, the communities
   of  the  said  villages  complained  and  were  consequently   given   to
   Nietverdient Police Station, being the  station  closest  to  them,  thus
   ensuring that the community is served effectively and efficiently.

9. 3 Challenges: There is a shortage of staff. There are only 3 members  per
    shift. If one member is on  sick,  vacation  or  family  responsibility
    leave, there is a tremendous shortage and this also  hampers  effective
    service delivery. An increase in the number of  members  would  improve
    the services.

    Community Policing Forum is not functioning well due to  the  fact  that
    other villages have no substructures. One village is  still  struggling
    to bring people together due  to  political  issues  which  affect  the
    establishment of Community Policing Forums.

9.4 Community Policing Forum is very active,  attending  community  meetings
    and also visiting schools to address crime issues, especially rape  and
    substance abuse.
      There is also a good working relationship between Councillors,  Police
    and the Community.

   Cells are not really up to standard, the problem is the  flushing  system
   which the contractors find it difficult to get and also  expensive.  Area
   Logistics office has been informed and  requested  to  change  the  whole
   system. All cells require renovation. The water  pipes  need  repair  and
   there are regular leakages  underground,  and  these  need  to  be  given
   attention. Motswedi village has a problem of shortage of water which also
   affects the station   and this was communicated to  the  Council  with  a
   request for water tanks.

10. VISIT TO ZEERUST CORRECTIONAL CENTRE

The delegation met with the officials from the Zeerust Correctional  Centre,
Judiciary and Legal Aid Board. Zeerust Correctional Centre  is  one  of  the
centres that were on the top of the  list  for  construction.  The  existing
building is very old. The centre is faced with challenges  such  as  keeping
dangerous prisoners in one cell.
The understanding of the Correctional Centre staff  is  that  the  executive
and Parliament make policies and laws, and they have to implement them,  but
in some instances they found it very difficult and challenging to  implement
these policies due to enabling resources and facilities which often  do  not
accompany the policies.

It is difficult to maintain discipline because  prisoners  claim  they  have
rights in terms of the Constitution. To deal with people that  are  rejected
by their families and society gives them a problem. In  other  words  it  is
extremely difficult for a  poorly  equipped  Correctional  Officer  to  keep
custody of a dangerous inmate.

10.1 Staff shortages

The  centre  is  understaffed  and  there  is  a  need  for   more   nurses,
psychologists and doctors.
There are no mechanisms in place to solve the problem of influx  of  illegal
immigrants.

10.2 Presentation by the Department of Justice on video conferencing
Video conferencing, as a pilot project  is  already  operating  in  Kwazulu-
Natal and is doing well.  The Court Manager made an  appeal  to  Members  to
fast- track legislation pertaining to video- conferencing. Public  awareness
and outreach programmes are implemented to  distribute  information  to  the
public. The Courts has to determine what kind  of  education  the  community
needed.

10.3 Advertised Posts

Most vacancies advertised are for Data Capturers and there  is  a  need  for
people with the knowledge to scan documents electronically.

11. VISIT TO ROOIGROND CORRECTIONAL CENTRE

Rooigrond prison farm was built in 1974 and is 1848 ha in size.  It  carries
on dairy farming, orchard and vegetable gardens  and  beef  cattle  farming.
During 1977  the  prison  was  incorporated  into  the  then  self–governing
territory of Bophuthatswana and named “Central Prison”. It reverted back  to
the Government of South Africa in 1994. The centre  had  to  fill  vacancies
according to race and gender balance.

11.1 Successes

21 prisoners passed matric, one has Honours  Degree  and  others  are  still
busy with their junior degrees.

11.2 Escapes
There have been no escapes in 2006, and the last time they had  escapes  was
in 2005. This is a cause for satisfaction and the centre needs to keep
11.3 Accommodation

The centre has an approved accommodation for  772  prisoners  but  currently
accommodates for 1160 inmates. For this prison there  are  3  female  nurses
and two male nurses.  HIV and AIDS is attended to at Bopilong Hospital.

The centre conducts different programmes such as  formal  education,  social
work programmes and religious care.

Prisoners in maintenance section acquire skills before  they  are  released,
with the hope that they will  utilise  them  when  they  are  released.  The
problem is that most of them are rejected by the  community  when  they  are
released and they are not given the opportunity  to  prove  themselves  that
they have changed.

Privilege packages for inmates rehabilitate prisoners, and have  contributed
a lot to discipline. These privileges need to be reviewed  for  even  better
rehabilitating results.
One of the major challenges is that they  sometimes  have  to  release  2000
inmates without the correct addresses. The reason is that some of them  come
from informal settlements  with  no  address  in  their  shacks  and  others
registered incorrect address which makes it difficult to send them home.

11.4 Staff benefits

The promotion policy is a cause  for  staff  low  morale  resulting  in  the
department to  losing  dedicated  staff  members.  The  Department  is  busy
reviewing the promotion policy. Some departments received  parity  as  early
as 1994. Review of overtime is  part  of  the  problem.  The  department  no
longer pays overtime for Saturdays. It only pays  for  Sunday  overtime  but
this would be phased out in 2008.

Parity and uniformity in terms of conditions of service is unattainable  due
to being no access to the Bargaining Chambers for Correctional Services  and
this is a cause for Correctional Services  to  lag  behind  when  department
rendering related services to improve the conditions  of  service  of  their
employees.

12.  VISIT TO ITSOSENG POLICE STATION

A site had been identified and allocated by the municipality to  build  this
police station, but later been withdrawn. Due  to  delays  in  construction,
the National office took a decision to  withhold  the  funds  allocated  for
this project.

12.1 Challenges

12.1.1 Accommodation

The station has a problem  of  a  shortage  of  accommodation  for  awaiting
trials.

12.1.2 Rampant Crime

House-breaking  and  vandalism  is  a  problem  for  the  community  and  is
exacerbated by poor street lights and bad village infrastructure.

13.  VISIT TO LICHTENBURG CORRECTIONAL CENTRE

The centre was built in 1910. It is an old and dilapidated building  with  a
falling ceiling. The building was reported five years ago to the  Department
of Public Works but up to this day there has been no response. The  approved
capacity is 291, but currently they accommodate 402 inmates.

The Centre was experiencing a shortage of staff and as a result, one  person
had to monitor 5 gates per shift. The cells can only accommodate  18  people
but due to overcrowding they accommodate  37  inmates  sharing  one  shower.
They had one nurse which was booked off sick for a long  time.  Since  March
2006 they had been without a nurse.

The manager complained about the delegation of powers as  the  centre  falls
under Rooigrond.   Social  workers  from  another  component  only  come  on
certain days to meet the prisoners. Regularity of their services is a  cause
for concern because they only visit when they are able to do so.

14. VISIT TO LICHTENBURG COURT

The court is operating in the premises of the SAPS  with  15  administrative
staff to render services.  The challenges are a lack of  office  space,  and
Defence attorneys have to  share  offices  when  they  are  consulting  with
clients. There are two prosecutors with  a  heavy  workload.  There  is  one
criminal court and statistics indicate  that  there  is  a  need  for  three
magistrates.

15. VISIT TO LEMANYANENG POLICE STATION

Lemanyaneng Police Station is situated in Dube section of  Mananenz  Village
with 89 staff members, and 18 vehicles policing 12 villages. Members of  the
CPF are divided into three sectors and this  is  informed  by  the  type  of
crimes, for example, like assault, housebreaking and theft.

15.1 Challenges

    • There is a need for more vehicles;
    • The Detective Branch is under–resourced;
    • Patrolling at night is made difficult by inadequate roads  and  street
      lights;
    • There is co-operation between CPF’s, Councillors and Chiefs  and  they
      are  engaged  in  establishing  sub-forums  for  decentralisation   of
      services;
    • Accommodation and air-conditioning is a problem.

15.2 Project Ubuntu

The station has as one of its projects, “Ubuntu”,  to  improve  services  at
the station. This tool is also used to measure individuals’  performance  in
each sub-component.

15.3 Recording Systems

Clients are recorded and registered when they  come  in.  Record  show  that
construction was prioritised for 2004/05 but nothing has  been  done  up  to
now. The roads are very bad.
Police are persuading the  tavern  owners  to  close  at  10:00  instead  of
opening for 24 hours.
The station holds cluster meetings once a week to review their  performance.
The Department of  Justice,  Correctional  Services,  South  African  Police
Service and the farmers also meet jointly once a month. It is very  rare  to
see people of some races attending meetings  of  this  nature.  One  of  the
major problems is  non-  attendance  by  people  representing  rural  areas.
Cluster  meetings  of  much  value  members  of  the  community  should   be
encouraged to attend.

16. LEGAL AID BOARD

The Legal Aid Board has a budget of four  hundred  and  fifty  million  rand
(R450 million) per year, which is not enough to cover court cases. They  had
to employ students that just finished university to  defend  their  clients,
but once they get the experience they required,  they  move  on  to  greener
pastures. The NPA has a program and a team to train prosecutors. One of  the
problem areas is lack of facilities and personnel and it  is  a  problem  to
measure success. They proposed that  the  salaries  for  Lawyers  should  be
uniform in the NPA, Justice  Department  and  Legal  Aid  Board  to  prevent
movement of Lawyers from one department to  another  or  salary  competition
within the public service legal fraternity.

16.1 Capacity challenges

The Legal  Aid  Board  is  not  well  resourced.  The  institution  is  male
dominated. Double bookings by lawyers’ causes delay finalization  of  cases.
The Legal Aid lawyers had to undergo a test before they  are  taken  on  for
legal representation. They visit police stations and  Correctional  Services
to check if there are people needing legal assistance.

The Legal Aid Board  denied  the  allegation  that  they  use  inexperienced
staff. They employ candidates  with  articles  and  internship  students  on
contract basis and once the  contract  expires  they  release  them  due  to
financial constraints.
Their request is to have sufficient  attorneys  to  deal  with  cases,  have
enough time to consult  and  research,  and  to  have  enough  resources  to
maintain their staff.

A local  Councillor  requested  that  the  Committee  engages  the  relevant
Department to help with the roads and the  Department  of  Public  Works  to
provide street lights.

17. VISIT TO MAFIKENG POLICE STATION

The  premises  are  very  small  and  the  management  is  looking  for   an
alternative place to move to. The  Community  Police  Forum  functions  well
with 15 sub-forums. The MEC and Mayor  are  very  active  on  programmes  on
street kids. The station has more that 70 reservists and they are trying  to
encourage them by rewarding them and they are also fully resourced.

17.1 Success

The station came second in terms of the outreach programs  that  are  taking
place within the province.
The staff members meet more often with tavern  owners  and  taxi  owners  to
discuss the strategy to handle crime.

17.2 Strategies to reduce crime

Strategies in place to reduce crime are:
    • Driving around or constant patrolling in the area,
    • Evaluating crime on a daily basis

17.3 Facilities for the disabled

There is a ramp built for the disabled persons.

18. VISIT TO MAFIKENG CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

The  centre  was  closed  by  the  ex-Minister,  Mr  Mzimela,  due  to   the
dilapidations of the building. It was re-opened  in  2000.  The  centre  has
been declared the best in terms of cleanliness.
18.1 Success in the centre

More that 50 prisoners were awarded  skills  certificates.  The  centre  has
adopted 27 schools and communities and educates them on  HIV/AIDS,  domestic
violence, rape and gangsterism.

The Department has developed a programme with  Local  Government  structures
for social interaction when the prisoners are released. They also  encourage
the Community to accept the inmates.

19. VISIT TO MMABATHO MAGISTRATE COURT

19.1 Challenges

Facilities

Most of the courts do not  have  air  conditioning  systems.  They  use  old
manual system to  process  maintenance  cases.  The  backlog  is  caused  by
shortage of staff. Many of  the  Prosecutors  are  sharing  offices  due  to
shortage of office space. Family courts have to be established to deal  with
children and maintenance. There is a  shortage  of  court  rooms  for  civil
cases. Magistrates also feel that domestic violence needs its own court.

Personnel

There is a wide gap between Court Managers  and  operational  staff  members
which needs to be looked at. There is also a shortage of staff  specialising
on  the  following:  Children’s  Court,  Family  Courts  and  Civil  Courts.
Retention strategy has to be attended to.
The Court structures needs  to  be  revisited  and  reviewed.  Most  of  the
administrations staffs are contract workers,  therefore  filling  of  vacant
posts need to be done expeditiously
There is also a shortage of foreign language interpreters.

Conditions of Service

Employees are working under stressful conditions because of the shortage  of
staff. There is no secure parking for  Judicial  Officers  and  Prosecutors.
Skills Development seems not to be high on the  agenda  of  the  department.
The Small Claims Court is too small. Working  hours  for  the  Small  Claims
Court need to be revisited and the Presiding  Officers  who  are  practising
attorneys are not receiving payments, they end up  stopping  their  services
because they are  not  motivated.   They  need  assistance  in  this  regard
because in other regions, like Cape Town, the provision for  these  services
has been made already.

Prosecutors hold daily meeting  to  discuss  the  next  days  work.  Cluster
meetings took place monthly and minutes are distributed  to  the  Department
of Public Prosecutions (DPP). The court  has  a  good  working  relationship
with the Police.
The court is engaged in community outreach  program  to  educate  people  on
crime. They also urged the delegation that it will be necessary for them  to
be given an opportunity to add  their  views  when  the  legislation  making
process takes place.

20. MEETING WITH STAKEHOLDERS AT THE PROVINCIAL LEGISLATURE

The meeting was held at the Legislature with four departments:  Correctional
Services, Safety and Security, Justice and the Department of Public Works.

20.1 Briefing by Provincial Commissioner Beetha

The Provincial Commissioner informed  the  delegation  that  the  influx  of
illegal immigrants has increased their work tremendously. Personnel will  be
trained on restructuring within. Stock theft required more trained staff  to
be able to deal with it successfully. The Commissioner has been  in  contact
with the Department of Agriculture to repair the fence between  the  borders
of South Africa and Botswana.
The Commissioner made  a  commitment  to  deliver  vehicles  with  immediate
effect. After the work study, additional police stations needed to be  built
in the following provinces: Limpopo, Gauteng and North West.

20.2 Briefing by the Regional Commissioner Tshivhase

There will be no immediate solution to deal with  overcrowding  as  long  as
the community is still reluctant to  accept  the  prisoners  when  they  are
released.  Traditional  leaders  should  be  encouraged   to   assist   with
persuading community members to accept their  ex-prisoners.  The  department
needs to  encourage  the  Department  of  Education  to  introduce  subjects
related to Correctional Services to create awareness on young children  that
crime does not pay.

On dilapidated buildings: The Department of Public Works is responsible  for
renovations  but  have  requested  that  Correctional  Services   be   given
authority to do  small  renovations  to  maintain  the  buildings.  He  also
proposed that South African Law Commission should  introduce  tribal  courts
to deal with small offences at that level.

20.3 Briefing by the Department of Justice

The Court Manager informed the delegation that correspondence has been  sent
to the Department of Public Works for almost ten years without response.

He proposed that the service delivery level of  Public  Works  be  reviewed.
The  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs  need  to
intervene with regards to the issues related to  the  Department  of  Public
Works.

20.4 Briefing by the Department of Public Works

The official representing the Department of Public  Works  acknowledged  the
delays in maintaining the buildings. She said some of the delays are  caused
by lack of communication.
The Department of Public Works made a commitment to deliver services to  its
client departments.

21. FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS


Having conducted all these discussions with the role-players and
stakeholders in the criminal justice system in the Province of the North
West, the Security and Constitutional Affairs Committee finds and
recommends as follows:

21.1 General findings and recommendations

    • Communication and co-operation is commendable, and this exercise needs
      to be made a continuous feature to promote the smooth functioning of
      the criminal justice system.

    • The participation of all stakeholders in the criminal justice system
      remains a condition without which we cannot eradicate incidents of
      crime in our communities, and therefore the strengthening of community
      safety structures and public education on crime has to be enhanced.

    • All departments or law enforcement agencies covered by this report are
      without exception, experiencing problems related to capacity,
      infrastructure and facilities and, generally underdevelopment. Urgent
      attention has to be given to these shortcomings to ensure efficient
      and effective functions of these critical departments in the fight
      against crime.

22. SPECIFIC FINDINGS ON SAPS COMMUNITY POLICING FORUMS

Community policing forums have not been formed in some stations and have
been dysfunctional in other areas. This reduces community participation in
the fight against crime. An awareness campaign and the importance and role
at CPF’s and related structures have to be commenced by all police areas
and stations, including traditional leader’s structures.
22.1 Courts facilities and infrastructure

The wheels of the criminal justice system rest on the availability of
facilities and infrastructure, and the issues related to the functioning of
emergency call number 10111 at Nietverdient, the provision of an adequate
number of vehicles, attending to dilapidated buildings and provision of
extra office space and accommodation and the redemarcation of policing
areas, are matters that require attention. There is a need for more court
rooms in some courts, a tighter security in courts, a safe parking space
for staff vehicles, and the installation of air conditioners inside the
court rooms.

The need for enabling facilities cries out for urgent attention to further
strengthen our criminal justice system. Lichtenberg needs some construction
work and this requires the Department of Justice to approach the Department
of Public Works with a proposal to that effect.

The Department of Justice should, as a matter of urgency, approach the
Department of Public Works with a proposal for the provisions of these
facilities and infrastructural needs. Indeed, the Committee has to raise
this strongly with the Departments of Justice and Public Works.

22.2 Human Resources in the South African Police Service

The hands and feet of the criminal justice system are its personnel and in
this report it is clear that there are areas where the police experience
shortages of staff especially in the investigating and stock theft units.

There is a pool of matriculants that are out of employment and steps should
be taken to recruit and train new staff as a matter of urgency.
22.3 Staff shortage

There are staff shortages both in the administration and the judiciary and
also in the areas of financial management; as a result, the work load
exceeds human capacity. The Department must recruit school leavers with the
necessary expertise and law graduates that are produced in abundance by our
universities, taking them through on- the- job and the Justice College
Training.

22.4 Stock theft

Cross-border stock theft (between Botwana) remains a problem requiring more
co-operations between the two countries. There must be an intensified
dialogue between our CJS cluster and its counterparts in Botswana on mutual
measures to be adopted to eliminate circumstances conducive to cross-border
stock theft.

23. SMALL CLAIMS AND MAINTENANCE COURTS

Small Claims Courts and Maintenance Courts are an important service for
mostly poor communities and therefore it must be made certain that they
function properly. There is a need to revisit working hours in these courts
to improve their effectiveness and efficiency.
There is also a need to improve the handling of maintenance cases in terms
of farms, payouts, and to make courts more user-friendly.

24. MAGISTERIAL AREAS

Status quo ante is still maintained with regard to the demarcation of
magisterial districts or areas. This often causes difficulties and
inconvenience to the public.

Consideration should be given to a re-demarcation of magisterial areas to
reconcile their boundaries with those of its partners in the CJS and, if
possible, the local government boundaries.

25. LEGAL AID BOARD

The issue that the Board uses inexperienced lawyers undermines state
efforts to ensure access to Justice. The reasons for lawyers not to be
attracted to serve in the Legal Aid Programme have to be addressed. Legal
Aid and its resources have to be prioritised to ensure equal justice for
all.

26. CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

26.1 Staff working conditions

There is a need for a well-oiled correctional service with clear guidelines
on the ranking of Correctional Officers, a review of the demilitarisation
policy to enhance the safety and effectiveness of officers, increased
staff, and minimization of acting positions and the introduction of
incentives as part of a retention strategy.

27. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
is satisfied that an urgent attention to the challenges described above
would lead to the achievement of the goals of the criminal justice system.
To that effect, mention must also be made of the need to ensure that the
Department of Public Works continuously attend to the maintenance of the
building structures of the departments’ concerned.
Generally, our interaction with the three departments was successful and
gave us confidence that there is room for improvement, indeed the
management of cluster appears to be committed to serving our nation with
distinction.

We need to mobilise communities to acknowledge this commitment to fight
crime and accordingly give a hand so that we collectively address the
scourge of crime.

Finally, it is expected that the three departments, Safety and Security,
Justice and Constitutional Development and Correctional Services will give
a progress report to the committee on the steps taken to improve the
services of the cluster within six months from the date of the adoption of
this report and its recommendations by the National Council of Provinces.


