---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 October 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-10-24
---

WEDNESDAY, 24 OCTOBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Acting Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

              UNAVAILABILITY OF MINISTERS DURING QUESTION TIME

                                  (Ruling)

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order! Before we start with today’s proceedings, I have
to address a matter that is of extreme concern, not only to the presiding
officers but to every single member of this House who is seized with his or
her obligations as a representative of the people of this country. The
Constitution enjoins the National Assembly to scrutinise and oversee
executive action. In addition, the Constitution determines that members of
the Cabinet are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for
the exercise of their powers and performance of their functions.
One of the most important procedures that the House has devised to fulfil
this constitutional responsibility of holding the executive to account is
Questions to Ministers, which takes place once a week on a rotational
basis. The purpose of such questions is to give members the opportunity to
obtain information from Ministers and to press for action with regard to
particular issues.

It came to my attention earlier today that, owing to the unavailability of
some Ministers to answer questions this afternoon, many of the questions on
the Question Paper would have to stand over. This is completely
unacceptable. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Order, hon members!

Rule 109(3) of the Rules of the Assembly makes provision for a member to
request the Speaker to place a question that had to stand over, owing to
the absence of a Minister, on the Question Paper again for the next
question session, subject to certain conditions. If approved, the rule also
provides for an additional 30 minutes to be added to that question session.
However, as a result of the large volume of questions that will have to
stand over today, it would, for practical reasons, be impossible for the
presiding officers to apply this rule, should members want to resort to it.

We are fully aware that Ministers are seized with important matters of
state but it does not become of them to show such disregard for the House
to which they have singular responsibility, both as members of the
executive and members of this House. The dates on which questions will be
put to specific clusters of Ministers are determined and communicated well
in advance and should enjoy priority in the scheduling of Ministers’
programmes.

I therefore wish to rule ... [Interjections.] Order, hon members! I
therefore wish to rule, in terms of Rule 2(1), that, despite the
inconvenience and cost, consideration will be given by the programme
committee, in consultation with the Leader of Government Business, to
schedule an additional question session for all the questions that have to
stand over today. If agreed, the House expects the relevant Ministers to
avail themselves for that session.

We will now continue with Questions to the Deputy President. As ruled,
questions to the Ministers in cluster 2 who are not available will stand
over until a decision has been taken by the Programme Committee. I thank
you. [Applause.]

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

The ACTING SPEAKER: The first item on the Order Paper is Questions to the
Deputy President. Members may press the “to talk button” at their desks if
they wish to ask a supplementary question. Question 16 has been asked by
hon V B Ndlovu. I now give the opportunity to the Deputy President to
respond. Hon Deputy President ... Viva Amabhokobhoko!

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Viva!

   Effect of Children’s Act and Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act on
                         moral regeneration movement

16.   Mr V B Ndlovu (IFP) asked the Deputy President:

       Whether the Children’s Act, Act 38 of 2005 and the Choice on
       Termination of Pregnancy Act, Act 92 of 1996, are negatively
       affecting the efforts of the moral regeneration movement; if not,
       what is the position in this regard; if so, (a) how can the negative
       effects be remedied and (b) what are the further relevant details?
                                                        N02528E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Acting Speaker. The answer to
Question 16 asked by hon Ndlovu would be a definite: No. The essence of the
question is whether the Children’s Act and the Choice on Termination of
Pregnancy Act contradict the efforts of the Moral Regeneration Movement,
MRM. The mission of the Moral Regeneration Movement is to facilitate,
encourage and co-ordinate programmes in every sector of society that will
work towards restoring the moral fibre of our nation. The latter would be
the responsibility of all of us in society, without exception. This is not
an exclusive task of the MRM but it is the responsibility of all
responsible adults. To view this otherwise would be passing the buck.

All of this happens in a democracy, where the Constitution guarantees
freedom. The Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act recognises that, in a
constitutional democracy, freedom is a fundamental right. The Act
emphasises the need for people to be informed before they take
responsibility for these choices. In other words, the Choice on Termination
of Pregnancy Act does not contradict the efforts of moral regeneration but
rather seeks to promote responsibility in a situation where one is faced
with the freedom of choice. It is not moral to bring into the world
children that will experience extreme neglect – that is something we must
also remember.

Building the moral fibre of a nation must take place in a context where
there is freedom of choice and where citizens take responsibility for it.
Contrary to belief in certain quarters, government does not seek to
prescribe to anyone whether he or she should terminate pregnancies or not.
The aim, rather, would be to inform them of the choices available and the
responsibility thereof. Of course, we also offer counselling.

The state also promotes the provision of nonmandatory and nondirective
counselling before and after termination. The greatest enabler of rights
and freedom is individual responsibility. Without personal responsibility,
rights and freedoms are meaningless.

Similarly, regarding the Children’s Act, our main aim there relates to the
care and protection of children, parental responsibility and the rights and
provisions for matters such as children’s courts, adoption, child abduction
and surrogate motherhood. The Act calls for prioritisation of the best
interests of the child, the right of the child to be able to participate in
any matter concerning that child, children living with disability or
chronic illness and the child’s rights of access to court.

Again, the Children’s Act does not contradict the efforts of MRM. The issue
of responsibility takes centre stage there. As indicated previously, the
Act indicates what choices there are, so that individuals can assume the
required level of responsibility. I thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Acting Speaker, hon Deputy President, I want to talk
about the moral fibre – “ubuntu ngqo” [authentic ubuntu]. If we say it is
the responsibility of a child, a 12-year-old child, and that it is her
responsibility or his responsibility without the parent or guardian, are we
still talking about the moral fibre of the family?
Secondly, if we talk about same-sex marriages, maybe I am lost, but in the
African situation and within an understanding of “ubuntu phaqa” [pure
ubuntu], what does that really mean? If we want to build ubuntu, moral
regeneration, the fibre of ubuntu, both, inside all of us, are we really
not contradicting ourselves when we say we are going back to our roots as
ubuntu?

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, let me start with the last question.
Maybe I will also pose a question – it’s question time, so I can also put a
question across to the member. If we discriminate against people because of
their choice and sexual orientation, I don’t think that to discriminate
against those people is ubuntu. I would also go on to say that I had a
conversation with a parent who has two children. One of those children is a
habitual criminal ... “utsotsi woqobo, umgulukudu” [a real hardcore thug]
while the other child is gay, and both of them are boys. The gay child is
well-behaved, a child that any parent would love to have.

The parent said to me that what she has learnt from her two children is
that the most important thing is the inner self of the child. Regarding
this child who has killed people, who gives them immense pain as a family,
if they had anything that could help, they would disown that child. But the
other child, who other people discard because of his sexual orientation, is
the best thing that has ever happened to her. What should I say to that
parent? So, it’s not that easy to make these decisions.

At the end of the day, when we talk about ubuntu, it’s about the extent to
which we are able to love, work with and respect one another in a manner
that does not force any of our choices on one another. If you have problems
with same-sex marriages, it still does not give you the right to be
horrible to those people. So I don’t claim to have an answer but I also
don’t think we should seek for easy answers to these kinds of questions.

On the issue of parents, children will always be children to us.

Ngisho nawe uqobo njengoba umdala kangaka nje nginesiqiniseko sokuthi
kumama wakho ungumntwana. [I am certain that, even you, old as you are; you
are still a child to your mother.]

So how much more would this apply to a 12-year-old? There is a possibility
in law for children to make certain decisions guided by some adults,
because when they go to a clinic they find adults there who would help
them. It’s not that I don’t have a problem with that decision, by the way -
I must also be outright. But having said that, I just think that we should
not give an impression that we are telling children to go and get advice
over the counter, where they might not get appropriate advice. Nurses are
adults and the people that these children will go to are also adults.

Clearly, this does not mean that we are saying that parents must get out of
the way and that children must have their own way. We have to find a way of
managing these kinds of difficult circumstances in a manner that ensures
that parents are not made to feel or even to think that they can abandon
responsibility. I always say to parents: Out of all the things that we do
we as parents and adults, even if we are overachieving or if there are
things that we would like to delegate, because we think other people can do
these things better, there is one thing that we can never delegate, and
that is parenting.

Ungayenza yonke into, uphumelele, kodwa uma abantwana bakho benza izinto
ezingalungile bayobuzwa kuwe, ngoba ngeke wathatha umsebenzi wokukhulisa
abantwana bakho uwunike omunye umuntu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[You can be successful in everything you do but if your children do bad
things you will have to account for their actions, because you cannot
relinquish the responsibility of raising your children to another person.]

So this does not take away that responsibility and the relationship between
a parent and a child.
Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy President, I would like to
congratulate you on your sporting garb today. Viva Amabhokobhoko, viva!

Madam, Deputy President, there were media reports this morning about a
father in the Nkomati region of Mpumalanga who allegedly committed incest
with his 12-year-old daughter. His daughter aged 12 years has borne two
children by him. Clearly, this is wrong. And I want to know what the Moral
Regeneration Movement is doing about enforcing or enhancing programmes to
teach actual morality in the home, because it seems we have lost morality
in the home altogether? This is a parent’s responsibility. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I want to start by emphasising that
the Moral Regeneration Movement is made up of a handful of people who are
all volunteers. We cannot expect them to take responsibility for all of
these issues in our society. You and I have a responsibility to address
these issues within our families and within our homes. Those of us who are
in our church structures and those of us who are educators – all of us,
have to do what we have to do in order to address these issues.

Having said that, I obviously would condemn this kind of behaviour. It is
just unbelievable. It’s horrible for it to happen once and it’s even
unthinkable that it happened twice.

Yesterday we had a board meeting of the MRM where we were discussing these
vexing questions and the capacity of this institution to work along with
society to address these issues. We have decided that we would need to step
up publicity in order to create discourse and discussions in communities.
In particular, if we can have it our way, we would like to have such
discussion within families, so that we can force families to have this
discussion.

I can’t imagine what the situation is in that family where that child is.
Who lives with that child? Who accepts that man as a member of the family
and his life simply goes on while that has traumatised this poor child?
There has to be a grandmother, aunt, cousin or somebody who should stand up
for this child and stand up to this man. I think, sometimes the absence of
these strong figures and moral voices within families is probably the worst
thing that is happening in society.

So, in the MRM, recognising that the family is an important entity, we are
therefore working on a project that we hope is going to take off, through
which we want to send messages on a regular basis on these discussions. Hon
Minister, I will ask you here in Parliament now and again: “What did you
discuss with your family today on that subject that we had on TV?” I will
be doing that so as to check whether it is achieving what we are trying to
achieve. Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Acting Speaker, Deputy President, contrary to what the
Deputy President has said, many parents believe that the two Acts in
question not only affect the efforts of the Moral Regeneration Movement but
that they also undermine their own moral values, as opposed to the values
of government. Giving children as young as 12 years of age the right to
carry the responsibility for medical treatment and surgical operations,
including termination of pregnancy, definitely, in their eyes, undermines
the efforts and principles of MRM, which include, fighting against, I
quote, “... immoral behaviour in our communities and public institutions.”

Now, if these two Acts do not contradict the MRM, as the Deputy President
has replied, what does it mean to refer to immoral behaviour in our
communities in one of the principles of the MRM? I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, I think I would like to state that I
respect the views of those parents on these issues. Obviously, they are
entitled to think the way they think but I would hope that, as a priest,
you would counsel those parents to continue to do what they think is in the
best interests of their children.

Mof D M MOROBI: Motlatsa Spikara, Motlatsa Mopresidente, ke a leboha ka
karabo ya hao e batsi ya ho hlalosa botho. Empa ke sa na le potso mona ya
hore ... [Mrs D M MOROBI: Hon Acting Speaker, the Hon Deputy President,
thanks you for your broad response, but I still need to pose a question
here ...]

... can you share with this House, Deputy President, how you will ensure
that social programmes aimed at strengthening the moral fibre of society
are effectively implemented, particularly in rural areas, and ensuring that
information reaches the deeper rural areas? What monitoring mechanisms are
in place?

I also want to share with this House that this House in 2005 passed the
Children’s Act and in 1996 the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act was
also passed. The Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act seeks to put an end
to the backyard abortions, which have caused numerous deaths. Regarding the
Children’s Act, an amending Bill is currently being considered and that law
should be completed tomorrow. This law seeks to strengthen the family and
the partnership between the family and the state, ensuring that children
are properly brought up. These regulations reaffirm the role of the family.
Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, in order to reach out to rural areas, we
have decided to work very closely with the National House of Traditional
Leaders and to involve traditional leaders as well. I am very thankful for
their co-operation. In fact, as we speak now, we are engaged in a programme
in which we visit some of the traditional houses in the provinces to engage
with them and also to explain and get information from them on how we could
make these programmes work.

Just last week I was in Venda, in Vhembe. The aim of that visit was, again,
to engage with that rural community and to look at how we could work with
the traditional leaders in that area. That forum was convened through the
National House of Traditional Leaders. I have to say that, on that
occasion, I was made Vho-makhadzi. Those who understand Tshivenda would
know that that’s a very important title.

We are also working with municipalities. We are decentralising the work of
the MRM, something that we discussed extensively at the MRM board meeting.
We decided that, in order to ensure that we are able to gauge the extent to
which we are reaching out, we are going to call an intergovernmental
consultative meeting with all provinces so that we can look at the extent
to which they have been able to decentralise, as well as the best practices
in each province.

I have to say that there are some provinces where you will find that the
provincial government, the municipality, the traditional leaders, the youth
and the church are actually all working together. In such an instance
things work much better. After we have done that consultation, we would
like to share with hon members our insights into those communities where we
think MRM is making progress so that, hopefully, some of you can also use
that information in your constituencies.
         Outcomes of binational commissions led by Deputy President

17.   Ms F Mahomed (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

    What were and are the outcomes of binational commissions led by herself
    to countries like China, Sweden and Norway?         N02525E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon member. The essence of this
question is to gauge the outcomes of the binational commissions, which were
led by the Deputy President in China, Sweden and Norway. I do want to start
by saying that we do not have a binational commission with the Kingdom of
Norway. So, when we do work with them it will be on a working visit. But we
have shelved that for now.

President Hu Jintao expressed his satisfaction regarding his regular
contact with President Mbeki, which has also happened at the multilateral
fora such as the UN and the G8+5. President Hu Jintao also extended an
invitation again to President Mbeki to visit China next year so that they
can assess the extent to which this binational relations and commissions
are working.

China has also given its support to the Partnership for Growth and
Development Project, which was a proposal we took with us to China and put
it on their table for discussion. We have agreed that through that
programme we will encourage Chinese companies to co-operate with South
African companies, especially in the field of mining, manufacturing of
household appliances and manufacturing in general, specifically to do value
addition of minerals that are produced in South Africa. The idea is to
increase value addition of these minerals in South Africa by Chinese
companies and also to broaden the scope of investment that is aimed at
manufacturing in South Africa by Chinese companies. Chinese companies will
actively be looking at increasing their investment and making use of the
China Africa Development Fund of $5 billion, which China has established,
for its companies to invest in Africa.

We have also agreed to have joint working programmes aimed at exchanging
lessons learnt on the work our two countries do in poverty eradication and
supporting one another in both countries.

We have also agreed to co-operate and co-ordinate the celebration of the
10th anniversary of the establishment of the diplomatic relations between
the two countries. The events will also form part of a three-year strategy
to market Brand South Africa in the People’s Republic of China. The
branding of South Africa is aimed on our side as South Africa to make our
country much better known in this significant market with the hope that it
will increase our capacity to be active in those economies. In the People’s
Republic of China, this celebration will involve the private sector, the
sporting fraternity, the arts, the youth and women so that we are also able
to strengthen people-to-people relations.
There were other results coming out of this binational, some of which were
the culmination of work that had been done by the different departments.
These include co-operation in the area of agriculture, which will also lead
into an aquaculture centre at Gariep Dam that will train South African
farmers in fishing. As we speak now, there are South African farmers in
China to teach the Chinese to cultivate apples.

In terms of the scientific exchange programme, we also agreed to exchange
scientists. The South African scientists are going to visit China annually
and in that programme we will help them to improve their livestock
programme. We will also do research together on some of the salient
features of enriching our livestock programmes.

The flagship programme that the scientists will also do with their Chinese
counterpart is a health project, which is in the area of telemedicine. We
are also increasing on the human resource front. We also want to encourage
our students in South Africa to learn the Chinese languages, because if
China is going to be one of the biggest trading nations in the world it is
important that our young people know how to speak the languages so that
they are able to compete internationally - international cannot be
international without China. So, we are going to pilot the teaching of
Mandarin in 50 South African high schools and those who do well will stand
a chance of studying for their degrees in Chinese or in China so that the
mixture of graduates that we have in South Africa with overseas education
should not only mean Europe and North America. Of course, we also signed
some memorandums of agreements. One was on minerals and energy and the
other was on co-operation in human resource development.

In Sweden, where we also have a binational commission, we noted the
increasing trade between the two countries and the growth in the number of
Swedish companies that are present in South Africa. It was agreed that
efforts are needed to promote exports from South Africa to Sweden. In that
regard as well, like in China, there is a need for us to enhance our
manufacturing capacity so that we have more goods that we are exporting to
such countries. Colleagues will be aware that in the Swedish economy one of
the strengths that they have is the automotive sector. The Swedish
companies therefore are important for us because we are also a country,
which has strength in that sector, but in particular now we were looking at
how we could strengthen the presence of the auto components industry in
South Africa.

We were able to also look at co-operation and at sharing experiences and
expertise in the labour market policies. A follow-up visit in this regard
will also be led by Minister Mdladlana in November.

We discussed HIV/Aids and the co-operation that we have and the
strengthening of the partnership in these two countries. [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The noise level is unbearable.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: To this end, we agreed on a new strategic framework
that will be elaborated on from next year. We visited the Karolinka
institute, which is involved with the medical university in Sweden and is
the home of the Nobel Prize for medicine. They are doing excellent work on
HIV/Aids, which we have an interest in. Of course it is indeed a
significant university because it is a global university and it boasts
producing one PhD student a day in different parts of the world. We would
like our students to be counted amongst those students that they are
working with.

In line with our commitment to further promote gender equality and the
advancement of women in our countries, including in areas where there is
conflict and postconflict - because both countries are active in peace-
keeping - we actually agreed that there is a need for us to find mechanism
of dealing with the challenges that women face in that regard.

We agreed on co-operation in the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup. In that regard
we are going to look at the transfer and exchange of technology in disaster
management and the kinds of disasters that are associated with such big
events. [Time expired.]

Mrs F MAHOMED: Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker. Hon Deputy President, I am
quite sure that we all appreciate the detailed response on this very
important issue. However, firstly, I would further like to know if there
are monitoring and evaluation systems in place to monitor the effectiveness
of the outcomes of each of these bi-nationals. I think you would also agree
with me that policy dialogue and co-operation must and should translate
itself into real change and in real terms. Secondly, it would also be
interesting to hear how these bi-national commissions benefit and improve
the lives of women in South Africa. I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, let’s just look at the binational with
China. For example, the fact is that at present there are hundreds of
students that are studying in China. South African scientists are able to
learn and co-operate with their colleagues in China. There are also the
ordinary people of China who, through these binational co-operations, are
also able to benefit from the good relations at government to government
level.

The attraction of investment, whether it is we investing in China or China
investing in South Africa, translates into jobs and contributes to the
growth of our economy. So, yes, there are benefits for ordinary people.

But even further in the case, for instance, of benefits to women in a
country like Sweden, we are working with the Swedish, both NGOs and
government in a number of developments at activities that are undertaken in
South Africa by NGOs. Among some of the initiatives that impressed me
significantly is an initiative that is undertaken in the schools in KZN by
a programme, called the STAR, which is a programme that supports education
of young people with a particular focus on girl children – and I’m sure Mr
Meshoe would like this – because it is a programme about building the inner
strength of young people to say no to the many things that we think young
people should not get involved in. It is showing tremendous success.
Teachers in KZN, most of them women, are participating in that programme,
and they say that through that programme they themselves have grown
tremendously as persons and that in the process they have also been able to
provide very good leadership to their students and to the parents in the
communities that they work in. This is just but one of the initiatives that
involve grassroots Swedish people because the person who has started this
programme is an ordinary private citizen of Sweden with the support of the
Swedish government. We are again happy that the government of KZN is also
supporting such an initiative.

If I could also add that during the visit to Sweden we also took with us
South African artists who had an opportunity to perform, thanks to the
support of the Department of Arts and Culture, and that went a long way
towards projecting South African culture amongst the Swedish people. Those
two groups that we travelled with before we left already had invitations to
go back to Sweden to perform. I hope that makes them smile all the way to
the bank. [Applause.]
Mrs S M CAMERER: Deputy Speaker, may I also add my compliments to the
Deputy President on her Springbok couture that makes her look ten years
younger. [Laughter.] Whilst it is certainly important for the Deputy
President to engage with China, Sweden and Norway in bi-national
commissions at Deputy Presidential level in view of the weight that the
government and the Department of Foreign Affairs gives to our relationship
with African countries, does the Deputy President not believe that we need
to raise the profile of our bi-national relations with African countries as
well? We have diplomatic relations with some 30 African countries at this
point and we have bi-national commissions at presidential level, with only
two – Algeria and the DRC – and at Deputy Presidential level with Nigeria -
all three of these countries being major oil producers. I believe we have
bilateral commissions at Ministerial level with Ghana, Tunisia and Ruanda.
I would like to put it to the Deputy President that surely her involvement
in more of these bilateral relations will be a boost to this effort of
benefiting our country and Africa as a whole as well. Perhaps you could
also enlighten us as to your involvement and your experiences in these
commissions in Africa. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Acting Speaker, I think we also have to add
countries such as Mozambique, of which I am not sure if the relation is at
presidential level, and Namibia which is at a presidential level. But I
must add that not all countries like these binational commissions, because
they think that they give them more work and that they would rather keep
the relations at a normal bilateral relation.

So, it doesn’t only depend on us in order for us to raise these relations
at higher level. But I take your point that we can always increase and
enhance the work that our Department of Foreign Affairs do in Africa. I
must also add that the private sector in South Africa is very active in
Africa and that it therefore gives us a lot of opportunities to contribute
significantly to the strengthening of the relations between us and our
African counterparts.

With regard to state-owned enterprises, the hon member will be aware that
already many of them had their mandate reviewed in order to allow them to
contribute actively in support of the growing economies of Africa. We all
agree that as other neighbouring and generally African economies grow, that
obviously is also a big benefit for South Africa. With Eskom we are
launching the infrastructure fund. So it should not only be the work that
we do at bilateral or binational commissions but we must actually stimulate
different ways of working with the African countries. For me, something
that I would like us to work more on is people-to-people relations between
ourselves and our African countries so that our relations with our African
brothers and sisters are not dependent on government and that as ordinary
citizens we actually also facilitate such co-operation. I think that we can
probably do more in the areas of arts, culture, sports, youth exchange and
academic exchange. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker. Madam Deputy President, on
a trade front there were products from China that were withdrawn in some of
the countries, including South Africa. These included food withdrawn from
the shelves because of some problems. And on the textile front we were
flooded as a country with some of the so-called cheap stuff from China. How
is the relationship on those fronts because most of the time when we deal
with these people we include the trade, which will involve the employment
of the people? How is the relationship when these things of theirs are
being withdrawn and cancelled or sent back?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, o se ke wa re batho ke ... [these people
...] Ungathi abo. [These people.] Our colleagues in other countries. Musa
ukuthi abo. [These people.] It is not a nice thing to say.

Yes, hon member, we do raise these issues. Actually, our Department of
Agriculture has established relations with China in order to address some
of these issues because they also have concerns about us. So, it’s a mutual
thing.

I am not familiar with some of the products that were withdrawn. But what I
would like to say is that the agreement that we have with China on textile
is actually working very well, contrary to the fears that were raised in
certain quarters. Initially, as you will remember, many of the retailers
were against this agreement. We only had a better working relationship and
co-operation from the manufacturers but now we are actually finding that
some of the things that the prophets of doom said were supposed to go wrong
are not going wrong.

It’s not perfect but we have seen a significant boost of the manufacturing
of textiles in certain categories in South Africa. Again, this is because
we were able to raise these issues of the flooding of certain products from
China to South Africa. We must also be realistic that we cannot fight
against Chinese cheap imports – they have a population of a billion people
and more. So, we have real issues that we cannot even stand against.

Following on the previous question, hon member, I just want to emphasise
that with regard to the co-operation around Southern Africa and Africa,
tomorrow I am going to the University of Roma in Lesotho – my alma mater.
We are going to get together there to look at how we can strengthen the
working of the Southern African universities, using the people forming an
alumni bond that is active and thinking not just about the universities
they went to but about what is in the best interest of SADC. I hope that
that is also another opportunity we have as citizens of Southern Africa to
boost these relations between and amongst the people of Southern Africa.
Thank you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker. Madam Deputy President,
seeing that there are these bi-national co-operations with China that
result in investment of the Chinese in the country and the creation of
jobs, how are the South African-born Chinese classified in our population
seeing that they do not fall under whites, coloureds or Africans? This I am
asking because there is a huge outcry from the Chinese community in my
constituency that they feel being marginalised because they do not know
where they stand at the present moment. In the past they used to fall under
the grouping of Asians. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, you must tell those Chinese in your
constituency that they are Africans and that they are South Africans.
That’s where they must stand. In the past they were all kinds of things.
Now they are just Africans and they are South Africans. [Applause.]

         Identification of chartered accountancy as a priority skill

18.   Mrs C Dudley (ACDP) asked the Deputy President:

       Whether the Joint Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition (Jipsa)
       has identified chartered accountancy as a priority skill; if not,
       what is the position in this regard; if so, what measures have been
       taken in this regard?                 N02531E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Acting Speaker, this question asks about the
shortage of skills in the field of chartered accountancy, and the steps
that we are taking to develop our people in this area.

Well, there is overwhelming evidence that we do have a skills shortage in
South Africa and that we need critical interventions. At the same time,
there is also evidence that even where we do have skills, sometimes people
are underutilised by employers. For the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa to achieve its objective of halving
unemployment and poverty by 2014, clearly this is an area that we need to
pay attention to. In the identification of areas that need intervention we
have identified the category that we call cross-cutting skill, which
includes ICT, finance and project management. So, the support for chartered
accountants will emerge out of our intervention on finance.

In order to address the shortage of experience and skills needed,
therefore, in the chartered accountancy profession, we addressed the root
cause, starting from school level right through to higher learning
institutions and, finally, to the workplace, which would be the placement
programme that we do. In addressing these challenges as government and
private sector, we are supporting initiatives, some of which are driven and
managed by the sector and the sector education training authority for
Finance, Accounting, Management Consulting, and other Financial Services
called FASSET, and the SA Institute of Chartered Accountants, SAICA.

One of the transformation programmes run by SAICA is the Thuthuka Education
Upliftment Fund, TEUF. The programme is geared towards transforming
membership demographics of the chartered accountancy profession to reflect
the country’s population and demographics in terms of both race and gender.
Thuthuka has initiatives at the school level, but its core programmes are
aimed at higher education institutions. The Auditor-General has contributed
to the increase in the number of black accounting professionals through the
Thuthuka Bursaries Fund, which is managed by SAICA on behalf of the Office
of the Auditor-General. The fund has already assisted 1 638 learners, since
it was launched three years ago.

SAICA also secured funding from other sources to ensure that the shortage
of professionals in the field is addressed. The funding includes that from
the private sector but also includes support from the Department of Trade
and Industry and the Department of Education as well as private
individuals. There is also a programme, again driven by SAICA, which is
based at the University of Fort Hare and the University of Limpopo.

Thuthuka, in its holistic approach, is also focused on ensuring that those
children that might not have exposure to the workings of the profession
because they come from previously disadvantaged and currently disadvantaged
backgrounds are brought into camps during holidays and work readiness
situations so that they are enabled to have a sense of how this career
works. Such programmes are actually very successful.

There is also the introduction of a learnership for disabled learners by
SAICA, and again, this is meant to enhance the number of disabled people
that can come into this profession. SAICA is also looking at a systematic
way of using life-long learning in order to increase the number of people
that are in the profession.

Individual set firms in the sector who are collaborating with us in the
Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Development, JIPSD, have also answered
the call. One of the notable ones is the KPMG programme, which has taken on
board 40 women. Many of them have already finished the programme.

Many of them were young women with a B Comm degree who would have been
sitting at home, and some of them were contemplating taking any job that
came their way. Some of them have now been taken under the wings of KPMG
and they are on the way to becoming accountants or CAs and there is an
intention to broaden this programme as other auditing firms are also coming
on board.

SAICA has various structures and programmes in place that offer mentoring
and support services to new and existing accounting firms. This includes
the training outside the public practice top, which is a financial
management route, and training inside the public practice tip. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we go on, I think you will all
agree with me that the noise level is unbearable.

Sizonicela bakithi ukuthi nihambe niyobamba imihlangano emahhovisi enu. [I
will therefore appeal to those hon members to go and hold those private
meetings in their own offices.]

We are going to ask you to please continue your business in the offices or
elsewhere so that we remain with people that are interested in the
responses from the Deputy President. Hon members, we are appealing to you.
The Whips are too relaxed, while we struggle to get order in the House. We
are appealing to all the Whips from both sides of the House to assist us in
maintaining order.

Is that agreed? Are we all going to be as honourable as our titles suggest?
[Interjections.] Thank you. I knew I could always count on you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Acting Speaker, hon Deputy President, regarding your
recent calls to chartered accountant companies to increase their intake of
interns, I just wondered if you had any idea how that was going, and
whether that has delivered any fruits? Also, do you have any incentives or
measures in place to encourage these companies to do what you’ve asked?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: We don’t have a total as yet of how many companies
already responded, but as I said, since the KPMG’s programme started, we
are seeing more companies in the auditing industry, especially, who are
increasing the number of people that they are taking. At some point we will
report on how many students or young people have been taken on.

We don’t have specific incentives for these companies. The biggest
incentive for these companies must be the fact that they are training a
labour force for themselves. I really do not want us as government to get
into a mentality where the private sector thinks that when they invest in
training, they are doing government a favour. They are doing something that
they have to do. There is a skills crisis, not just in South Africa, but
all over the world. If they do not invest in training competent workers for
themselves so that they become more profitable, then they are really
passing the buck.

Having said that, because it is our responsibility as government also to
invest in people, we will not neglect and abdicate our responsibility. In
our scholarship programmes, the scholarships that are supported and funded
by government, we have a particular category where we actually support
students in finance. I must also say that I was pleasantly surprised
recently to note that at the University of the Western Cape, the number of
students that are graduating with degrees in a finance-related field has
increased quite significantly.

In fact, I think that UWC now graduates the largest number of black
students in the accounting and commercial profession, as it were. That is
something that I think is quite significant: what was a “bush” university
is now a leader in producing competent people for the economy.

Mr B M MKONGI: Madam Acting Speaker, I know that the challenge of chartered
accountancy is a big one in South Africa, especially for young black
students. However, in addition to that, what are other critical skills that
the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition has identified that
have made progress? If progress is being hindered, what could be the
reasons, and what is government doing to make sure that it fast-tracks this
issue to ensure that it eliminates those things that are hindering
progress?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, that’s a big question, because the number
of areas in which we are pushing for the significant increase of skills is
quite a broad area. Engineers are the ones that we talk about, but really,
engineers now have become a euphemism for skills in the built environment,
because when you have an engineer, then you need a quantity surveyor and an
architect, etc. So, it’s a whole area of related skills.

We are pushing for educators. As you know, in the last Budget, we put in
quite a bit of money to increase the number of teachers, especially in
languages, in mathematics and in science. We need social workers, and
therefore, we have increased the number of people that we are training as
social workers.

I just want to emphasise that we must never be misunderstood that when we
emphasise the skills that are needed in the private sector and in commerce,
we are downplaying the skills that we need in humanities and the social
sciences, because there can never be a nation that is made up of people who
are mixing concrete and measuring bridges in the absence of people who care
for the people. So, that balance is also very important.

The other point I want to emphasise is that we are not only talking about
the high-level skills which we need and which are very important, but in
South Africa we have a high demand also for paralegals, paramedics and that
category of workers who get the job done quickly. The most important thing
in those areas is the ability to care and do the jobs with compassion and,
therefore, people learn on the job, and add the skills.

South Africa is also a country with a fantastic capacity in the area of
arts and culture. The investment in training in that area for our own
consumption and for export of South African culture is also an area where
we can be doing much more, because every other South African has got some
artistic capacity. Even here in the House, if I ask us to form a choir ...
ungazibonela nje indlela abantu baseNingizimu Afrika abacula kahle ngayo
... [you can see for yourself that South Africans sing very well.] ... and
we will be led by Derek! [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy Minister Hanekom, are you available, and would
you like to be in that choir? [Laughter.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Deputy Speaker and Deputy President, I just want to
know something: There are companies that don’t want to take on these
professionals when they don’t have experience. They always say that they
want them to have at least five years’ experience, or whatever. How are we
going to help these professionals, especially the black professionals, who
are just coming out of the colleges and universities, to assist them to
find jobs, specifically because there is a relationship between the
Presidency and the business people, in order for them not to discriminate
against these people who have just come out from tertiary education? Thank
you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thanks. The initiative in the Joint Initiative for
Priority Skills Acquisition where we place unemployed graduates and newly
graduated technikon and university students is aimed at making companies
deal with the fact that people need to start somewhere. We cannot always
ask for experience if we don’t give people an opportunity to make a first
start.

A lot of the internship programmes are also aimed at achieving that. The
numbers are not as good as we would like them to be, and that is why we are
publicising it, and when you yourselves, hon members, talk about these
issues, you actually help us to highlight the need for these internships.

We also need government to do more than what we are doing. Even as
government, we are not doing enough when it comes to the placement of and
providing experience for these young people. Some departments are doing
well, I must say. Thank you.

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am coming back to the question
of chartered accountants and the shortage thereof. When the Lord Mayor of
the City of London recently visited South Africa, he pointed out that South
Africa, in order to develop economically, should have about 100 000
chartered accountants. Yesterday, in the NCOP, the Minister of Finance,
Trevor Manuel, elaborated on these figures when he added that South Africa
has about 26 000 registered chartered accountants, but that about 6 500 had
gone overseas in search of better career prospects.

This suggests that South Africa has a shortfall of about 80 000 auditors
... [Interjections.] ... let me finish my question, please, and yet the
Chairperson of the Employment Equity Commission, Mr Jimmy Manyi, wants
South Africans to believe that there is no skills shortage. Now, as head of
Jipsa, Madam Deputy President, will you please tell us who to believe – Mr
Manyi or the Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Believe both of them, they are good men. [Applause.]
Thank you.

I need to explain what Mr Manyi means. Mr Manyi argues that even though we
have a shortage in terms of the numbers, of the people that are already
trained, we are underutilising them. There is empirical evidence – we did
the research ourselves in Jipsa – that the reason why we have unemployed
graduates with appropriate degrees, is because there are people with
qualifications but the industry shuns them. Sometimes they don’t want to
take them, because they don’t have experience. They don’t want to take them
because they come from historically black universities. So, they’ve got
attitudes towards people who qualify for this.
Let’s use everybody who is available, and let’s enhance their skills. Let’s
invest, as the private sector and employers and also as the public sector,
in the enhancing of the capacity of people who already have a qualification
because, by getting a qualification at a tertiary level, in particular, you
demonstrate capacity to conceptualise. You demonstrate a certain high level
of cognitive skills. To tell me that somebody, because they are from this
university or that university, is not good enough, is what makes a person
like Mr Manyi mad. I think he has got a point there. He may express it in
his own way, but he’s got a point. Give the man a break. [Applause.]

      Application of principle of freedom of the press and other media

19.   Dr P W A Mulder (VF Plus) asked the Deputy President:

       Whether the principle of the freedom of the press and other media,
       as set out in section 16(1)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic
       of South Africa, Act 108 of 1996, is still being applied
       consistently; if not, why not; if so, what actions and measures
       guarantee that this freedom is not restricted?

           N02532E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: This question wants us to say whether we think that
the freedom of the press in South Africa is facing a crisis. Our assessment
as government is that freedom of the media continues to thrive in our
country. As the hon member knows, the principle of media freedom is
enshrined in our Constitution and nobody can take that away, be it the
state entities or any individual citizen. Only the courts are vested with
the authority to interpret this application of freedom in accordance with
provisions of the Constitution and any subsidiary legislation. In fact,
this free flowing debate that we are now having on this matter and the
similar debates that take place in the nation are due to a strong culture
of freedom of speech and freedom of the press in South Africa.

Government fully supports freedom of the media and appreciates that this is
one of the cornerstones of our democracy. The ultimate guarantor of this
freedom is in the Constitution itself, and the rigorous application of the
letter and the spirit of this basic law of the land by the judiciary in
instances where there may be attempts to restrict such freedom or violate
the Constitutional limitations that are attached to such freedom, is
guaranteed. The leadership of the South African National Editors’ Forum in
a recent debate on national radio confirmed that freedom of the media in
South Africa is not under any threat. I would also add that since 1994,
South Africa has been ranked as one of the countries of the world with the
best environment for press freedom. In a recent release of global freedom
rankings by the Freedom House, an NGO based in Washington, it ranked South
Africa as one of the countries with the best possible freedom of the press.
I don’t know where this is coming from.
Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Acting Speaker and Madam Deputy President, I welcome
the statement from the Deputy President. I think it is very important that
we get that on record. Let me tell you where it comes from. As an African
state, the government should accept that South Africa is viewed through
more critical eyes by the world than what the case would be with other
states. Of course, these are double standards. I get angry with this.
Especially the Western media seemed to be looking at this and therefore we
should be extra careful not to, in any sense, reinforce such negative
perceptions. The rumour for example, that Mr Mondli Makhanya, the editor of
the Sunday Times will be arrested reinforced the perception that South
Africa is somewhat like Zimbabwe and does not tolerate criticism and press
freedom. Or maybe the same goes for the rumour, for example, that the
police experienced pressure to quickly finalise and act on the
investigation into Mr Makhanya. These are the type of things that do this.
If the government does believe in press freedom, why does the government
then threaten newspapers, which criticise them, that they will be punished
by the government through the withdrawal of government advertisements? I am
not talking about ANC party advertisements but of government advertisements
to be withdrawn from these newspapers, as was reported in the media?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: As he himself has said, it was a mere rumour. We are
not rumourmongers here. We are hon members. If there are editors who decide
to publish a rumour as a story, then it is shocking. Whose freedom is then
actually being threatened: our freedom or that of the media? You be the
judge.

On the issue of the withdrawal of advertisements, there is the issue of
freedom of association. The government has a right to advertise wherever it
wants to do so but having said that, I don’t know about the threats that
you are talking about, necessarily. Having said that, I really think that
government departments must advertise where they think that they’ll get
optimum value. It is also double standards for us as citizens that when
editors write stories that are blatantly untrue, we do not chastise them
for actually doing so. The concern that you have that African countries,
including South Africa, are projected in a particular light, actually feeds
into that frenzy. When we as citizens do not protect the image of our
country by calling them to order, we are also beginning to apply the double
standards that we do not want others to apply. I take the point that you
made.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Acting Speaker. Deputy President, the ACDP
appreciates your assurance that there is no attempt to curtail media
freedom in South Africa. However, we had the Films and Publications
Amendment Bill that was passed by Cabinet and prior to the portfolio
committee’s intervention, it allowed for pre-publication censorship.
There are still constitutional concerns from the National Editors’ Forum on
this Bill. Would you comment on this? You also referred to a global
analysis. There is another analysis by Reporters without Borders in 2006,
which indicates that South Africa has dropped from the 21st position of
countries that enjoy the most press freedom in 2003 to the 44th position in
2006. Does this not indicate a different picture and that in fact there has
been deterioration in press freedom in South Africa? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I am familiar with that report and the analysis in
that report, some of the incidences that they were quoting as incidences
that catalogue the number of instances that show that South Africa is
dropping, are the Mondli Makhanya type of examples, where it consists of
allegations that are not substantiated. It passes as a fact in some cases.
I must also say that there is also a growth in the number of countries that
have better press freedom. There is an overall improvement in the world,
which means that we might not always be at the top. The amount of rumours
that are fuelled about South Africa and go unchecked, we also have that
problem.

On the issue of the Bill whose official title is eluding me, the
pornography one, it is for that reason that there are some concerns that we
have. We have this dilemma of having to protect members of the public,
children in particular, from material that could be damaging. It concerns
all of us and balances with the freedom of others. I don’t claim to know
the answer of that balance but I just know that at all times I would do
anything to protect my children from harmful material as a parent.
[Applause.]
Ms M SMUTS: To the hon Deputy President, I just find some of her
observations and remarks difficult to reconcile with what has been
happening. How can it be said, for example, that free speech is thriving in
a country that explicitly puts media freedom in its Constitution, when
indeed government has tabled legislation which allows for pre-publication
censorship and which has nothing, with respect to the Deputy President, to
do with child pornography? There have never been any complaints about that.
The Bill goes way beyond that.

Now secondly she made the statement, that only the courts are vested with
the right to interpret free speech and the other rights. Now that being the
case, does she accept in fact Judge Mohammed’s excellent ruling in the hon
Health Minister’s privacy case against the Sunday Times? This case makes it
quite clear that while the privacy of medical records must be respected,
there was in this instance a compelling public interest case to publish,
given the fact that the courts have that status. Does she accept that
ruling? Could she perhaps tell us why the Health Minister has not in fact
sued for defamation on this matter? It cannot just be said that these
matters are not true. If they are untrue, the Health Minister must sue for
defamation and if she doesn’t, then we assume the truth of these things.
The defence in defamation is truth in public interest.

Lastly, would she kindly give us her view of something that was said by the
chairperson of the relevant committee in the NCOP, I think last week, when
the same Film and Publications Bill was dealt with, when the media
organisations said that they will now have to go to the Constitutional
Court on this matter, as indeed I think they should, the answer to them
from the ANC leader of that committee was that they can go to court but the
ANC will simply write the Bill again to ensure that prepublication
censorship does occur. Will she give us her view from leadership on the
position taken by that Member of Parliament, please?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the Deputy President responds, I would like to
make it very clear to the members of the National Assembly that we don’t
deal with matters that are in the NCOP. Therefore, I do not expect the
Deputy President to respond to that matter. Of a number of questions that
have been raised, the question that we are dealing with is the question on
the principle of the freedom of the press and other media, anything that is
related to that question may be answered and it is up to the Deputy
President to respond. I think that the questions are not related to the
principal question.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Acting Speaker, for your
excellent ruling and observation. I will not really dwell on the issues
that are not linked to the question that I am answering. On the issues of
the Bill and the taking to court, we will abide with what the court says.
There is no question that we will not abide with that. We have a different
interpretation from that of the media and that is maybe where the courts
come in. Then we will take it from there when that happens. I don’t want to
be second-guessing and arguing with you. We do not have the power to tell
the courts what to do. The other issues have really nothing to do with the
question. I am also a politician and I know how to score points here and
again and I am not going to do that.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Madam Acting Speaker, when we wrote the Constitution we did
anticipate that some people would selectively quote from it to advance
their interests. The Constitution explains in its interpretation of the
Bill of Rights that when interpreting the Bill of Rights, a court, a
tribunal or a forum must promote the values that underlie an open
democratic society based on human dignity, equality and freedom. Preceding
that one it also says: There will be human dignity that must be protected
and respected. All of this must happen in the context of the interpretation
by ourselves, government exercising its responsibility and Parliament in
ensuring that it happens.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, what is your follow-up question because you
are running out of time, now?

Mr S L TSENOLI: My follow-up question, Madam Acting Speaker, is: Is it not
correct that in the nature of robust debate that there will be selective
misrepresentations of the Constitution, as it argues?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that was not a question but a comment. I don’t
expect the Deputy President to respond to a comment. And I think that
brings to the end the questions to the Deputy President.

     QUESTION TRANSFERRED FROM WRITTEN TO ORAL REPLY UPON REQUEST OF THE
                         RELEVANT MEMBER (RULE 117)


Question standing over from Wednesday, 5 September 2007:

MINISTERS:

    Implementation of recommendations of Pickard Judicial Commission and
          Motimele Commission of Inquiry into South African Soccer

289.  Mr B M Komphela (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

        1) What were the key findings and recommendations of the (a)
           Pickard Judicial Commission and the (b) Motimele Commission of
           Inquiry into South African Soccer;


        2) Whether any of the recommendations made by either of these
           commissions of inquiry were implemented by soccer authorities;
           if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   Whether Sport and Recreation South Africa will play any role in
            ensuring that the recommendations contained in the
            abovementioned reports are implemented by soccer authorities; if
            not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                         N01973E

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Acting Speaker, the question is
divided into three sections: The first section relates to the findings of
the Pickard Judicial Commission and the Motimane Commission; section two
relates to the recommendations that emanated from these two commissions;
and the third section asks whether we as the department play a role in the
implementation of these recommendations.

The key findings and recommendations of the Pickard Judicial Commission
were as follows: Firstly, the commission found that it could not dictate to
the soccer fraternity how it should run its soccer affairs, but the
experience of the past as well as the report of the commission should be
used by the soccer fraternity, one, to avoid a recurrence of the financial
mismanagement or malpractice by the organisations and, two, to improve the
administration of these organisations.

Subsequent to the releasing of the findings of the report by the
commission, a meeting should be chaired by an independent person, who would
call over a period of several days between this report and that meeting all
interested parties, such as the senior members of the National Soccer
League, currently known as the Premier Soccer League, all provincial
representatives and executives and committee members of the SA Football
Association, amongst others, provided that this meeting can only be held
once the present administration is released from the services of Mr Solomon
Sticks Morewa and the full-time Executive President of Safa.

The second finding was that at the said meeting all issues should be
canvassed, the whole constitution of the various soccer associations should
be reconsidered and efforts must be made to reach consensus on the level
where both professional and amateur soccer players are properly represented
on Safa and the executive committees thereof. The principle of a full-time
executive president is unacceptable; ideally, the president and the
chairperson of Safa should be men of integrity and financial independence.

Thirdly, a full-time and adequately remunerated person, a CEO, should
attend to the day-to-day affairs and negotiate on behalf of Safa at all
levels. But such a person may not be president of Safa, nor may the latter
chair meetings of the executive. The executive will report to the president
and may not receive any compensation on what expenses it incurred when
attending those meetings.

The commission found that representation on the committees should be
entrenched in such a way that neither professionals nor amateurs can ever
exercise a majority vote. The task of all office bearers is to promote
football, meaning that any form of personal advantage must be absolutely
prohibited. And it also found that in as far as women’s soccer is
concerned, a similar meeting as alluded to above must be held to address
problematic issues.

Mong B M KOMPHELA: Letona ke ya leboha ka tlhaloso eo o re fileng yona,
empa, Letona, ditshisinyo tse ileng tsa etswa ke dikomisheni tsena tse
pedi, eleng Komisheni ya Pickard le Komisheni ya Motimele. Banna bana ha ba
hlokomela ditshesinyo tseo. Ba ntse ba tswela pele ba ipha tjhelete eo, ba
ntse ba etsa tsona ditho tseo Motimele le Picad ba itseng ba se ke ba di
etsa. Ke eng seo re ka thusang banna bana ka sona, hore mohlong re kgone ho
ba thibela hore ba se ke ba tswela pele ka dintho tsena tse ba ntseng ba di
etsa feela ho kupuwe hore ba seka ba hlola ba dietsa. Ke ya leboha.
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Mr B M KOMPHELA: Hon Minister I thank you for the clarity you gave us,
however, the recommendations made by both the Pickard and Motimele
Commissions are not adhered to by these people and they continue to access
those monies and also continue to do the things which the commissions
advised them not to do.  What can we do to help these men not to continue
doing what they are not supposed to be doing in terms of the two
recommendations? I thank you.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, I must first apologise
to the person who had asked the question, that is, the chairperson of the
portfolio committee. I could not respond to all issues because it is a very
long response. I’ll give you the written response, but with respect to the
last part of your question, the fact of the matter is that neither Pickard
nor Motimele could force Safa or the NSL/PSL to implement any of their
recommendations.

As a matter of fact, since then until now - you must remember that Pickard
was in operation since Steve Tshwete’s term of office, and Motimele since
Ngconde Balfour’s term of office - as I am standing here now, the
Department of Sport and Recreation, the government of the Republic of South
Africa does not have a tool which compels Safa to do what these
recommendations are asking for. The recommendations are not judicial and
they cannot be legally enforced. Until the Bill that passed through the two
Houses is signed, we will remain without hands.

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for his presence in this
House today. It shows that you have respect for this place, the people’s
place here. Mr Minister, I would be very careful of using the word
“commission” when we speak to soccer officials because to them “commission”
means money in their pockets. That is how they understand “commission”. My
question is: What are the names of the individuals implicated by the
Motimele Commission of Inquiry and what action has been taken against them?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, I agree with Mr Lee
that, like many other words that we use, “commission” is very ambiguous. It
can mean so many things to many people. But, with respect to this matter,
money in the pocket is not only the preserve of the SA Football
Association. As a matter of fact, there are very few federation
administrators who do not take commission, directly or by proxy, and this
has become clear in the last few days when we investigated the Absa/PSL
situation. We had to go beyond them and it was shocking to see how many of
these federations make money through commissions, directly or by proxy.

The hon member will remember that, subsequent to the Motimele Commission’s
report, the Department of Safety and Security then opened cases against 27
referees or match officials and owners of clubs. It opened cases but as a
matter of fact only one was prosecuted because, according to themselves,
there were not enough grounds for the prosecution of the others. I will not
be able to give the details of whys and wherefores because, as I say, the
matter was in the hands of the police. We only received what they reported,
namely that there were not enough grounds for the prosecution of the
others.

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, you know, what is important really to the nation:
We really want to know who those people are, the so-called “others”. We
would really like to know what their names are. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, that is easy to provide,
but we cannot provide that now, since we did not anticipate that it would
be requested. It is available in the files and in the records of the
department. We will make it available.

                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE

                                  Cluster 2

   Actions of Chief Director in nominating a person to the SA Broadcasting
                              Corporation Board

MINISTERS:

360.  Ms M Smuts (DA) asked the Minister in the Presidency:

          1) Whether his Chief Director asked a certain person for her
             permission and her curriculum vitae on nominating her for a
             position on the SA Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) Board; if
             not, what is the position in this regard; if so,


       (2) whether his Chief Director advised the said person that he is
             working for the Minister in the Presidency; if not, why not?
                                                                    N02496E

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The next question is question 360,
which has been asked by the hon Smuts to the Minister in the Presidency. I
am advised that the hon Padayachie will reply to the question.

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, on a point of order: In the light of the excellent
statement made here by the Acting Speaker at the commencement of these
proceedings, that Ministers absent today should come back to take
questions, would you please allow me to request that, in the case of the
two questions I have here for the hon the Minister in the Presidency, my
questions also stand over, because the matter is of considerable
seriousness?

As the hon Acting Speaker has said, each Minister is individually
responsible for his portfolio and department and then Cabinet is
collectively responsible. The matters we are dealing with in these
questions pertain to things that happened in that Minister’s department and
not in the department of this Deputy Minister, who also does not hold
collective responsibility.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you. The question, at the
request of the questioner, will therefore stand over.

     QUESTION TRANSFERRED FROM WRITTEN TO ORAL REPLY UPON REQUEST OF THE
                         RELEVANT MEMBER (RULE 117)

Question standing over from Wednesday, 5 September 2007:

  Extent to which sports federations compelled to comply with King 2 Report

288.  Mr C T Frolick (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

       To what extent is sport federations compelled to comply with the (a)
       provisions and (b) recommendations of the King 2 report on corporate
       governance?                                 N01972E

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, the question relates to
the extent to which federations are compelled to comply with the King
Report.

The King 2 Report only gives guidelines or a code of corporate practice and
conduct to ensure that the best corporate practices are complied with by
the private sector. This applies to such institutions as all listed
companies on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, all banks, financial and
insurance entities, public sector enterprises and agencies that fall under
the Public Finance Management Act, as well as those public sector
enterprises exercising a power or performing a function in terms of a
provincial constitution or those public sector enterprises exercising a
public power or performing a public function in terms of any legislation of
the Republic.

From the above it becomes very clear that the King 2 Report gives
guidelines rather than injunctions. It is not enforceable, but those that
are affected by it should give due consideration to the application of the
said code of corporate practice and conduct.

From a sport perspective, sports federations that are in charge of
companies registered on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange or public entities
in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, such as Boxing South Africa
and the SA Institute for Drug-free Sport, are the only public entities
under the administration of the Department of Sport and Recreation. These
will have to give due consideration to the application of the said code as
defined by King 2. However, they cannot be compelled to comply with the
provisions and recommendations of King 2 that have been translated into the
said code of corporate practice and conduct.

However, in terms of section 4 of the proposed National Sport and
Recreation Amendment Bill that will be promulgated soon, our department
will enter into a service level agreement with the SA Sports Confederation
and Olympic Committee, as well as with national federations. We will then
be able to require that national federations, in terms of that agreement,
comply with the provisions of King 2.

Mr C T FROLICK: Thank you, Minister, for the reply. Chairperson, arising
out of the hon Minister’s reply, the advent of professional sport in South
Africa after 1995 heralded a new period where sport became a multibillion
rand industry. Money continuously exchanged hands between the sponsors, the
agents, companies and sport federations, as well as office bearers. In the
previous question, Minister, you referred to the fact that that is a
practice that is very widespread nationally and internationally.

Given the fact that the majority of our federations and provincial clubs
are poor, have no resources and operate from the boots of cars, what
efforts have been made by the department to assist these federations, who
are interacting with big business and who have companies, (Pty) Ltds, to
move towards compliance with the provisions of the King 2 Report as far as
good, clean administration and corporate governance is concerned? Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, our department has again
reflected in the annual report the amount of money that we invest in the
training of administrators and organisers of sport in the various sectors
of our communities. We will also report on how much we have invested in the
partnership that we have with the University of Johannesburg insofar as the
training of senior managers is concerned.

We have also held literally hundreds of meetings with different
federations, the last one being held only yesterday with the football
federation, to try to lobby them and explain to them the essence and
meaning of good governance for our sport and for the improvement of our
leagues and, indeed, for the inculcation of pride and integrity in the
federations of this country.

Everybody is excited after the Springbok victory in the 2007 Rugby World
Cup in France last Saturday. However, when we deal with governance issues
in this House, even with respect to the leadership of the SA Rugby Union,
we are hurled with insults. It is, however, a product of that pain and
blood in our boardrooms that has improved the lot of the administration of
our football.

I’ve just received a letter from Yaoundé in Cameroon. It’s from the
Secretary-General of the Supreme Council of Sport in Africa, congratulating
South Africa on this marvellous victory, but urging us to continue to be
the shining example to the rest of the continent in the improvement of the
governance of our federations. We will put money into that programme. Thank
you.

Mnr T D LEE: Mnr die Minister, u weet die Engelse sê: “Charity begins at
home.” Nou, wanneer dit kom by goeie aanspreeklikheidsbestuur, dan moet u
die voorbeeld stel. Maar kyk maar net hoe u eie department bestuur word.
Vir die afgelope paar jaar was daar geen kwalifikasies deur die Ouditeur-
generaal nie. Hierdie jaar was daar nege ernstige kwalifikasies. Dis nege
redes om baie bekommerd te wees.

Mnr die Minister, ek wil vra: Wat u gaan doen om daardie saak reg te stel,
in belang van sport in Suid-Afrika en spesifiek in belang van die feit dat
ons in 2010 die Sokkerwêreldbeker gaan aanbied? Asseblief, in belang van u
en dié land se geloofwaardigheid, laat ons hierdie dinge doen. Wat gaan u
doen? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Mr Minister, you know, the English say, “Charity begins at
home”. Now when it comes to good accountability management you have to set
the example. But look at how the department is being managed. For the past
few years there have been no qualifications by the Auditor-General. This
year there have been nine serious qualifications. That is nine reasons to
be very concerned.

Mr Minister, I want to ask what you are going to do to rectify that matter,
in the interest of sport in South Africa, in the interest of the fact that
we will be hosting the Soccer World Cup in 2010. Please, in the interest of
your own and of the country’s credibility, let us do this. What are you
going to do?]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, if I wanted to be
finicky, I would say that that is a new question. I will answer it,
nonetheless.

On the question of the Auditor-General’s queries on our report, you will be
interested to see that they go way back. The question that the hon member
should be asking is: Why did the previous Auditor-General miss these
issues? Why did they not pick them up? Why did it take so long for them to
pick up these things? These things have nothing to do with corruption; they
have to do with inefficiency, noncompliance with prescripts,
nonavailability of policies and all those kinds of things - not now, not
yesterday, not three years ago, but many, many years ago. What are we going
to do about it? We have already corrected most of those and, of course, the
report that you will read will reflect what was at the end of March, not
what is at the end of 2007. We have implemented a whole range of corrective
mechanisms.

Of course, the members will remember that we were running a skeleton staff
when we started the department. During this term of government there was a
moratorium on the appointment of staff and Mr Lee has consistently been
asking me to fill those vacancies. We have filled them now, Sir. Thank you.

Mnr T D LEE: Voorsitter, ek verstaan wat die Minister vandag hier probeer
sê, maar wat ek nie kan verstaan nie - en wat Minister Fraser-Moleketi
seker nie kan verstaan nie - is die feit dat die Minister gewaarsku is dat
sekere bonusse nie aan mense uitbetaal moet word nie. Desnieteenstaande is
bonusse aan daardie mense betaal. Dit is weer ’n bewys van finansiële
bestuur wat nie die mas opkom nie. Ek wil vra waarom hy sy kollegas se
advies geïgnoreer het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, I understand what the Minister is trying to say
here today, but what I don’t understand - and what Minister Fraser-Moleketi
probably doesn’t understand - is the fact that the Minister had been warned
that certain bonuses should not be paid out to those people. Nonetheless
bonuses were paid out to those people. This is once again evidence of
financial management that doesn’t cut it. I want to know why he ignored his
colleagues’ advice.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, Mr Lee’s informants are
very selective with the truth. Let me give you the history of those
bonuses.

The director-general at the time sent me a memorandum advising me to
authorise the payment of those bonuses. I referred the matter to the
Department of the Public Service and Administration and they refused to
waiver the rules in respect of the payment. That was it. A few months down
the line, the director-general sent another memorandum, advising me, in
terms of what he purported to be the law, why these particular bonuses
should be paid.

Now, Mr Lee, the director-general in any department of the state is the
first adviser of the executing authority. Anybody who does not listen to
their director-general is not very clever. But it turned out that they
misled their executing authority. Section 19 of the Public Service Act
states that that is gross misconduct, and there are stipulated steps to
take in those circumstance, and we are taking them.

                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE

                                  Cluster 2

              Benefits derived from overseas trips by Minister

MINISTERS:

363.  Mrs J A Semple (DA) asked the Minister of Social Development:

       Whether, with reference to his department’s 2006-07 annual report
       revealing that he went on 19 overseas visits in that financial year,
       spending a total of 109 days out of the country, any measurable
       benefits that can be applied to his portfolio were derived from
       these trips; if not, why not’ if so, what are the relevant details?
                                  N02500E

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairperson, first of all, this
question was answered and made public about a week or two ago. Secondly, I
would like to advise the hon member that the way in which those days have
been counted really does not reflect the reality in general. Some of those
days happened before April last year, but they have all been added together
in order to come up to that number. Thirdly, some of those days were days
when I went to different countries on behalf of the President, and it was
when I went out of the country on behalf of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs.

But in general, I think the hon member is a bit misled in thinking that
social development has its mandate only within South Africa as a whole. The
amount of work that has been done by South Africa, especially by the
President, at the United Nations, and by other Ministers, the Minister of
Finance and all of the others, has interested the international community
especially on the way in which South Africa has been dealing with the issue
of poverty alleviation and eradication. Hence, a lot of interest has been
generated in the international community.

Secondly, if the hon member looks very clearly into those dates, they are
the days when I was travelling within Africa, but also in Latin America,
where I was getting experience from other people.

Thirdly, you must understand that, on the issue of social development,
there are not many countries in Africa that deal with the issue of poverty
directly within the communities themselves. Very few Ministers deal exactly
with that. It is in that process that we are going out, one way or the
other, to try to talk to our colleagues on the importance of concentrating
generally on the issue of poverty and poverty alleviation.

Fourthly, most of the work that we are doing in this country comes from the
assistance and budget that we received from the international donor
community, and most of the time they would like to know how they can
continue to assist us in this type of work, and in that process we have
been able to mobilise about R329 million in order to facilitate the work.
That is money that does not necessarily include what has been given to
nongovernmental organisations, which need a lot of money in order for them
to survive.

But most importantly, it is a point and I think it should be understood as
such, that the work that has been done in South Africa interests the vast
majority of people especially in this country and other developing
countries. What we have learnt ourselves has been very instructive in
general to try to compel the type of policies that we are carrying out in
South Africa, in comparison with the countries of the same development,
especially in Latin America, in the field of social development and the
question of development in general.

The exchanges that we have had, specifically with Bolivia, Chile, Mexico
and Brazil, have been very enlightening. The programmes, for instance, of
Bolsa Familia and Opportunidade in Mexico and Brazil, have been very useful
and some of the things that we learnt from them are beginning to be put
into effect in South Africa, for instance the question of concentrating on
children, that investment in children has to be intensified because you are
not dealing generally with individuals, you are dealing with a whole
generation for the future of South Africa.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon Minister. I regret your
time for the first response has expired. You will get an opportunity to
come back with the supplementaries.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, hon Minister, for
your reply. I am very pleased that you are actually here in the House today
to answer the question, as opposed to being on one of these so-called many
overseas trips. Hon Minister, I do apologise if you don’t agree with our
figures, but the figures are based on those that are actually documented in
your own department’s reports. So, that’s what we calculated. And I didn’t
ask you a question two weeks ago; I put out a press statement and you
replied. So now we are having it in the House on a one-to-one basis.
Hon Minister, I would just like to ask you: Do you think that the benefits
derived from your trips overseas or in Africa actually warrant the
financial costs and the time costs? Do you think the benefits outweigh the
costs, yes or no?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon member, R329 million
is very little money. [Interjections.] If you think that the R329 million
that we received from the donor community is very little money, then I
think you should think again. The very fact that the international
community is basically capable of investing or giving us so much money is
something that we should thank them for.

Secondly, you are right: The way in which the number of days has been
counted does not necessarily reflect the truth. As I said to you, some of
the days that have been added are days before April last year, that is,
from 2005 to April 2006. And the other days, generally, are the days that I
have talked about, including those of the President, those of the Deputy
Minister and those that we spent at conferences like the Aids conference in
Canada. Those are days that I really think were important. But also
included in that are days that one spends in Africa just travelling, before
one even gets to one’s destination.

Mr T M MASUTHA: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Of course, what the Minister in
his humility did not mention is that last week Thursday I gave him a call
and told him that the Children’s Bill was coming up tomorrow, and he had to
shorten his overseas trip to make sure that the children of this country
take priority. [Interjections.] And further, the opposition, of course,
will not mention the fact that the Minister, since he took over this
Ministry, has managed to raise the take-up rate of the foster care grant
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Masutha, what is your
question?

Mr T M MASUTHA: The question I want to ask you, hon Minister, is: When you
compare the great strides we have made in fighting poverty in this country
with our peer countries that you have visited, do you think that we have
done fairly well, or do you think we are still challenged?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I think we have done well.
As far as the millennium development goals are concerned, it is quite
obvious that we are going to be able to fulfil that, but of course there
are weaknesses as far as maternal mortality and infant mortality are
concerned. Those are the weaknesses that, I think as our health system
improves, we will be able to ensure that we do fulfil those.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, hon Minister, I am really pleased that you
clarified the R329 million. I thought what you were telling us was that you
spent R329 million on your trips overseas, and then you mentioned the donor
funding. Hon Minister, are there any reports that have been tabled about
the visits and benefits to the department and the country of your visits?
If so, how can they be accessed, and if not, why are there no reports
tabled? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the member can approach my
director-general. All of the reports are available.

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, the hon Minister mentioned that he learnt on his
overseas trips that we must put children first. The current legislation,
the Child Care Act, is underfunded by R50 billion. We only fund about R2
billion. Will the Minister give this House the assurance that, since he has
learnt from his overseas trips that children must come first, that all
legislation pertaining to children within his department will be funded
appropriately? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): That is a new question, but it is
up to the Minister to decide.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I think the hon member
knows the commitment of this government as far as children are concerned.
When the budget is asked for and there is a possibility that it would be
available, basically this government will do everything in its power to
ensure that children come first.
  Plans with regard to setting up of special transit facilities for asylum
                                   seekers

359.  Mr C M Lowe (DA) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

       (1) Whether, with reference to certain newspaper articles (copies
             furnished), her department has plans to set up special transit
             facilities for asylum seekers; if not (a) why did her
             department’s Refugee Affairs Director (name furnished) make a
             statement to this effect and (b) what are the reasons for her
             department not putting these plans in place; if so, why did
             her department’s acting head of communication services (name
             furnished) state that the department was contemplating
             additional refugee centres and not special transit facilities;

       (2) whether she has taken any action as a result of these
             contradicting statements by officials of her department; if
             not, why not; if so, what action?                      N02495E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Chairperson, and thank
you, hon member. The answer to part one is: No, the South African
government will continue to ensure that refugees are integrated into
communities and not have to be put in camps. We are of the firm view that
the refugees and other categories of regularised foreign nationals that are
in our country can best contribute and be protected when they are properly
integrated into our communities. This remains in line with our
constitutional obligation to accord them the right to freedom of movement.

To clarify the statements regarding transit facilities, I must indicate
that the department had commissioned a feasibility study in October 2006 to
inform us of the viability of setting up transit facilities for asylum
seekers whose status was not yet determined. This was done in order to
advise on the many policy options we have been considering with regard to
the management of illegal migration and the pressure currently put on the
asylum system.

Merely commissioning a feasibility study, therefore, does not mean that
government has adopted a policy to set up such transit facilities. The
draft report of the study was sent to relevant stakeholders for comment,
and unfortunately one of the journalists who got access to the study
erroneously attributed it to one of the officials in the department.

To the second part of the question, the answer is no. There is no
contradiction between a statement acknowledging that we have commissioned
such a study and one that clarifies that we have not decided to set up such
facilities. I thank you.

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, thank you very much for
your response. But I do believe that the fact that there were two specific
points of view issued, is indicative of your department, where it seems
that one hand does not know what the other hand is doing. And it is not
just on the question of refugees, hon Minister; quite frankly, your
department appears to be a department in crisis. It is largely
dysfunctional and when it comes to refugees particularly, we see that their
dignity is trampled on, their human rights are abused, as we have seen just
this week down on the Foreshore but also in Pretoria, in Johannesburg and
in Durban where I visited those offices. Frankly, Minister, it not just the
refugees, it is the citizens of this country, too, who have their dignity
trampled and their human rights abused when they try to get ID books,
passports and the like.

Simply put, Minister, it cannot go on. Your director-general has been good
enough to be frank and plain-speaking with us in telling us what the
problems are and what he needs to do, but you, Madam, have been simply
invisible.

I want to ask you this afternoon whether you are committed to turning
around Home Affairs, and making the citizens of South Africa and the
refugees who come here feel that they do have human rights, that their
dignity will be respected and that they will get service. Because, with
great respect, Minister, that has not been the case until now. It simply
has not been the case. This is the first time you have been in this House
in months. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr C M LOWE: I would just simply ask, on behalf of South Africa: Are you
committed to Home Affairs? Thank you, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Also, you are asking more
than what is contained in the content of the original question. I shall
leave it to the discretion of the Minister.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chairperson. You are very correct,
Mr Lowe, that I have not been around, but I am sure you will be very happy
to hear that I was not lying on my back in my bedroom.

Secondly, regarding a crisis of human rights violations of both citizens
and refugees, you are very correct. I am trying to sort out the system that
I have inherited and trying to correct it because it is a mess. I also want
to say that I am sure you will be very happy to hear that while I have been
out of the country I have been dealing with the issue of the scarce skills
quota list, which we have published. If you need a report from the
Minister, I can assure you that you can receive that report about where we
have been, whom we have spoken to and what it is that we have talked about.

About the citizens of this country, you are equally correct. The mess that
we are sorting out is not a mess that was created after 1994; it is a mess
dating back 40 years. [Interjections.] Yes, the director-general is very
committed to turning around the department. Yes, of course, he is there and
the turnaround team is there, and all the issues that you are raising are
issues that this Minister has raised in this House through the portfolio
committee. Thank you.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you very much, Minister, for
your precise answer. Would you agree with me that during the liberation
struggle of the Mozambicans, the majority of white Mozambicans came to
South Africa, and the majority of them were given citizenship? Will you
agree with me, again, that during the liberation struggle of the
Zimbabweans, white Zimbabweans did not go back to England but came to South
Africa and were given citizenship by the then regime?
The issue of a refugee camp only arises because it is Africans that must be
put in the camp. Will you agree with me, Minister, that this government has
monitored the situation and we know very well that integration is taking
place. If you go to Soweto, Khayelitsha, Gugulethu, you will see a number
of refugees who have been integrated into the communities. Some of them are
doing panel beating, some are doing building.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): You are running out of time, hon
Chauke.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Therefore, Minister, will you agree with me on the points
that I have raised? Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs. I will not make reference to the issue
of white Mozambicans and citizenship, but I do want to say that one of the
areas I visited yesterday, Bushbuckridge, is a close border area. It
borders with Mozambique where you have a number of undocumented migrants.
This is not the only area, only province or only village that is affected
by this. We have the same in other areas where we border with other
countries.

Of course these people are undocumented. We declared an amnesty in 1996-
1997, when people were allowed to apply for permanent residence. We have
now noted that a number of those undocumented migrants were reluctant to
come forward and apply for permanent residence, and as a result we have a
number of people who arrived here prior to the declaration of that amnesty
who still do not have documents.

Secondly, on the issue of integration with citizens, I still believe that
the policy option which we as government have taken, of integrating asylum
seekers and refugees into our communities, remains the best and most
workable option. Anyone who has never lived in a camp as a refugee or an
asylum seeker will stand and advocate for this because you have not had the
experience.

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you, Chair. Hon Minister, I thank you for your response.
Arising from your answer, if one visits Marabastad, if one visits the
Foreshore - and I am assuming, hon Minister, that you have actually been
there - surely anything is better than the conditions that those people are
forced to live under. Because that is where they live. You can call it a
camp, you can call it a transit facility; it does not matter. There
certainly has to be somewhere where people can at least be sheltered, their
children can be fed, they can even be educated. Perhaps “camp” is the wrong
word, but the current situation is simply unacceptable. It is a national
disgrace; it really is. To just sit here and to throw it back at us is not
the answer.

What would you say is the answer, then, over a short period of time? With
the situation going on in Zimbabwe, you know as well as I do, more and more
people will come across the border looking desperately for any form of
survival. That is all we can offer them, survival that they cannot have
there. Anything has to be better than what they currently put up with. It
is all very well saying that camps or transit facilities are no good. What
is the response? Thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Mr Lowe. Chairperson,
fortunately, Mr Lowe is a member of the portfolio committee. I am sure you
are very familiar not only with the turnaround process, but with a
particular work stream which deals with issues of permitting and refugee
affairs. I am sure, as a member of that portfolio committee, you are aware
as well … [Interjections.] Please, just allow me to speak. You are not Mr
Lowe. Mr Lowe, I am sure you are also aware of the fact that beyond Customs
House, which was visited by the portfolio committee, beyond Marabastad,
beyond Rosettenville, there are other centres which we have opened, sites
that are eradicating the backlog. This is one way of trying to manage this
problem of long queues.

I am also sure that you are aware of the fact that there is an intention to
integrate the backlog sites with the current refugee offices. I am sure as
a member of the portfolio committee you do have that information. I am not
sure if we should continue to look at that situation and actually improve
it beyond what we are trying to do, which is moving people from Customs
House and integrating them in the current offices, the ones we have
established, not the ones we inherited.

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you, Chair. Hon Minister, thank you for that response.
Just on the question of what you inherited, Madam. The situation in
Zimbabwe, to the best of my knowledge, really started to flare up in 2000
and 2001. If one visits these refugee centres, you will find that 80% to
85% of the people there are from Zimbabwe. They are from all over Africa
but the bulk, the large majority of them, is from Zimbabwe. That is one of
the major reasons for the current crisis with the refugee situation.

My question is: How on earth has that got anything to do with what you have
inherited from any previous regime in this country? Your tenure, as I
understand, Minister, has been since 2004. This has happened under your
watch. This has happened under your call. It has become a national disaster
and a national disgrace. Why are you now turning and blaming the previous
regime, which had nothing to do with it? How are we going to address it
now? That is my question. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Minister, just give me a
second. Hon members, I don’t want us to smuggle new questions in as
supplementaries. [Interjections.] Order! I am chairing. I am going to leave
it to the discretion of the Minister, but I am uncomfortable about us
smuggling new questions in. The system is there; and the Rules are there.
You want to ask a question that is different from the one you tabled.
Order! This is question time. I am making an appeal, hon Davidson. I am
leaving it to the discretion of the Minister to respond.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I am going to allow the Minister
to respond first, Mr Ellis.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, maybe I can respond just to say,
yes, national disgrace; yes to all the things that you are saying. I agree
about the national embarrassment. However, we are not sitting around and
doing nothing about the embarrassment and the disgrace.

Secondly, I am not responsible for the movement of people from Zimbabwe
into South Africa. Therefore, it cannot be that, that all the ills that we
have in refugee affairs or with undocumented illegal migrants, we should be
talking about Zimbabwe. You are saying that the majority of people who are
at Customs House are Zimbabweans. In fact, they are not. If you want a
breakdown of refugees - I am not talking about asylum seekers - we can
provide those figures to you. You will see, Mr Lowe, that they are not
necessarily all Zimbabweans. The majority, in fact, are not Zimbabweans.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The House adjourned at 17:04.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bill passed by Houses– to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 23 October
         2007:


         (a)     Co-operative Banks Bill [B 13B – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).


National Assembly

The Speaker

 1.   Membership of Committees


    1.      Mr R Sonto has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Matters Relating to the Ex-Mineworkers Union with
         effect from 23 October 2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
 1. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Support Program for
         Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.



COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

Portfolio Committee on Social Development Children’s Amendment Bill [B19B-
2006]

The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Social  Development,  having  considered  and
examined the Children’s Amendment  Bill  [B19B-2006]  (National  Council  of
Provinces – sec 76(2)), referred to it, and classified by the Joint  Tagging
Mechanism as a section 76(2) Bill, reports the Bill with amendments.

The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:

History and background of the Bill

This Bill will complete the Children’s Act, Act No 38 of 2005, by  inserting
provisions relating to essential social welfare services for children.

This new law is the first comprehensive national response to the  protection
and welfare of children. It is aimed at honouring  our  obligations  towards
children under the Constitution and  various  international  instruments  on
the protection of children.

In 1997, the then  Minister  for  Welfare  and  Population  Development  and
Minister of Justice mandated the South  African  Law  Review  Commission  to
investigate and recommend a  new  comprehensive  legislative  framework  for
children, which has culminated in the development of this legislation.

The composite Bill was introduced in  2003  and  split  into  two  parts  as
required in terms of the Constitution. The first part,  with  its  focus  on
children’s rights and the relations between parents and children,  and  with
other care givers, was passed as the current Children’s Act, parts of  which
came into operation on 1 July 2007.

Public consultation

Given the constitutional issues  involved,  the  Committee  embarked  on  an
extensive public participation process, involving several  public  hearings,
that included ordinary citizens from remote areas of the country  who  would
not normally have had access to, or an opportunity to participate  in,  such
hearings.  Further hearings were also conducted at  Parliament  in  response
to a request by civil society to that effect.

Policy issues requiring further attention:

It is recommended that the following policy issues be  further  investigated
and addressed by the Department of Social Development through  intersectoral
collaboration with other government departments:

1.    Foster care in relation to social security

The Committee notes the phenomenal growth in the uptake of  the  foster-care
grant which could affect the long-term  sustainability  of  this  grant  and
therefore requests the  Department  of  Social  Development  to  conduct  an
urgent comprehensive review of the social security policy for  children  and
the foster-care system.

It commends the department,  however,  for  the  efforts  made  to  maximize
access by vulnerable children to this form of support. The  cluster  foster-
care system being introduced in  this  Bill  will  go  a  long  way  towards
improving placement and will be a vital form of support to children.


2.    Guardianship

The Committee noted during the  consideration  of  the  Children’s  Act  the
motivation put forward by  the  Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development  for  retaining  the  jurisdiction  of  the  High   Court   over
guardianship matters, pending the phasing in of the family courts where  the
matter will ultimately reside. Noting with concern the hardship  experienced
by poor people  in  accessing  the  High  Court,  the  Committee  urges  the
Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  to  review   this
decision with a view to bringing the matter to the lower courts.

3.    Refugee children and unaccompanied, undocumented foreign children
While the Committee recognises that the  Children’s  Act  provides  for  all
vulnerable  children,  including   refugee   children   and   unaccompanied,
undocumented foreign children, it urges that more work be  conducted  at  an
intersectoral level to remove any policy gaps.

4.    Child-headed households

The Committee observes the escalating  problem  of  child-headed  households
resulting from social challenges which  has  necessitated  the  granting  of
legal recognition in this Bill.

The Committee recommends that the practical  management  and  monitoring  of
child-headed households be further investigated, particularly  their  access
to social protection and adult supervision.

5.    Corporal punishment

The Committee excised clause 139, dealing with the discipline  of  children,
from the Bill in recognition of the need for further  investigation  of  the
matter and anticipates this matter being finalised in a  proposed  amendment
bill to be introduced in 2008.

The Committee however, wishes to emphasise that the existing law  regulating
inappropriate forms of discipline of children remains  in  place  and  urges
that the programmes envisaged in  this  Bill  aimed  at  promoting  positive
parenting skills be implemented by the Department of Social Development.

The Committee is of the view that this matter should have been tagged  as  a
section 75 matter by the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  when  the  comprehensive
Children’s Bill was introduced in 2003.

6.    Street children

The Committee has endorsed in  this  Bill  a  policy  shift  from  providing
shelters  for  street  children  to  providing  them  with  a  comprehensive
response while recognising that they  are  children  in  need  of  care  and
protection in child-care and youth-care centres.

The Committee calls on the Department of Social Development to  ensure  that
a comprehensive intersectoral response to the needs  of  these  children  is
developed.

Intersectoral collaboration

The Committee recommends that the Interdepartmental  Steering  Committee  on
the  Children’s  Act,  in  consultation  with  the  Department   of   Social
Development, provinces  and  other  government  departments,  should  report
regularly to a higher level of governance,  for  example  to  the  Forum  of
South African Directors-General (Fosad), with regard to the  development  of
tools such as  implementation  plans,  profiles  of  services  to  children,
regulations, norms and standards,  practice  guidelines  and  implementation
strategies, as required by the Bill.

Communication strategy

The Committee strongly recommends that the Department of Social  Development
should embark on an integrated and comprehensive communication  strategy  to
communicate the intentions of this legislation and to educate the public  in
order to instil in society the ethos and values promoted by  the  Children’s
Act.

Children are  a  collective  responsibility  within  government  and  it  is
important that this strategy be implemented on  a  continuous  basis  in  an
intersectoral manner.

____________________
Adv. T M Masutha, MP

Chairperson: Portfolio Committee on Social Development
24 October 2007

Report to be considered.


