---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-09-06
---

THURSDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:07.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                         CHANGE IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that Mr M T Likotsi has today
left the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania and joined the African People’s
Convention. [Interjections.]

MEMBER’S CONDUCT REGARDING QUESTION ADDRESSED TO MINISTER OF HEALTH

                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with the business of the House
this afternoon, I wish to reflect on the disturbing events that occurred in
the Chamber yesterday afternoon and the way in which they have cast a
reflection on the NA.

The Constitution determines that members have freedom of speech in the
Assembly and its committees. This is an unfettered right, a jealously
guarded one at that, subject only to the Constitution and the rules and
orders that the House imposes on itself. This it does solely for the
purpose of the orderly conduct of proceedings and to prevent it from being
impeded in continuing with the important business it has in the interest of
the people of this country.

One such rule is Rule 63, which deals with offensive language or, as it is
otherwise known, unparliamentary language. This is a broadly framed rule
that allows a presiding officer to take into consideration, inter alia, the
context and tone of a particular remark or inference. In its interpretation
this rule is further elucidated by years of established practice and
convention.

In this House, since 1994, there have already been a number of rulings from
the Chair that members may not impute improper motives to other members or
cast personal reflections on their integrity as members or verbally abuse
them in any other way. This approach is also in keeping with the practice
in many other parliaments. If such accusations, whether made directly or by
inference, were to be generally allowed in debate in this House they would
not only seriously undermine members in the performance of their duties,
but they would also undermine the image and effectiveness of Parliament
itself to function as the Constitution intends.

Accusations are equally offensive and damaging if they are made indirectly
by reference to views held by others or even if they are put forward by way
of a question because then clearly no substantiation is being offered which
could give credence to the allegation. This is not to say that if a member
has good reason to believe that another member may have acted improperly
such matters should not be brought to the attention of the House. Action
should, however, be taken in the proper manner. In such circumstances it is
sound practice to require that a member institutes a charge against the
member concerned by way of a separate substantive motion which requires a
distinct vote of the House. For such a charge to be brought before the
House by way of a substantive motion, the charge would incidentally have to
be clearly formulated and properly substantiated.

In view of what I have just explained, members will agree that Question 254
to the hon Minister of Health by the Hon Mr Mike Waters on yesterday’s
question paper was in clear violation of Rule 63. Regretfully, owing to an
administrative oversight, the question was not ruled out of order earlier.
However, this does not detract from the fact that the question was indeed
improper and that the matter should have been brought to the House by means
of the mechanisms the House has created for itself to enable it to deal
with such issues in the appropriate manner.

This brings me to a matter which requires some reflection on the part of
all members, namely the object or purpose of questions. Questions are a
mechanism created to hold the executive to account. However, in order to
ensure that they remain an effective mechanism for obtaining information
from the executive and pressing for action, they are required to conform to
a series of rules and conventions. As such, the rules of debate and
maintenance of order apply also to questions. Members would do well to
familiarise themselves once again with the contents of Chapter 13 of the
National Assembly Guide to Procedure, of which they ought to have copies,
before they submit questions. The guide contains a comprehensive
explanation of the scope and nature of the questions to Ministers, of what
is allowed and what is not. I do not need to repeat it here.

Having now had an opportunity to reflect on the conduct of the hon Waters
yesterday and having studied the Hansard pertaining to the incident, I wish
to make the following ruling. Yesterday during question time I instructed
the hon Waters to withdraw from the Chamber after he had pointedly refused
to abide by my ruling that the matter at hand was not open for debate. He
even attempted further to cross-examine the Chair.
Mr Waters initially refused to obey my instruction to leave the House; in
fact, he repeatedly stated that he would not do so, thereby posing a direct
challenge to the authority of the Chair. He furthermore engaged in conduct
which cannot be described other than as outrageous, disrespectful and
grossly disorderly.

In the remarks he directed at the Chair, subsequent to being instructed to
leave the House, he cast serious aspersions on the competence and integrity
of the Speaker and on the proceedings of this House. He also repeated
several times, deliberately and brazenly, the allegation contained in the
question which had already been ruled unparliamentary.

I want to remind hon members that according to parliamentary practice, the
application of the Rules is entirely in the discretion of the Presiding
Officer. A member may disagree with a ruling in a civilised manner, but
must accept the word of the Presiding Officer. We need to ensure that our
conduct in this House at all times reflects an awareness of the grave
responsibility we have of representing the people out there to the best of
our ability. Yesterday this certainly was not the case.

Though I have the power in terms of Rule 52(a) to immediately suspend a
member, I thought it prudent at the time rather to restore order to the
proceedings and to continue with the business at hand. However, I was then
and I still am now of the opinion that instructing the member to withdraw
from the Chamber is not sufficient vindication of his conduct following my
instruction to leave. Hon Waters is, of course, here and I now wish to
address myself to the hon member. [Interjections.]

Hon Waters, I wish to address you and I would like you to stand. Your
conduct yesterday was of so serious a nature that I am left with no choice
but to suspend you for a period of five parliamentary working days, as
provided for in Rule 54. I would like you now to please withdraw from the
Chamber and the precincts of Parliament immediately. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Might I address you on that, Madam
Speaker?

The SPEAKER: Hon Davidson, I would not like to be addressed on the ruling.
The ruling is final and that is the end of this particular matter.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker ...

The SPEAKER: You can approach me in my chambers if you wish to do so, but
presently I am proceeding with the business of the House. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I don’t wish to address
you on your ruling itself ...

The SPEAKER: I am saying I do not want to be addressed on the ruling. I do
not want to be address on this ruling. I have ruled. If you want to discuss
the matter, you are free to approach me in my chambers. This is the end of
this matter, Mr Davidson, I would like you to take your seat so we can
proceed with the business of the House.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker ...

The SPEAKER: Hon Davidson, please, I wouldn’t like us to now get into
another wrangling match on this matter.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I don’t want to, Madam Speaker, and that
is precisely the reason why I am rising to address you. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: I do not want you to address me, that is what I’m explaining
to you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, it makes it very difficult
for ...

The SPEAKER: Hon Davidson, I am not allowing you to address me on this
matter on which I have again made a ruling. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Speaker, graag gee ek hiermee kennis dat ek sal
voorstel:

   Dat hierdie Huis ’n debat voer oor die prosedures wat gevolg word ten
   opsigte van die oorweging asook die huidige beleid wat van toepassing is
   ten opsigte van die aanstelling van direkteure van openbare korporasies.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Speaker, I hereby take in  pleasure  in  giving  notice
 that I shall move:

   That this House debates  the  procedures  followed  with  regard  to  the
   consideration of directors of public corporations, as well as the current
   policy applied in respect of their appointment.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the DA:

   That this House debates the government’s planned nuclear expansion,
   including issues relating to nuclear governance and the implications of
   advancing nuclear energy for both the current and future generations.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I would like to move the
following substantive motion:

   That this House –


     1) notes that the Minister of Health was convicted of theft in 1976 or
        thereabouts while employed at the Athlone Hospital in Botswana; and


     2) resolves that an ad hoc committee be appointed to investigate
        whether she is fit to hold public office.

          BLACK CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK TO MARK STEVE BANTU BIKO’S DEATH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That this House –


     1) notes that on 12 September 2007 it will be 30 years since the
        brutal murder in detention of Steven Bantu Biko;


     2) further notes that 6 September is the official start of the Black
        Consciousness Week to mark, acknowledge and remember the profound
        contributions that Biko made to the development of Black
        Consciousness;


     3) recognises that Biko was an organiser, an unwavering visionary, a
        selfless patriot and a theoretician, who made a significant
        contribution to the development of black political thought;


     4) acknowledges that Black Consciousness has at least two profound
        implications for the liberation struggle:


           a) All forms of liberation are meaningless if they are not
              preceded by the liberation of the mind.


           b) Unless the oppressed realised the importance of unity their
              efforts will be meaningless.


     5) believes that Biko’s vision of bestowing upon our country a more
        humane face is more relevant today than it ever was before; and


     6) calls on all our people to join in the celebrations that are meant
        to mark the 30th anniversary of the death of this noble son of the
        soil.

Agreed to.

                DEATH OF FORMER AUDITOR-GENERAL HENRI KLUEVER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes with profound sadness the death of former Auditor-General
        Henri Kluever on 28 August 2007;


   (2)      notes that he served in this post from 1993 to 1999, as well as
        in the post of deputy auditor-general since 1986;


   (3)      recognises the fundamental role he played as the first auditor-
        general in our new democracy by establishing this office as a
        leader in promoting effective accountability at all times;


   (4)      further recognises the instrumental role he played in ensuring
        that this office has become a world-class national audit office
        leading to the World Bank recognising it as a leading organisation
        regarding best government auditing practices in 1996;


   (5)      acknowledges current Auditor-General Terence Nombembe’s
        statement that: “To honour his courage and sterling work, we need
        to work even harder to take this office to even greater heights”;
        and


   (6)      conveys its condolences to his wife, Marinda, and their three
        children.


Agreed to.

              DEFECTION OF Kent Morkel and Kobus Brynard to ANC

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M R SONTO (ANC): Madam Speaker, two leading members of the DA in the
Western Cape Legislature Kent Morkel and Kobus Brynard joined the ANC
yesterday. [Applause.] This constitutes a major setback for the DA and a
valuable acquisition for the ANC.

Both Morkel and Brynard declared themselves being persuaded by the
conviction that the ANC is the major vehicle to nation-building in the
country and the party best placed to address poverty, and that the divisive
policies of the DA have made it untenable for them to remain in such a
destructive party.

This latest acquisition by the ANC in the Western Cape strengthens the
ANC’s majority in the provincial legislature even more. It also places the
ANC in a favourable position for a decisive victory in the 2009 general
elections in the province.

The ANC will continue to welcome public representatives from other parties
who wish to adopt the objectives of transformation, poverty alleviation and
nation-building. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I see that the DA is missing and so their opportunity will go
by unutilised.

                    SITUATION OF RURAL women and children

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Speaker, for many years the rights of women
as well as women’s issues were not afforded the attention that they
deserved. Women were treated like second-class citizens who were regularly
subjected to abuse, degradation and denied access to the opportunities that
their male counterparts had.

However, government has greatly increased efforts to remedy the situation
and tried to protect and advance the rights of women and children. These
efforts have been largely successful, but more needs to be done as many
women and children, especially in rural areas, are still subjected to the
injustices that we are working so hard to stamp out.

In uMsinga in Northern KwaZulu-Natal, a man was arrested recently for
allegedly killing three of his children by butchering them with an axe.
This gruesome slaughtering of the innocent highlights the extreme nature of
domestic violence that some women and children still endure. The
emancipation of many urban women and children is in stark contrast to their
rural counterparts.

We therefore urge government and the relevant authorities to focus and
develop specific programmes to advance the rights to opportunities of women
and children in rural areas and to attempt to change the mind-set of the
many men who still treat women like their possessions. We must keep the
spotlight focused on the plight of women all year round, and not just
designate certain dates. I thank you.

                         THE DEVELOPMENT AT UMSINGA
                            (Member’s Statement)

Nk P BHENGU (ANC): Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. Intuthuko eMsinga iyaqhubeka.
Umphakathi womkhandlu ongunombolo 7 eMsinga endaweni yasehlanzeni kwaDolo
naseNadi ube nenkulu inhlanhla lapho iKhansela lomkhandlu ongunombolo 7
owengamelwe uKhongolose, uKhansela uKhetheyakhe Ngubane ewulethele
intuthuko ngokuthi wakhelwe izindlu zangasese. UKhansela Ngubane wafaka
isicelo wasithumela eNdiya enhlanganweni okuthiwa iSulap Interantional
eyinhlangano engekho ngaphansi kukahulumeni ngonyaka ophelile.

Kuthe ngo Agasti lafika ithimba lase Ndiya selilethe impendulo yokuthi
UKhansela Ngubane isecelo sakhe samukelwe, ngakho bazothatha ithimba
labantu kulo mphakathi liyoqeqeshelwa lolu hlobo olukhethekile lwezindlu
zangasese ukuze babuye bathole namathuba emisebenzi.

Sithi sowuKhongolose siyawancoma amaKhansela angabheki nje izimali
ngaphakathi eNingizimu Afrika kuphela kodwa afune nasemazweni angaphandle
ukuze kusizakale imiphakathi yawo, ukuze iphile impilo engcono
nenesithunzi. Sithi phambili nentuthuko eMsinga phambili. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Ms P BHENGU (ANC): Thank you Chairperson. Development is going on in
uMsinga. The communities of Ward 7 in uMsinga, at Dolo and at Nadi, were
very fortunate because Councillor Khetheyakhe Ngubane, from that area,
which is under the control of the ANC, brought development by building
toilets for them. Councillor Ngubane made an application last year to an
NGO in India, known as Sulap International.

The said NGO sent a delegation to uMsinga in August with a positive
response to Councillor Ngubane`s application. The delegation was going to
take a group of people from the community to be trained in the building of
this special kind of toilet so that they can create job opportunities.

As the ANC, we commend councillors who do not look for money only from
within South Africa but also raise funds from abroad, so as to ensure that
their communities live a better and a dignified life. Forward with
development at uMsinga, forward! [Applause.]]

              Withdrawal of question 254 TO MINISTER OF HEALTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J BICI (UDM): Madam Speaker, the UDM believes that a member of the
opposition was unjustly deprived of the opportunity to exercise his right
to ask a question. The belated decision to have the particular question
withdrawn is especially odd, since it seemed that the hon Minister of
Health was ready to respond to the hon Mike Waters. [Interjections.] What
happened yesterday in this House was disgraceful and goes against the grain
of true multiparty democracy.

The institution of parliamentary accountability and the asking of questions
are designed exactly to deal with those issues that the ruling party might
find uncomfortable to address. If this institution is upheld when
sweetheart questions are asked but resisted when the real issues arise,
then it becomes an extravagant charity. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I allowed you to finish, but you should know deep
down that you are out of order. [Interjections.]

              FF PLUS’ OPPOSITION TO FLOOR-CROSSING LEGISLATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Agb Speaker, die VF Plus was een van die min
politieke partye in hierdie Raad wat van die begin af teen oorloopwetgewing
gekant was. Ons het voorspel dat dit op die langtermyn allerlei negatiewe
gevolge en onbedoelde gevolge gaan hê. Die huidige berigte oor omkopery en
tjekboek-politiek bevestig watter gemors oorloop geword het.

Verlede jaar het die VF Plus ‘n spesiale debat oor die saak aangevra, omdat
ons ernstig glo dat oorloop tot nadeel van die demokrasie is en dat oorloop
alle politici se beeld benadeel. Die oorloop van politici word deur die
kiesers met reg gesien as die steel van hul stemme en laat ons almal in die
Raad na politieke opportuniste lyk. Die VF Plus het in die debat oor
oorloop aangetoon hoe oorloop in ’n land soos Indië slegs die regerende
party bevoordeel het en na 14 jaar afgeskaf is vanweë allerlei korrupte en
onaanvaarbare praktyke waartoe dit gelei het.

In die lig hiervan verwelkom die VF Plus die feit dat die ANC by sy
onlangse beleidskonferensie die hele kwessie van oorloop bespreek het. Die
VF Plus wil die hoop uitspreek dat die saak spoedig na die huidige
oorlooptydperk verby is, aandag sal kry en finaal afgeskaf sal word. Die VF
Plus sal alle voorstelle wat tot die afskaf van oorloop sal lei,
ondersteun. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Hon Speaker, the FF Plus was one of the few
political parties in this Assembly that was against the floor-crossing
legislation from the beginning. We predicted that it would have various
negative and unintended consequences in the long term. The current reports
of bribery and chequebook politics confirm the mess that floor-crossing has
become.

Last year, the FF Plus requested a special debate on this matter because we
firmly believed that floor-crossing was detrimental to democracy and did an
injustice to the image of all politicians. The floor-crossing of
politicians is correctly seen by voters as the stealing of their votes and
causes all of us in this Assembly to look like opportunists. The FF Plus
indicated in the debate how floor-crossing in a country such as India only
benefited governing parties and that it was abolished after 14 years
because it had led to various corruptive and unacceptable practices.

In the light of this, the FF Plus welcomes the fact that the ANC, at its
recent policy conference, discussed the whole issue of floor-crossing. The
FF Plus hopes that the issue of floor-crossing will be considered and
abolished soon after the current crossing period has passed. The FF Plus
will support any proposals that lead to the abolition of floor-crossing. I
thank you.]

      WELCOMING THE POSSIBLE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NEW CARBON STEEL PLANT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L ZITA (ANC): The ANC welcomes the announcement in the National
Industrial Policy Framework that the Department of Trade and Industry has
embarked on a feasibility study into the viability of establishing a new
carbon steel plant.

The ANC further welcomes the involvement of other government departments
and public entities, such as the Departments of Public Enterprises, and of
Minerals and Energy, as well as the Industrial Development Corporation and
the national minerals research organisation, Mintek, in this important
project. The successful co-operation of all these entities and the eventual
establishment of a state-owned carbon steel plant have the potential to
make a substantial difference to the lives of our people.

The Freedom Charter states clearly and unambiguously that all the people
will share in the country’s wealth, which is the inheritance and the
patrimony of all people of South Africa. The ANC believes that it is not
only economically beneficial, but also just that the state takes an active
hand in ensuring that the people of South Africa benefit fully from the
state-ownership and control of national resources such as steel. Thank you.

                          POOR SERVICE AT HOSPITALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mong S L DITHEBE (ANC): Sepikara se kgabane, ka 17 August 2007, mme e mong
mane tleliniking ya Bophelong Ward 21 Matjhabeng Municipality - Freistata,
o ile a tjamelwa ke bothata ba hore ngwana wa hae a hanelwe ho thuswa ke e
mong wa baoki hobane mooki eo a ne a na le qabang le mma ngwana eo. Hona ho
ile ha baka hore mola oo bakudi ba bang ba neng ba eme ho ona, o eme tsi,
hobane mooki eo, o ne a ikana ka hore a keke a thusa mme eo ha feela a ntse
a le moleng. Ha ntle-ntle ngwana eo, ke yena motho eo ditokelo tsa hae tsa
bophelo bo botle le botho ka kakaretso di ileng tsa thunthetswa.

Serapana sa 28 sa Molaotheo se supa hore maemong ohle moo ngwana a amehang
teng, ditokelo tsa hae di tla pele ho tsohle, ebile o lokelwa ke tlhokomelo
e ntle ka nako tsohle; le hore ha a lokela ho sotlwa ka tsela efe kapa efe.


Ka yona nako eo ho ile ha ba le mokudi e mong ya akgehang yaba e mong wa
baoki o mo sheba feela are: “Ha se letsatsi la phano ya meriana ya batho ba
nang le lefu la ho wa”. Mokudi eo o ile a ba a hlaphohelwa ka boyena a sa
ka a fumantswa thuso. Ruri, bona ke boitshwaro bo sa amoheleheng bathong ba
borona. Serapana sa 185 sa Molaotheo se tlama basebeletsi bohle
mekgahlelong yohle ya mmuso hore boitshwaro ba bona ba phano ya
ditshebeletso e be bao maemo a hodimo, ebile e be bo kgahlisang.

Leano la Batho Pele ke katoloso ya molao oo o kgabane. Re le ANC, re a
tseba hore boitshwaro ba baoki bana, ke mohlala wa ditholwana tse mmalwa
tse bodileng, empa boholo ba baoki le basebeletsi ba bang ba mmuso ba ikana
ka leano la Batho Pele, ebile ba phethisa dikateng tsa lona ka matsatsi
ohle.

Re ipiletsa ho baoki bohle ba sa natseng ditokelo tsa bakudi ho fetola
mekgwa ya bona le ho hlompha ditokelo tsa bafumani ba ditshebeletso tsa
bophelo bo botle ka nako tsohle. ANC e tla dula e sebeletsa bophelo bo
botle bakeng sa bohle le tlhompho ya ditokelo tsa moahi e mong le e mong.
Ke a leboha. (Translation of Sesotho member’s statement follows.)

[Mr S L DITHEBE (ANC): Hon Speaker, on 17 August 2007, a certain lady at
the Bophelong Clinic in the Free State found herself faced with the problem
of her child being denied treatment by one of the nurses because the nurse
had a grudge against the child’s mother. This resulted in a situation
whereby the queue in which the child was standing came to a halt because
the nurse had sworn that she was not going to help the child as long as her
mother was in the queue. In fact, the child is the one whose right to
health care and whose basic human rights were trampled on.

Section 28 of the Constitution shows that a child’s best interests are of
paramount importance in every manner concerning the child, and he or she is
entitled to good treatment at all times; and that he or she is not supposed
to be ill-treated in any manner whatsoever.

At that very moment one of the patients collapsed and yet one of the nurses
just looked and said: “Today is not the day for dispensing medication to
people with epileptic fits.” That patient eventually regained consciousness
on his own without receiving any kind of assistance. This is really
unacceptable behaviour on the part of our people.
Section 195 of the Constitution commits all employees at all levels of
government to promote and maintain a high standard of professional ethics,
and to also ensure that their conduct in the delivery of services is
provided impartially. The policy of Batho Pele is an extension of that
impeccable law. As the ANC, we are aware that this type of behaviour from
these nurses is just a part of a few rotten apples. However, the majority
of nurses and other government employees swear by the policy of Batho Pele,
and are committed to its provisions at all times.

We appeal to all the nurses who violate patients’ rights to change their
ways and respect the rights of the recipients of health care services at
all times. The ANC will always strive for better health care for everyone
and the respect of the rights of every citizen. Thank you.]

              PROPOSAL OF HEALTH LAWS TO IMPROVE PUBLIC HEALTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Madam Speaker, in an attempt to refocus the
attention of the nation on the health of the public, rather than on the
health of the hon Minister of Health, the IFP proposes the introduction of
certain laws that will support the people our Ministers are supposed to
represent.

The first concerns general health. It is that no product containing trans
fats should be sold in the Republic of South Africa, since trans fats
aggravate diabetes, obesity, inflammation and heart disease.

The second concerns HIV, and is that all persons who seek marriage
contracts or civil unions shall be required to sign a document stating that
they have been tested for HIV and know their status and that of their
partner.

The third concerns alcoholic beverages. It is that all beverages containing
any form of alcohol shall be labelled. The label will state the percentage
of alcohol in the bottle, the amount that would cause blood levels above
the legal amount and the suggested limit to consumption at any one time.
Labels will also enumerate the harmful health effects of excessive alcohol
consumption.

We also propose that the effect of committing a crime under the influence
of alcohol should be a subject for widespread public debate and
information. Thank you.

       RESEARCH FINDINGS INTO CROSS-BORDER MIGRATION INTO SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MAUNYE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC takes note of the research
findings into cross-border migration into South Africa that were released
on Monday, 3 September this year, by the Witwatersrand University.

The survey on Zimbabweans crossing into South Africa shows little evidence
of increased patterns of crime in the border areas. The research dispels a
number of widely-held beliefs on cross-border migration from Zimbabwe into
South Africa. The findings of the Forced Migration Studies Programme at the
university further show that while the number of Zimbabweans crossing the
border into South Africa has increased, the media and opposition parties
have exaggerated the numbers.

The research findings, amongst others, acknowledge the efforts of
government to respond to the situation by increasing the operational
capacity of the detention centre that is located in Messina where
undocumented migrants are housed before being deported across the border.
It further mentions reports from the SA National Defence Force, in
particular, that they have substantially increased their number of patrols
over recent months.

The media and the opposition should take note of the findings of this
independent study, instead of making irresponsible statements which create
a hype about general lawlessness at our borders. We further commend the
government for the efforts made in dealing with this challenge. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                   NEW ORPHANAGE TO BE BUILT AT KWANONGOMA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu B Z ZULU (ANC): Somlomo, laphaya KwaNongoma, uNkk Fikile Magwaza
ungumuntu ozikhathazayo ngempilo yezingane ezingenabo abazali. Kwathi
ngonyaka we-1998 wanquma ukuthatha izingane ezine ezazingenabo abazali waya
kohlala nazo ekhaya lakhe. Kwathi ngokwanda kwezingane ezazidinga usizo
lwakhe, uhulumeni wabe esezakhela izindlu ezingorondaveli abayisithupha
ukuba zihlale kubo. Isibalo sezingane asehlala nazo sesikhulile saze safika
kwezinga-21. Lona ngumsebenzi omkhulu noncomekayo awenzela isizwe.

UNgqongqoshe Wezenhlalakahle wasesifundazweni kuthe uma ezwa ngosizi
lokuphila kwalezi zingane wasukumela phezulu, ukuze zisizakale. Ngomhla
zingama-31 Agasti, kuwona lo nyaka, uNgqonggqoshe wasesifundazweni ubehlaba
isoyi lapho kuzokwakhiwa khona isithabathaba somuzi esezezizohlala kuwo
ozobiza igidi ezi-4 zamarandi.

Isinyathelo esithathwe nguhulumeni ka-ANC sivule isahluko esisha kubantu
bale ndawo yaseWela, KwaNongoma, KwaZulu-Natali. Namuhla bakuqonda kahle
ukuthi nguhulumeni oholwa u-ANC ozobalethela izimpilo ezingcono. Phambili
ngentuthuko KwaNongoma, phambili! [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr B Z ZULU (ANC): Madam Speaker, at Nongoma, there is a person by the
name of Mrs Fikile Magwazwa who is concerned about the lives of orphans. In
1998, she decided to take four orphans into her home to stay with her. As
the number of children who needed her help increased, the government built
them six rondavel huts. The number of children staying with her has since
increased to 21. She is doing a great and commendable job for the nation.

When the MEC for Social Welfare heard about the plight of these children,
he acted quickly to help them. On 31 August this year, the provincial
Minister turned the sod on the site on which a mansion is going to be
built, at a cost of R4m, for these children.

The step taken by the ANC government has opened a new chapter for the
people of Wela, at KwaNongoma, in KwaZulu-Natal. They now know very well
that it is the ANC-led government that will bring them better lives.
Forward with development at Nongoma, forward! [Applause.]]

                         DEATH OF LUCIANO PAVAROTTI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP expresses its sadness at the
death of the world’s famous legend, Luciano Pavarotti, who was also known
as the greatest tenor, the voluminous voice.

He died in the early hours of the morning. His work is known throughout the
world. He helped bring opera to the masses. Today South African schools are
having Luciano choral competitions, where learners compete on Pavarotti
works. South Africa enjoys the entertainment of the three tenors from South
Africa, who imitate the three tenors from Italy. Those boys are famous
because of the works of Luciano Pavarotti, Placido Domingo and Jose
Carreras. The Departments of Arts and Culture, and of Education have lost a
legend, because through him, we have learners who have earned scholarships
to go abroad to further their educational music.

We in the IFP send our condolences to the bereaved family and friends. May
his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

                        2007 ANNUAL INDIGENOUS GAMES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M NTULI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Department of Sport and Recreation
hosted the annual indigenous games at Sisa Dukashe Stadium at Mdantsane,
Eastern Cape, during the weekend of 1 September 2007.

This festival forms part of the country-wide heritage month celebrations.
Participation at the festival was in the eight indigenous games such as
ugqaphu, morabaraba, dibeke, jukskei, kho-kho and lintonga. The North West
province emerged as the 2007 indigenous games champion, having survived
stiff challenges from Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and Limpopo, who came
second and joint-third respectively. The North West has won the indigenous
games championship for the fourth time, having previously won in 2003, 2005
and 2006.

A delegation from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, led by the
Minister of Sport, Mr Mun Jae Dok, attended the opening ceremony, and were
entertained with a colourful gymnastrada display by young gymnasts who
recently also attended the World Gymnastrada in Austria.

The ANC congratulates the department and all the participants at the
festival for their contribution in popularising traditional indigenous
games that are part of our diverse heritage. However, the department and
the provinces need to ensure that athletes with disabilities also
participate in the games, and a concerted effort must be made by all
provinces to involve women as provincial co-ordinators for the indigenous
games. Thank you. [Applause.]

                       NO FLOOR-CROSSERS FROM THE UDM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu G T MADIKIZA (UDM): Somlomo, i-UDM eminyakeni bekusithi rhoqo xa kufike
ithuba lokukreqa kwiqela lezopolitiko ubani ebelimele ibe lixhoba
kangangokuba abahlalutyi neentatheli bebesoloko beyithatha njengobethw’
esinqeni. Ndifuna ukwazisa le Ndlu ke ngoku, ukuba kulo nyaka sililitye
lenyengane, akucholwa naphantsi kwi-UDM. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr G T MADIKIZA (UDM): Speaker, over the years during the floor-crossing
period, the UDM has always been the victim. As a result, political analysts
and journalists regard it as a party that is beaten below the belt. I want
to inform this House therefore, that this year we are solid as a rock, and
nothing will be scored from the UDM. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                EFFICACY OF THE LAND BANK IN ITS CURRENT FORM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF PLUS): Mevrou die Speaker, die VF Plus maak beswaar
daarteen dat die Minister van Landbou apartheid en gebeure voor 1994
blameer vir die huidige probleme van die Landbank. Die Landbank het 13 jaar
tyd gehad om `n stelsel te ontwikkel waardeur opkomende boere doeltreffend
gehelp kan word om suksesvol te boer. Tot op datum was daar enkele
suksesse, maar heeltemal te min.

As die Landbank nie gaan slaag om meer opkomende boere te help om suksesvol
te boer nie, sal daar indringend na die Landbank se funksionering en
besluitnemingsprosesse gekyk moet word. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Dr W A MULDER (FF PLUS): Madam Speaker, the FF Plus objects to the fact
that the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs blames apartheid and
events before 1994 for the current problems of the Land Bank. The Land Bank
has had 13 years to develop a system through which emerging farmers could
be effectively assisted to farm successfully. To date, there have been some
successes, but far too few.

If the Land Bank is not going to succeed in helping more emerging farmers
to farm successfully, we will have to look incisively at the functioning
and decision-making processes of the institution.  Thank you.]

    EXPULSION OF HON M WATERS FROM THE HOUSE AND THE DEBATE THAT FOLLOWED

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, perhaps we should say to the hon
member from the UDM that ...

... mhlawumbi abakho abashiya i-UDM ngoba akukho mntu ubafunayo. Nakhona
ixesha alikapheli, asikavali, ngoko kha ume, uza kubona xa sele kuvaliwe.
[Kwahlekwa.] [... maybe there is no one who is leaving the UDM because
nobody wants them. And the period is not yet over, we are not closed yet,
therefore you must hang on. You will see when the period is over.
[Laughter.]

Madam Speaker, I hope you’ll allow me to respond because the hon member
from the UDM chose to address the Speaker via the executive. I believe it
is incumbent upon the executive to react to the hon member’s statement.

The hon member indicated that what happened in the House was disgraceful,
and yet proceeded to then cast aspersions on the Speaker who was presiding.
It is clear that the hon member has very little understanding both of the
Constitution and the Rules of the House.

It is our obligation, in terms of the Rules of the House and the
Constitution, that our conduct reflects both the integrity and dignity of
this institution. The rules are very clearly spelt out in the Rules of the
NA, the Joint Rules of both Houses, as well as the Constitution as to what
form of dignity and integrity we should uphold. I think it is incumbent
upon us to ensure that the dignity of Parliament is upheld by every Member
of Parliament.

The embodiment of that dignity in convention is the Speaker of the House,
and no other individual. The hon Waters does not enjoy a higher status than
the Speaker who is responsible for the conduct of our business and the
observance of our adherence to the spirit and heart of the Constitution.

Because the hon member has never stood up and read any statement that was
as long as the statement he read, I wondered when he crafted it and where
he actually got it from. I would urge the hon member not to be a messenger.


Perhaps, Madam Speaker, it may be necessary to examine whether the member
meant that the hon Mike Waters conducted himself in a proper manner.
Concerning the disgrace he referred to in his statement, if it is directed
at you, Madam Speaker, I would think that you may need to rule again on it
at the next sitting of the House. [Applause.]

                    SITUATION OF RURAL WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: On a number of occasions in the past
in this House, I have referred to a particular issue that I believed was
supported by most of us here. I am standing up to react to a statement that
was made by the hon Zikalala. We regret, and I am sure that this is the
position of every South African of goodwill, the fact that there continues
to be so many deaths that are unnatural in South Africa.

In the financial year that ended on 31 March this year, more than 19 000 of
our people were killed. But the greater number of those deaths were related
to what we have defined as social crimes. These are crimes that happen
mostly between people who know one another in social circumstances where
both the perpetrator and the victim will be found.

The issue of domestic violence is a very big problem for South Africa. The
matter she referred to in uMsinga is indeed part of social violence in
South Africa which happens within the domestic environs of our country. But
she has called upon the government to create conditions so that we can curb
this kind of crime. Yes, government has a responsibility to do that. But
government, including the law-enforcement agencies of this country, cannot
succeed in that task unless we mobilise all our people. This is not the
function of government alone.

I am therefore, on the basis of her statement, making a broader appeal
which I have indicated and have made in the past in this House that we
should all combine against these crimes that continue to happen so that we
can fight them. It will not help for us to deploy police in the various
streets of our country, because no police official will know that the
people who are going past them en route to their own homes intend to get
into their houses, pull out firearms, and kill their wives and children in
those homes before turning the firearms on themselves. No police official
will know that.

No police official will know that the argument which is heated in a
drinking hole which both the perpetrator and the victim patronise is going
to develop into a fight where a life will be lost. No police official will
know that. But if we as the population of this country do not combine our
efforts and raise issues that relate to moral regeneration, raise issues
that relate to the system where our children are growing up and all of
those matters, for so long shall we continue to bury people who have died
from unnatural causes. Thank you.

                          POOR SERVICE AT HOSPITALS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: I would like to respond to
the statement made by the hon Dithebe around Batho Pele. Firstly, I would
like to say that as government, we will never condone any slackness on the
part of our civil servants who don’t deliver a service which they are in
fact being paid for; secondly, as government we will also deal harshly with
those who fall foul of this responsibility; thirdly, we also call on
communities and individuals within communities to identify by name, and I
am stressing this, those who don’t deliver the expected service so that we
can take the necessary action against them. All government officials and
staff members are expected to wear name tags, whether they are on the front
desk or in the back room or wherever they are. This is the only way in
which we can actually take decisive action against those responsible for
these actions. Lastly, I want to also commend and congratulate the millions
of civil servants who abide by the principles of Batho Pele. I say millions
because they are in the majority who many a time also go beyond the call of
duty to deliver the service that they are expected to. Thank you.
[Applause.]

       RESEARCH FINDINGS INTO CROSS-BORDER MIGRATION INTO SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: We wish to support the statement by
hon Maunye on the migration between Zimbabwe and South Africa. We agree
that it dispels the widely held beliefs on cross-border migration from
Zimbabwe into South Africa. But we also believe that it assists to dispel
the negative stereotypes about African immigrants into our country which
continue to inform a lot of discourse about the issue of migration. As a
result, it is easy for many people to immediately and recklessly associate
African immigrants with crime while those from other continents and regions
are taken to be coming into our country and are making a positive
contribution.

We continue to be of the view that immigration contains a lot of positive
benefits for our country, but we also continue to hold the belief that
everything must be done to assist the people of Zimbabwe to resolve the
challenges of their country. South Africa must continue to approach the
Zimbabwean situation informed by the principles of progressive
internationalism, as well as our principles of international and human
solidarity.

The UN High Commissioner for Refugees, His Excellency Mr Guterres, who was
in our country two weeks ago, praised our progressive migration and refugee
policies. We have, as a department, committed ourselves to finding further
ways to assist the people of Zimbabwe, in particular their migrants, during
this difficult period in their country. Thank you. [Applause.]

      WELCOMING THE POSSIBLE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NEW CARBON STEEL PLANT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Madam Speaker, I
would like to respond to the statement made by the hon member Langa Zita on
the task team that has been formed to deal with the setting up of a state
carbon steel plant on the industrial policy.

I think this is one of the milestones of this government’s attempts to deal
with the legacy of the past through economic empowerment. The Industrial
Policy Framework sets the tone through which this economy can be
transformed. This is the first of its kind and, according to the DTI and
the economic cluster of government, this will make sure that we are able to
unearth those issues that are impediments to job creation, unemployment and
underdevelopment. This is one of the measures that will really enable us to
meet the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.

We had hoped that, through working together with communities and the
private sector, we would have been able to meet a lot of those challenges.

It is quite clear that, given the magnitude of the work that was put into
the industrial policy, we are headed in the right direction. The customised
sector programmes as laid out will allow us to deal with a lot of other
departmental co-ordination.

But this is truly stating to us that we are one of the countries that are
respected globally for having the right policies. The economic policies
have never been so good under the ANC leadership government for the past 10
years. Thank you.

               TRANSPORT AGENCIES GENERAL LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Speaker, hon members, let me remind this
House that the existing ex-transport entities have, up to now, been
established in accordance with various principal Acts of Parliament.

As a result, uniformity and standardisation across entities have always
been very elusive, particularly in the appointment of board members and
chief executive officers. Quite frankly, the Transport Agencies General
Laws Amendment Bill will simplify the complexities and delays of appointing
the board members and CEOs of transport entities.

It will also bring the missing link of streamlining, standardisation, as
well as allowing transport entities to sing from the same hymnbook.

This Bill also provides for the necessary measures to regulate the
integration and management of transport entities.

It also seeks to ensure that appointments within entities are a fundamental
component of service delivery.

Specifically, our criteria for the appointment of board members will move
beyond just general skills and experience in the legal- corporate
governance and financial management, to more sector-specific skills and
experience. We believe that this will contribute immensely towards service
delivery. We also believe that the tenure period of board members is
fundamental in realising their full potential and contribution to these
entities. It proposes a standardised appointment period of a three-year
cycle and thereafter a board member will be eligible for reappointment for
a further three years. We also believe that this approach will allow board
members to realise their full potential in contributing towards achieving
the objectives of entities while the department will get value for money.

Hon members, in summary, the Bill seeks to standardise practices within
entities by streamlining the processes of selection and appointments of
board members and CEOs of entities. Particularly, it will ensure uniformity
in the appointment of CEOs with more emphasis on the consultation between
the Minister of Transport and relevant boards, prior to appointment.
Quite noticeably, the Bill also emphasises the need to appoint and deploy
senior departmental officials, as and when required, in order to ensure
harmony between national policy directives and the strategic objectives of
these entities, with a view to strengthening the oversight responsibility
of the Department of Transport. The signing of the performance agreements
with these entities will also be central in the amending Bill, which is in
line with the Public Finance Management Act.

Hon members, let us all remember that the principal objective of this Bill
is to amend the principal Acts that established the following entities: The
Cross-border Road Transport Agency; the South African Maritime Safety
Authority; the South African National Roads Agency Limited; the Transport
Appeals Tribunal; the South African Civil Aviation Authority; the Road
Traffic Management Corporation, and the National Railway Safety Regulator.
Therefore, the amendment before this House included a lengthy process of
consultation with all these entities and our stakeholders. Simply put, it
is through this Bill that we will be able to set the same rules of the game
for all transport entities.

Madam Speaker, I request this august NA to pass this Bill, please. Thank
you.

Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the first democratic
Parliament of 1994 to 1999, all government departments were,
understandably, actively restructuring themselves. Now, this restructuring
sometimes took the form of the creation of dozens of new stand-alone
agencies, often with a corporate or quasi-corporate character, each with
its own board and its own CEO, usually with quite nice plush head offices
somewhere in Sandton or Midrand or Centurion.

In the course of staffing these agencies, many senior personnel were often
lost to departments, and there was a loss of capacity sometimes and of
institutional memory within departments themselves. It would be wrong, I
think, to generalise too easily. Some of these new entities have performed
very well, particularly in the case of entities with good leaderships and
clear mandates. But others, including some in the transport sector, have
often performed in a rather mediocre fashion, if the truth be told.

The creation of relatively independent entities has also often resulted in
a lack of executive coherence, parallelism, uncertainty about who is doing
what, and dangers of fragmentation.

Now, this is not a uniquely South African problem. In fact, in this period
of 1994 to 1999, our country was often awash with consultants coming from
the UK, from Australia and places like that. And, they were often telling
us to corporatise and to fragment government in this way. In those
countries themselves now, they are busy with the painful process of trying
to “reknit government”, as they call it.
Since taking over this portfolio, Minister Radebe has been working hard, I
think, to ensure much more effective departmental oversight, supervision,
strategic guidance and assistance to the dozen or so transport entities
that fall under our budget. As a committee, we have detected a distinct
improvement in the performance of some of these entities.

This amending Bill, as you have said, takes the process a step forward. The
Transport General Laws Amendment Bill in front of us deals with six
transport agencies, and you have listed them. We would particularly like to
welcome the provisions in this amending Bill that provide for the Minister
to conclude performance agreements with the various entities. This should
improve the reknitting that we have referred to and enhance the output of
these agencies, and it will also help us as a committee in our oversight
work. If we have an understanding of what the performance agreements are,
we will be better able to measure what they are doing or not doing, as the
case may be.

We would like to thank the staff of the Department of Transport, who came
and accompanied us through the process of working on this amending Bill,
and also thank the state law advisers. When you are amending six or seven
principal Acts it is quite a complicated effort in terms of cross-
referencing, and they really helped us.

Specifically, when we looked, as a committee, at the amending Bill, we
spent some time carefully scrutinising the spread of competencies that the
principal Acts envisaged in regard to the respective boards. In this
regard, we have introduced, at the committee level, several amendments. In
the case of the board of the SA Maritime Safety Authority, Samsa, we have
added organised labour as a sector that we believe should be represented on
the board. The safety of seafarers and others working in the maritime
environment is a very key central mandate of Samsa, and it surely makes
sense to ensure that an organised labour presence is on the board.

When it came to the Road Traffic Management Corporation, we could not
understand why members of the board required expertise in the field of, to
quote the principal Act, “commercial banking and financing”. We couldn’t
understand that. So we referred back to the objectives in the principal Act
and that helped to explain the mystery. I should say that it was the hon
Patricia de Lille who was chairing the committee at that stage, so we claim
no responsibility for this.

At that stage, it was envisaged that the Road Traffic Management
Corporation would “phase out all public funding and phase in private-sector
investment in road traffic on a competitive basis” - I’m not quite sure
what that means – and “introduce commercial management principles to inform
and guide road traffic governance and decision-making”.
Minister, we resisted the temptation of actually, then and there, amending
this aspect of the principal Act – that is, the objectives of the
corporation. But, in describing the desirable competencies of the board of
the RTMC, we thought that we should rather focus not on commercial banking
– we’re not sure what that’s doing in the RTMC – but on the core functions
of the RTMC. So, corporate governance is an important requirement.
Regarding information technology, the RTMC is the entity now charged with
eNaTIS, and we know that there are quite a lot of challenges on that front
and they relate to IT. And there are, of course, competencies in regard to
road traffic management.

With these friendly amendments - and the colleagues from the department
were in agreement with the amendments we were proposing; these amendments
that we introduced during the committee stage to the amending Bill – the
ANC certainly strongly supports the amending Bill.

I’m also in possession of the speech that the hon Stuart Farrow, on behalf
of the DA, was going to deliver. He kindly provided me with a copy. I
noticed that the DA firmly and also warmly supports this Bill. If I could
be allowed another seven minutes, I could talk on behalf of the DA, but I
will resist that temptation. Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Madam Speaker, I must say upfront that I was not the IFP
representative on this committee. My speech is solely based on reports I’ve
read and discussions I have had with our study group. We do believe that
there was wide consultation on this subject, and many of the inputs were
taken into consideration.

The Bill’s objective is to provide for the appointment of members to
various boards on recommendation by the Minister. It is essential that the
competent members be appointed to the various boards. There is also
provision for the extension of terms of office for board members in order
to process the appointment of new members.

We welcome the performance agreement which will measure financial
achievements of objectives, accountability and business planning
performances. This will assist the Minister to ensure that the objectives
set out are achieved. The IFP supports the amending Bill. Thank you.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Bill before us relates to
the appointment of the board as well as some related matters of the
agencies that report to the Department of Transport. These agencies are the
Cross-Border Roads Transport Agency; the SA Maritime Safety Authority; SA
National Roads Agency Limited; SA Civil Aviation Authority; the Road
Traffic Management Corporation and the Railway Safety Regulator.

As can be seen from the extensive list, these agencies are responsible for
a wide range of very important and indeed complex transport issues. Each of
these agencies is governed by separate Acts, and the Bill before us
consequently amends each of these Acts.

The importance of the work of these agencies cannot be exaggerated, and it
is therefore vital that the functions and the appointment of their boards
and management structures are not unduly interrupted or delayed.

Under the current dispensation there are overly complex and time-consuming
procedures that affect these appointment processes. Therefore, the Bill
seeks to streamline this. The Bill also seeks to establish uniformity
across these agencies as far as these processes are concerned.

The UDM concurs with the objectives of the Bill and therefore supports it.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, as has been pointed out, the
main objective of this amending Bill is to short-circuit and improve the
currently cumbersome process of appointing board members. The amendment
further clarifies the specific skills and expertise required of board
members and the necessity of performance agreements, as well as setting out
the tenure of the chief executive officers and the board members.
In the run-up to the 2010 Soccer World Cup there are clearly huge
challenges regarding transport infrastructure and we undoubtedly need
persons with the necessary qualification, skills, expertise or experience
to sit on the boards of these various entities. Performance agreements will
assist in ensuring that board members are diligent in performing their
duties which, as we understand in certain cases, has lacked in the past.

The ACDP supports these provisions as well as the provision that requires
that Parliament will have oversight and must be informed about board
appointments as it will then be able to exercise its oversight function.

The ACDP supports the provisions of this amending Bill. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, the MF welcomes the amendments and provisions
that appear to bring a number of places of transport legislation under one
roof and clearly streamline the management and the appointment of board
members and the chief executive officers. It is extremely important to
maintain a system of checks and balances throughout our bureaucracy and to
ensure their preservation against the autonomy of power.

In line with the expansions for the 2010 football games to be hosted in
South Africa, the country has been expediting much road work throughout the
provinces. While motorists may be disgruntled by this inconvenience of
traffic throughout the day, the MF feels that an appeal has to be made that
these are in preparation of the upcoming games and in developing South
African road transport.

We use this platform to call on motorists and pedestrians to take heed when
using our roads and to invest in our Arrive Alive campaign. We would also
like to again invite motorists to use their headlights on a 24/7 basis.

The MF will support the Bill. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Speaker, hon members, in view of the
comments we should all remember that this Bill will definitely transform
these entities into robust machines of service delivery. It will also
ensure the streamlining and appointment processes and procedures, and
remove certain limitations to service delivery.

Above all, it will boost performance through strict monitoring of
performance agreements with entities, as well as harmonise national policy
directives with the strategic objectives. Finally, we will also have one
point of reference in the form of this Bill.

In conclusion, I wish to restate that this House will not have erred by
putting its stamp of approval on this Bill. Ngiyabonga. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

     THE NEED OF REALISING SUSTAINABLE HUMAN SETTLEMENTS WITH ACCESS TO
   LIVELIHOODS, PROPER RECREATION, EDUCATION, HEALTH, ARTS AND CULTURE, AS
     WELL AS BASIC SERVICES SUCH AS SANITATION, CLEAN RUNNING WATER AND
          ELECTRICITY SO THAT THE DIGNITY OF OUR PEOPLE IS RESTORED

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Madam Speaker, over the years this concept of sustainable
human settlements has been broadened to become a framework for an overall
national socioeconomic development in the context of formulating global
shelter strategies. It is now contended that sustainable human settlements
are the special dimension as well as the physical expression of economic
and social activity.

No creative act takes place without being influenced by conditions of
settlement. In turn, the creation of workable human settlements inevitably
becomes an objective of and an indicator and pre-requisite for social and
economic development.

Settlements are objectives of the development in that places where people
can live, learn and work in conditions of safety, and comfort and
efficiency are fundamental and elementary needs. Settlements are also an
indicator in that they are the most visible expressions of society’s
ability to satisfy some of the fundamental needs of its members. They can
mark accomplishment, as well as expose destitution, neglect and inequality.


Sustainable human settlements are a prerequisite for social and economic
development. We are reminded that sustainable human settlement means the
totality of the human community, whether in the city, the town or the
village with all social, material, organisational, spiritual and cultural
elements that sustain it. The fabric of human settlements consists of
physical elements and services to which these elements provide the material
support.

Issues surrounding the sustainability of human settlements are a human
rights issue. Reinforcing the right of every woman, man, youth and child to
sustainable human settlements is universal. Human rights standards are
defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, CIDO - the
international governance convention - and the other widely adhered to human
rights treaties and declarations. Powerful tools that must be put to use in
implementing are also the Habitat Agenda and the commitments that all of us
made in Rio, Cairo, Copenhagen and Beijing.

The human rights issues, inter alia, are the human right to adequate
housing, to safe and healthy environments, to development, to an attainable
standard of health, standard of living, including access to adequate food,
water and sanitation, including energy for cooking, eating and lighting,
basic services, school transportation and employment opportunities, as well
as the human right of the child to live in an environment appropriate for
physical and mental development; the human right to work and receive wages
that contribute to an adequate standard of living; the human right to
freedom from discrimination based on race, sex and any other status; the
human right to equal access to education and information.

Conscious attempts to align South African settlements with the precepts for
sustainable human settlements as outlined in Chapter 7 of Agenda 21 of the
UN Conference on Environment and Development, began with the democratic
elections in 1994 and the subsequent drafting of settlement-related
policies and legislation that sought to address the segregated nature of
the country’s economy.
South Africa’s experience in implementing Agenda 21 with regard to
sustainable human settlements has been determined by the provision of
social services and infrastructure to the poor and formerly disadvantaged
communities in the country, and the structure and the nature of government
and nongovernmental organisations responsible for effecting change to South
African settlements. As such, Africa’s response for creating sustainable
settlements has focused on three of the programme areas that are indeed
outlined in Chapter 7 of Agenda 21. They are the provision of adequate
shelter for all; the improvement of human settlement management and the
promotion of sustainable land use management.

The state of human settlements in South Africa as far back as 1992 was such
that colonial and apartheid planning had left an extremely negative legacy
in the settlements of South Africa. High levels of poverty among urban and
rural communities were linked to the high levels of unemployment and a lack
of social stability. In many cases there was a lack of access to even the
most basic municipal services, limited or no access for the poor to land
for housing, and a highly destabilised housing environment. Poor
environmental quality of these settlements was exacerbated by the lack of
basic services.

The above factors and many more had resulted in 1992 in a situation where
South African human settlements were characterised by spatial separation of
residential areas according to class and population groups. This was
accompanied by the desperate levels of service provision, urban sprawl, low
levels of service provision, low levels of suburban population density and
the concentration of the poor in relatively high density areas on the urban
peripheries, which were often environmentally inhospitable.

South Africa and indeed the rest of the developing world are faced with a
multiplicity of challenges addressing sustainable development. It is within
the context of these multiple challenges that the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation was formulated and these principles were further augmented
by the UN habitat strategy for the implementation of what we all now refer
to as the MDGs, or the Millennium Development Goals, that set us all the
different targets.

Priority areas within the national governments may draw their development
strategies to achieve sustainable human settlements. These would include
provision of adequate shelter for all, improved human settlement
management, the promotion of integrated provision of environmental
infrastructure, and they would also include water, sanitation, drainage and
solid waste management.

At the recent ANC policy conference this year, the ANC recognised that one
of the most significant constraints to accelerated and shared growth
remains the spatial distortions created by apartheid.  On the other hand,
it is common in all capitalist societies for growth and development to be
highly skewed and concentrated in a small geographic space. On the other
hand again, apartheid spatial planning deliberately exacerbated these
tendencies, ensuring that people would be located far from social and
economic opportunities, denying many people access to opportunities of
employment, wealth creation and social progress.

We must act decisively to reverse the pattern of spatial marginalisation at
all levels. It also means government should target its social and economic
investments in localities that will become major centres of growth in South
Africa.

Parliament needs to look at legislative reform and all these different
areas so that we realise sustainable human settlement. Committees in
Parliament must, in their various clusters and in the individual
committees, see what oversight needs to be done with regard to all of that.
And indeed, we need to look at policy formulation from time to time. But,
we must participate in such a way that we can use the oversight tool that
is there in Parliament, for us to realise and ensure that indeed we can
live up to creating a situation where we can say South Africa has arrived
with regard to sustainable human settlements.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mrs I MARS: Madam Speaker, firstly, I would like to thank the hon September
and I think the debate could not have come at a more appropriate time, as
public frustration with government service delivery is at boiling point in
numerous communities across the country. We’ve even had the Public
Protector recently announcing that his office would launch a special
investigation into service delivery and the protests as a result thereof.

Clearly, public frustration of this magnitude spells danger for our young
democracy, as social instability could lead to destabilisation of the
democratic state and its institutions. It is something we must all guard
against vigorously. The public frustration with service delivery is
understandable, if one remembers that the housing backlog is not being
eradicated quickly enough. Millions of people still have no running water,
sanitation or electricity and that informal settlements have grown at the
quickest pace.

It would be disingenuous to suggest that government has failed completely
in service delivery, but we must also acknowledge that the pace of service
delivery is too slow and leads to disillusionment and frustration amongst
the poor. Also, how can we reasonably expect a person with no access to
housing, basic services and other amenities to live a life of dignity and
honour? The hon September, in introducing this debate, referred to creating
sustainable human settlements to restore dignity, and the IFP agrees with
her on the absolute need for this and we would just like to take this
further. We would suggest creating sustainable human settlements especially
in the rural areas of our country. We know that rural areas remain
underdeveloped and that a lack of infrastructure and services is
increasingly driving people to the city. This exacerbates the problem of
unemployment, and urban schools have already experienced that.

If rural areas were included more in developmental action, it would
alleviate some of the pressures being experienced by the cities. What rural
areas need are proper roads, sanitation, water provision, electricity,
telecommunications and the creation of job opportunities for our local
communities. If these aspects could be put in place, rural communities
would have the opportunity to fight their own way out of poverty.

Rural communities also need improvement in services, such as health and
education, and they certainly need public facilities services such as Home
Affairs offices, to access the benefits of state interventions in places
where this is most needed. Multipurpose centres should go to all these
communities to enable them to participate in those things that are their
right. If the infrastructure and services in rural areas are improved it
could reasonably be expected that investment and businesses would increase
there by creating jobs, and that local economic growth will have positive
spin-offs, not only for the community but for all of us.

Madam Speaker, our Constitution guarantees everyone the same rights and no
distinctions are made between a person living in the city and a person
living in the rural areas. The inhabitants of rural areas, therefore, have
the same rights to dignity as other citizens and they do have the same
expectations. But only concerted efforts on the part of all of us to do
more for rural development would mean that the citizens of rural areas
could have their dignity restored. Thank you.

Ms S N SIGCAU: Madam Speaker and hon members, housing is the central pillar
of basic service delivery that provides the anchor for other basic service
deliveries such as electricity and potable water. Despite the valiant
efforts involved in building or subsidising about two million houses since
1994, the department faces an uphill battle to catch up with the housing
backlog.

Population growth, massive urbanisation and the mushrooming of informal
settlements create an ever-increasing demand for decent housing. A housing
backlog in excess of 2,8 million units and growing is cause for great
concern. The rapid growth of housing in certain areas also leads to
environmental degradation and it means that those settlements are not
sustainable in the long run. The UDM remains convinced that large-scale and
co-ordinated infrastructure development is the only answer to this
complicated issue.

Inequality in economic and infrastructure development leads to massive
urbanisation and migration towards those areas that are perceived to be
offering the best services and opportunities, which results in further
strain on the resources there. Once government has begun to eradicate the
economic and infrastructure backlog in certain cities, regions and rural
areas will see a more manageable and sustainable development trajectory for
housing and service delivery in general. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mrs Z A KOTA: Madam Speaker, Madam Mars – you can’t speak here and say the
government is taking too long - we are dealing with unlimited needs and
limited resources. So, the huge backlog that this government is dealing
with is something that we have to take into account.

In September 2000, at the UN Millennium Summit, world leaders agreed to set
time-bound and measurable goals and targets for combating poverty, hunger,
disease, illiteracy, environmental degradation, and discrimination against
women. Placed at the heart of the global agenda for the 21st century was
the Millennium Declaration which was adopted by 189 nations. The Millennium
Declaration contains eight goals, with 18 related targets, and 48
indicators, which have to be achieved by 2015.

Parliament is a critical role-player in overseeing the implementation of
the MDGs by government because of its unique legislative oversight and
budgetary authority. In his state of the nation address President Thabo
Mbeki said that government remained committed to intensifying the housing
programme. This was also shown by the increase in the budget allocation for
housing. Furthermore the President emphasised the need for the speeding up
of the eradication of informal settlements in South Africa, in line with
the MDGs of 2015. He added that this fast-tracking must integrate
communities and build a nonracial society.

The ANC-led government has approved more than two million housing subsidies
between 1994 and mid-2006. The quantity of housing provision is
unprecedented in South African history. To build on this foundation,
government has adopted an integrated human settlement programme for the
next decade. In addition to the speeding up of the delivery of housing the
programme is aimed at making new developments more sustainable, and
integrating them with other social amenities and, in so doing, improving
access of residents to economic opportunities.

Work is also being done to expedite delivery of shelter to the most
vulnerable and those in distress. This happens when communities are
confronted with natural disasters, especially as we are confronted with the
issue of global warming. Taken together with the issues of land restitution
and land redistribution and tenure reform, the housing programme has seen
the transferring of billions of rands’ worth of assets to the poor. Much
still needs to be done to reach out to all those who have not yet benefited
from those government programmes in ensuring the provision of housing and
land is undertaken with communities in an integrated and sustainable
manner.

However, there are a number of challenges with regard to land acquisition
for housing purposes. There are a number of pieces of legislation that
prohibit the housing department from delivering houses in an integrated
manner, especially with regard to allocated land. These pieces of
legislation are the Development Facilitating Act, Act 67 of 1995, and the
Less Formal Township Establishment Act of 1991, which must be repealed.
There are a number of other laws that are blocking the process of housing
delivery. The Departments of Land Affairs and of Housing must work together
to review these pieces of legislation.

Land is a public good, and the state is a custodian of land. It needs to
provide land for the poor. It must determine priorities for the land, and
not the private sector. We can't integrate our communities on 13% of land,
while 87% still resides in the past. Provincial ordinances must be
scrutinised, including municipal bylaws. They must be in line with the
Breaking New Ground Strategy if we are to succeed in integrating our
communities.

The challenge of providing houses is also coupled with the issue of related
services, meaning that central planning is critical at government level.
When houses are built, there should be schools, parks, clinics, police
stations, roads and trading areas so that when we build houses, we build
communities. Provision of houses must create an enabling environment for
the provision of basic services, water, electricity, sanitation and so
forth.

We welcome the government’s commitment in ensuring that by the end of 2007
no community will still be using the bucket system for sanitation, and that
all communities have clean water and decent sanitation by 2010. They must
have electricity by 2012. These are the targets which are measurable, and
we as Members as Parliament need to monitor them in our respective
constituencies.

Yesterday, we had a housing dialogue focusing on the issue of the people’s
housing process. It became clear to us that domestic workers of Sea Point,
Muizenberg, Claremont and Kenilworth are saving because they want to build
houses closer to their places of work, but the critical aspect is that
there is no land available for them to build houses. It is critical that we
assist these people because, at the end of the day, domestic workers are
critical people in terms of making us able to do our work. If we don’t
provide them with resources to have accommodation so that their children
also have their dignity, it is not useful to say that we can integrate our
communities when we say that domestic workers must stay in Delft or in far-
off areas.

It means that, as a caring government, we must be able to assist these
people. We are happy that the provincial government in the Western Cape is
saying that it is going to assist them. We are calling upon Cape Town
Municipality to also join in assisting these people in building those
houses. We understand that we have the Social Housing Bill that is coming
up, which will assist people who are not able to rent on the free market,
but even that piece of legislation does not accommodate domestic workers.

We are saying that, as government, we should find an instrument that will
assist domestic workers also to be part and parcel of living closer to
their places of work. The ANC government is always committed to assisting
its people, and we believe that the issue of domestic workers will be
looked at by us. Before passing that Social Housing Bill we will ensure
that there is an instrument that will accommodate this cry of domestic
workers; we are also not forgetting the issue of farmworkers, as we do so.

In conclusion, we thank the social cluster for having this debate here
today, because we feel that the ANC government is committed to bringing
about a better life for all our people. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, sustainable human settlements with necessary
amenities and services make obvious practical sense, and will help in
developing fully functional communities.
Health, education, socioeconomic and recreational facilities are essential
aspects of community life, and without them, communities exist without hope
of improving their circumstances. Projects aimed at addressing the ever-
increasing desperate situations in our cities, where large percentages of
millions of inhabitants lack access to basic services and amenities,
including housing, offer some hope.

However, these and similar projects must be accelerated and carefully
monitored. Capacity must be beefed up, and funding made available. Quality,
affordable, sustainable and suitable housing must also include the
renovating and managing of existing housing and flats for rent. Provincial
subsidies, grant funding and loan funding are all key in order to provide
affordable and quality housing for the people of South Africa. A strong
emphasis must be placed on the development of mixed density, low-cost
housing units, targeting households earning between R1 500 and R7 500 per
month.

Housing backlogs in our cities are of course accentuated by continued
migration, and low-cost housing presents a particularly daunting challenge
in this regard. Sustainable human settlements with essential amenities and
services in order to restore the dignity of our people are long overdue. I
thank you.

Mr L R R REID: Madam Speaker, hon members, my contribution to this debate
is to look at what role sport and recreation can play to bring about
sustainable human settlement. The RDP correctly states:


  One of the cruellest legacies of apartheid is its distortion of sport and
  recreation in our society, the enforced segregation of these activities
  and the gross neglect in providing facilities for the majority of South
  Africa’s people. This has denied millions of people, and particularly our
  youth, the right to a normal and a healthy life.
The old way of planning settlements for black people used to be to throw
them away, forget about them and let them live in squalor - far removed
from everything. Blacks were simply dumped in those areas with no access to
basic services and amenities.

In apartheid South Africa the white sections of towns were properly
developed. Houses in these sections were built in the best areas, with all
the necessary infrastructure and access to water and sanitation,
electricity and First World sporting facilities that included stadia with
turf tracks and indoor sports facilities.

At the same time, there was absolutely no such infrastructure in black
areas. Communities in black areas often had to put up sports fields
themselves, even on gravel tracks. These sports fields were not fenced and
there was no electricity or water.

Previously, there were integrated communities who played on these sports
fields. For example, here in the Western Province, that was the pride of
the old SA Rugby Union; they played at the Green Point Stadium. But the
infamous Group Areas Act put an end to all that. Blacks were gradually
moved farther and farther away from towns - up the hills and later over the
hills. [Laughter.] Communities were uprooted; for example, those in
District Six. These people were moved to areas that had no sporting
facilities. Furthermore, the Separate Amenities Act denied blacks access to
certain facilities in town.
The White Paper on Sport and Recreation of South Africa states: “The
challenge in the provision of facilities in South Africa is not simply
about a shortage of facilities but rather the location of these
facilities.” It is for this reason that Sport and Recreation South Africa,
through the building of a sport and recreation programme, has built
sporting facilities right across the country, and especially in the
communities, that ensure that the masses of our people have access to these
facilities. Even the smallest community like rural Klaarstroom in the Karoo
region has a sports field.

Here in Cape Town the Blue Downs Stadium and the stadium between Mitchells
Plain and Khayelitsha are examples of those being built in the communities.
The latter stadia will unite the communities of Khayelitsha and Mitchells
Plain. As a result of a lack of sports facilities in Khayelitsha the youth
in that area turn to drugs, gangsterism and crime.

These new stadia will help to create a safer community because the youth
will now be able to participate in sport. [Applause.] This, because there
were no sporting facilities where they could play home matches and
therefore they were forced to play away games at great cost. This problem
will now be addressed by this new stadium.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup will have an impact on the expansion of transport
networks such as the Moloto Rail Corridor, the Klipfontein Rail Corridor
and the Gautrain. Other spin-offs will be the provision of services to poor
communities at grassroots level and on a mass participation basis. The
building of these facilities will also create jobs, as will their
maintenance. This will help turn back the frontiers of poverty.

The building of these multipurpose sports facilities, together with the
multipurpose centres, will ensure that communities now have access to
recreational activities such as mass participation programmes in their
communities.

To ensure sustainable human settlement, local government in general and
town planners in particular must ensure that through proper planning the
people must have access to basic needs. There must be sufficient open
spaces or green areas such as parks. No human settlement can be sustainable
without proper sport and recreational facilities that are accessible to our
people. I therefore want to urge communities to actively participate in the
IDP processes at local government level to ensure that through the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant more facilities are built in close proximity
to where people live.

The provision of sports facilities together with decent housing will help
water and sanitation, local economic development, road transport and
education facilities to go a long way towards realising sustainable human
settlement and restore the dignity of our people.

I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before I call on the next speaker, I wish
to take this opportunity, on that note of sports and the dignity of our
people, to give a rugby update. The information is that the Parliamentary
Rugby team played the last game just now and they have beaten England 19-0.
[Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, South Africa will always be a sporting and a
winning nation. When we became a democracy we made a promise to the South
African people that we shall bring to them a better life, equality, freedom
and opportunity.

The MF acknowledges that South Africa has made great progress over the past
13 years. It is reported in our forthcoming South Africa Survey that living
conditions have improved overall and that 88% of households had potable
water in 2005. However, this does not excuse the many homeless and shanty-
town domiciles that have little or no sanitation as well as minimal access
to potable water.

The MF also feels that it is not a condition that we may accept a delayed
delivery upon. There are living conditions that human beings are being
forced to live under. It is inhumane and we need to speed up delivery. We
cannot allow any backlogs or frozen funds, or unreliable contractors to
sabotage our progress. We need to adopt an urgent delivery approach to this
matter. This reminds me, Madam Speaker, of the profound words of Mahatma
Gandhi, that as long as there are tears and suffering our work is not over.

I thank you.

Ms M N S MANANA: Madam Speaker, the Minister present and hon members,
access to safe and healthy shelter is essential to a person’s physical,
psychological, social and economic wellbeing and should be a fundamental
part of national and international action. The right to adequate housing as
a basic human right is enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights. Despite this, it is estimated that at present at least one billion
people do not have access to safe and healthy shelter and that, if
appropriate action is not taken, this number will increase drastically by
the end of the century and beyond.

The overall sustainable human settlement objective is to improve the
social, economic and environmental quality of human settlements and the
living and working environment of all people, in particular the urban and
rural poor. Such improvement should be based on technical corporation
activities, partnership among the public, private and community sectors and
participation in the decision-making process by community groups and
special interest groups such as women, indigenous people, the elderly and
the disabled.

The Department of Housing is at the forefront of the National Agenda for
the delivery of housing and the ANC-led government is taking the overall
responsibility for providing houses to all. It is well known that
government inherited a critical housing shortage, with the 1996 census
reflecting a housing backlog of 2,2 million. The Department of Housing has
built 2,8 million housing units, providing more than five million people
with secured homes.

The Human Settlement Redevelopment Programme initiated in 1999 aims at
improving the quality of the urban environment and redresses the imbalances
and backlogs inherited from the apartheid government. These involve yearly
roll-on housing development plans spanning all three tiers of government.
So far government has spent more than 40 million in 15 areas in all nine
provinces in the human settlement programme.

On health issues, since 1994, the Department of Health has been radically
transforming the increased access to the poor, improving quality and making
the system more cost-effective; free health services are now offered at
public primary health care clinics and community health care centres across
the country. Up until now the Department of Health has built more than 700
clinics and upgraded 298 clinics. There are now more than 3 500 clinics in
the public sector. Free health care for children under six years and for
pregnant and breastfeeding mothers is also available at these clinics.

Over the past years the health sector has undergone a rapid change to make
it more equitable and accessible to the needy. A district-based health
system is being developed to ensure local level control of public health
services and to standardise and co-ordinate basic health services around
the country to ensure that health care is affordable and accessible to
everyone.

Regarding the water issues, 19% of the population still lack access to safe
water and 33% lack basic sanitation services. Public institutions also
suffer from the lack of access to safe water and sanitation services. Fifty-
nine percent of all schools and clinics lack access to acceptable
sanitation facilities while 27% of all the schools and 48% of all the
clinics lack access to safe water supply.

Water-related epidemics and diseases such as cholera, diarrhoea and others
occur in South Africa. Malaria is also a common disease. Between 2000 and
2004 there were 7 854 reported incidents of malaria infections, 875 of
which ended with fatality. Each year some 2,5 million people fall ill with
bilharzia, of whom about 10% are severely infected although only a few die
of this disease.

The free basic water programme to ensure access to effective water supply
and sanitation services in association with the access to health and
services, plays a major role in addressing water-related diseases and
improving the health and quality of life of all. The ANC government is also
promoting improved hygiene practices through national programme campaigns
and education awareness at schools and in communities.

Furthermore, the provision of free basic water to the poor has become a
national policy since 2000. This programme aims to ensure that poor
households receive six kilolitres of free basic water per month. Beyond
this basic allowance, users must pay for their consumption. The programme
is being progressively implemented by the Water Services Authorities and
over 76% of the population already receive access to their free basic
water. Progress has been made to ensure access to water supply and
sanitation. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the need for sustainable human settlements
will remain a priority for our nation and for our government for a very
long time. Thirteen years into our new democracy we must continue to pursue
our people’s needs and desire for sustainable human settlements. Throughout
the year local governments throughout our country had to fight fires and
deal with floods in predominantly informal settlements. This year’s winter
has brought great misery to certain areas where houses have been built in
high-water catchment areas.

It is reported that earlier this year about 15 000 people were affected by
the heavy rains in the Cape Peninsula and that about 49 residential areas,
mainly in the informal settlements, have indicated a need for assistance.
According to the MEC for Local Government of the Western Cape, there were
about 306 fires in informal settlements last year, which affected the lives
of more than 3 000 families.

People ought to have access to basic services such as water, sanitation,
education, transport, economic opportunities and a healthy lifestyle. Local
and provincial governments must take stronger action to ensure that human
migration activities to certain areas subscribe to criteria governing human
settlements. Failing to do this, government should take responsibility if
people are allowed to locate in conditions that do not subscribe to
sustainable living standards.

In conclusion, there are a number of informal settlements throughout the
country that need to be upgraded, especially where the land is suitable for
human habitation, rather than uprooting and relocating people to other
areas. Greater participatory relations are needed between local and
provincial governments and communities to design a framework on how to
improve the human conditions in especially informal areas. Thank you.

Mr B MTHEMBU: Madam Speaker and hon members, the need for sustainable human
settlements is informed by the type of society we seek to create, as
articulated in the Freedom Charter. The Freedom Charter says:


  There shall be houses, security and comfort. All people shall have the
  right to live where they choose, be decently housed and to bring up their
  families in comfort and security. Unused housing space to be made
  available to the people; rent and price shall be lowered; slums shall be
  demolished, new suburbs built where all have transport, roads, lighting,
  playfields, crèches and social centres. Rest, leisure and recreation shall
  be the right for all. Fenced locations and ghettos shall be abolished.

The sustainability of settlement as envisioned in the Freedom Charter is a
multidimensional challenge. It involves settlement dimensions,
environmental conditions, economic viability, institutional ability and
structure; social relations, values and aspirations. We talk of sustainable
human settlement which is also being informed by the global moves to ensure
that we bring a good life; all the goodies of a good life, which everybody
is entitled to enjoy. We want sustainable human settlement which will be
enjoyed not only by the current generation, but also by our children’s
children. We want all the goodies of life through sustainable human
settlement which will ensure that we enjoy life to its fullest.

When the ANC came into power in 1994 it promised to bring a better life for
all and that all people shall have life in abundance.

There is a bias towards urban areas and I briefly just want to touch on the
need for the creation of sustainable human settlements in rural areas.

On the Rustlers Valley farm, there is a farmworkers’ village called Naledi
village. When the owner turned to tourism as a means of income, instead of
evicting the 150 farmworkers who were living on his farm, he decided to
place a chunk of his farm in a trust for the village and set about making
them self-reliant. Naledi village is now a prosperous community that
provides a range of services to other communities in that area. [Applause.]

In Witbank there is a Presidential project, unfortunately it is called
Idingindoda, which is settled right in the town. It has single, double and
three-roomed flats. It caters for blacks, whites and Indians. It is
accessible, has shops, recreation and creates jobs. That is what the
Freedom Charter states; new suburbs which will integrate and move forward
in creating a new nation where we would all live together.

Similarly in the Mpumalanga province, along the N4 road to Mozambique,
there stands a huge chunk of land that has been turned into a trust called
Mjajane trust through the land restitution process. It is envisaged that
this trust will form part of the tourist attraction; the beneficiaries will
have shares in the hotels, built settlements, clinics, school facilities,
and have access to investment and the Kruger National Park. Most
importantly, those beneficiaries who want to farm will be given training.

These are the kinds of initiatives which are more innovative. They are
trying to make human settlements in rural areas sustainable. They are
trying to address the various aspects of life so that people can enjoy all
the goodies of a good life; to have human settlement that is sustainable,
that causes people to regain their dignity and to be emancipated from the
indignities which they have suffered for so long.

The approaches promote active community participation in all aspects of
social and economic life, strengthen social relations and economic
participation by individuals, households and communities, and thus reduce
poverty and hunger and achieve sustainable livelihoods. If we are to
promote sustainable human settlements in rural areas we need to speed up
ownership of property, especially land.

I want to argue that it is important, when we talk of sustainable human
settlements, especially in rural areas, that the question of property
rights, the question of land, the question of property assets, be addressed
as soon as possible. A challenge that we have in rural areas is a shortage
of land.

In conclusion, I want to say that it is important that we address the
structural challenges, especially knowledge assets, through equitable and
quality education in rural areas. Property assets and the acquisition of
land are very critical. Most importantly, we need to create infrastructural
development in rural areas; then we will be able to create an inclusive and
caring society. In this way we will be able to curb the migration from
rural areas to the urban areas that creates unplanned informal settlement.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, I would like to thank all the hon members
that have participated in the debate. The responses received in the debate
clearly emphasise the need for Parliament to look again at the role that it
needs to play in the targets that have been set. If we look at all the
targets that have been clearly set - the Millennium Development Goals -
they are aimed at allowing us to go a long way in creating sustainable
human settlements, and a very good role that Parliament can play is to
ensure that when departments come with their annual reports, we can see
whether we are indeed making strides in this manner.
So, I think there’s quite a need for Parliament to find a focused way in
regard to how it wants to ensure that we have sustainable human settlement,
and to do so through looking at the targets that have been set by the
President and also those that South Africa accepted in Johannesburg, the
Millennium Development Goals, as well as numerous other targets.

Chairperson, allow me to take this opportunity – Madam speaker started it
and I just want to finish it. Madam Speaker was informing the House on what
our team did today, but Madam Speaker left out the other two results. Maybe
it would be important to tell the House that the team started off by
scoring 10-3 and that the team also won against France, and the score was
22-12. A very sustainable team we have there in France, and we should maybe
do something when they come back.

Having listened to the scoring of the team, it’s important to also add also
that one of the other methods of ensuring the completion of sustainable
human settlement is to remind the House that today we are celebrating Arbor
Day. And what better way of doing this than by ensuring that in all our
different schools, clinics, townships, houses and everywhere, we plant a
million trees in South Africa? And this year the Million Trees campaign has
started with planting fruit trees so that we can ensure that we bring
nutrition and we alleviate poverty where it grows. The challenge is for the
House here today to double or better the million trees that have been set
out by the President for us here today.

Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

  THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN STRIKING A BALANCE BETWEEN NATIONAL SECURITY,
    HUMAN SECURITY AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOMS, AND IN AVERTING THE THREAT TO
                                  DEMOCRACY

                            (Debate on IPU Topic)

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, as is the case in other countries like Canada,
New Zealand, the USA and Australia, in South Africa, the oversight of our
security and intelligence services is underpinned by legislation. South
Africa has a rights-based Constitution which determines that our national
security is subject to the authority of Parliament and the executive or the
Cabinet.

The subject of today’s debate compels one to seek a clear definition of the
concepts: national security and human security. The current definition of
national security is: Freedom from fear and want. Implicit in this
definition is human security or the need for the individual, as opposed to
the state, to be free from danger, threats or insecurity, all of which are
common basic human requirements. Human security, therefore, is a concept
that affects the daily lives of each and every South African.

Set against this background, Parliament’s role and oversight function is
significant. However, one needs to sound a warning. Someone once said that
when watchdogs morph into lap dogs, lazy dogs or yellow dogs, the nation is
in trouble. We know that in and of itself oversight does not necessarily
safeguard or guarantee democracy or human security.

Indeed, our experience has shown that abuses can be committed by security
services despite the existence of oversight. However, we also know that
democracy and the security of a nation’s people are best served when
Parliament and its oversight bodies not only have a clear and comprehensive
legislative authority to act but also to do so in a robust and consistent
fashion. This often requires integrity, wisdom and courage of
parliamentarians in carrying out that oversight role.

The ANC has thus advocated for a democratic state with institutions based
on the will of the people as being the only way to serve the wellbeing of
all our citizens. The ANC’s perspective on national security is that all
security apparatus should be rooted in and accountable to the communities
in whose name they serve.

To this end, and in order to ensure their legitimate conduct, our
Constitution provides an imperative that all members of our security
services must act in accordance with our Constitution and the law. It is
also an imperative that our intelligence services may not engage in party-
political matters nor may they have loyalty to any political party or
faction thereof.

The mandate of our security services, therefore, is to act in the national
interest by contributing to and enhancing the security and welfare of all
our citizens irrespective of party-political affiliations. In doing this,
members of our security services must demonstrate allegiance to the
Constitution and the law.

The events of “Terrible Tuesday”, commonly known as 9/11, give added
significance to democratic accountability of our security services.
Moreover, the presence of hard security matters such as terrorism,
organised crime, people smuggling, drug trafficking and weapons smuggling,
to name a but a few, impacts on our human security.

What exacerbates this, of course, is the globalisation of our world
economy, which has placed enormous pressure on limited and fast diminishing
resources such as energy, water, minerals and fertile land, which in turn
results in increased competition and conflict. We also find ethnic,
religious and ideological differences, as well as intolerance and
polarisation added to the above.

A case in point is the attempts by outside interests to destabilise West
Africa following the discovery of oil reserves in that region. It is an
established fact that with energy shortages being imminent the use of
hydrogen fuel as an energy source is now being seriously investigated.

Platinum is being advanced as a possible catalyst to convert hydrogen into
the proposed new form of energy. Given that South Africa sits on some 86%
of the world’s platinum reserves, it is necessary that we take steps to
create stability in our region and continent and to protect such resources
for the benefit of all our citizens.

Chairperson, if you would allow me to express a personal opinion at this
point, it is my view that oversight of the security services as conducted
by the committees and members of this Parliament is of the highest
standard. However, the challenges facing this Parliament are to maintain
the fine balance between secrecy and the constitutional rights of our
citizens and to help place our government in a position to be the catalyst
for stability and positive development in Africa. I thank you.

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, the IFP would like to thank the presiding
officers for scheduling this debate well in advance of the IPU’s annual
conference in Geneva, Switzerland. This topic will be the subject of this
panel discussion in October and again will be debated further at the IPU’s
118th Assembly in April 2008.

The main objective of today’s debate is to arrive at a common departure
point for the SA Parliament when it participates in the assembly in
October. We will be going there, not as individual political parties but as
a collective delegation from Parliament.

The world in 2007 is an infinitely more dangerous and unstable place than
the world of 20 or 30 years ago. The end of the balance achieved by two
competing superpowers has led to the rise of more dictatorships,
totalitarianism, regimes, wars, ethnic and religious conflicts, and
ultimately the rise of international terrorism. As a result, democracy has
come under sustained attack and in many parts of the world it has gone
backwards rather that forwards.

In addition, human rights and individual freedoms have also come under
attack. Even in the established democracies, a steady erosion of human
rights and freedoms in the face of a greater perceived need for national
security is apparent. This is even more so in those democracies that are
targets for international terrorism. In some instances, these democracies
have responded with national security measures that many consider
antidemocratic and antifreedom. But they have been able to convince their
public that some freedoms must be curtailed in order to protect the
security of the state of the nation.
This is not a new dilemma for democracies. The need for a trade-off between
pursuing national security and human rights and freedoms is almost a given
when democracies have come under attack. But there is also a contradiction.
These democracies have struck the optimum balance between these competing
needs. Their survival has been promoted while they have erred on the side
of repressive national security measures and have experienced more problems
of instability and even erosion of fundamental democratic values. What,
then, is the role of parliaments in finding the balance?

We believe, as Mr Landers has just said, that there needs to be a check on
the state and the potential abuse of power for position. Parliaments must
execute their oversight responsibly and vigorously as representatives. We
must check on the executive at all times. We cannot allow the executive to
proceed and just do what they wish. We have to ensure that there is a
balance continuously and that human rights are not abused in any way. We
have to ensure that we do not accept half-baked answers and solutions; that
the executive has completely seen this thing through and is doing what is
right for the country as a whole; and that everybody in the country must be
happy that they are in fact being taken care of.

I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, the intersection between
national security and individual freedom has always been a problematic
political phenomenon. For the greatest part of history, it was national
security that trumped individual freedoms. With the advent of democracy and
the attendant gradual entrenchment of individual freedoms, the question has
been more vexed.

It is inarguable that individual freedoms cannot simply be suspended in the
name of national security. Yet, it becomes a much more troubling question
when the national security we are referring to includes averting
directorates to democracy. In that context, it seems almost inevitable that
individual freedoms cannot be the highest priority when the production of a
democracy as a whole is paramount.

This argument presents a slippery slope because countries which claim to be
legitimate democracies, whether they are the apartheid government in the
1980s or modern-day America, can engage in grave subversions of individual
freedoms in the name of national security and averting threats to
democracy. Undoubtedly, parliaments as institutions present some of the
best bulwarks against this sort of abuse of power. It is only through
parliamentary accountability that the national security can be balanced and
monitored against individual freedoms.

It is in parliaments that this simple question can be asked: Can the threat
to national security only be addressed and managed through the curtailment
of individual freedoms because often, as is the case with any security
establishment, there is overzealousness and eagerness to increase its own
power and influence at the expense of individual freedoms? I thank you.

Dr A N LUTHULI: Chair, thank you for the opportunity to address you this
afternoon. I will begin by outlining a political background perspective to
the topic of discussion. The ANC has always articulated a clear vision of
the role of democratic governance institutions and their role as legitimate
platforms for representing the aspirations of the people. The ANC has thus
advocated for a democratic state and institutions based on the will of the
people - I refer you to the Freedom Charter - as the only way to secure the
birthrights of all citizens without any regard to race, sex or beliefs.

The ANC’s perspective of national security, human and individual security
is coined in a collective security for people without an overemphasis on
individuality; this is due to the nature and character of the struggle for
liberation which was and continues to be significantly based on a holistic
liberation of the people. The security apparatus is therefore an integral
part of such a thorough-going liberation character, whereas on the one hand
the apartheid government security outlook was mainly meant to be the
security of the state and its ruling elite, as well as the broader white
minority group.

On the other hand, the security architecture being elaborated by the ANC is
fundamentally driven by the notion of the security of the people. To
further illustrate this point, the ANC policy on the Police Service states
that the police must be accountable to the people whom they serve. It has
been, and continues to be the view of the ANC that all security apparatus
should be rooted in and accountable to the communities in whose names they
serve.

The oversight role of Parliament should as such be driven by the
aspirations of the people with regard to national security, human security
and individual freedoms. This is derived from the Freedom Charter’s clarion
call that the rights of the people shall be the same regardless of race,
colour or sex. Within the ANC policy paradigm, human security and
individual freedoms - as presented in this discussion topic - border on
issues of human rights.

Then I will discuss the role of us as parliamentarians in striking a
balance between national security, human security and individual freedoms,
and in averting the threat to democracy. The role of Parliament as an
oversight body over the executive and its role in providing checks and
balances is an important role in fostering democratic and accountable
governance. In this regard, the ANC always advocated a strong and effective
Parliament capable of dealing with the great tasks of reconstruction, of
overcoming the legacy of apartheid and of nation-building. This kind of
perspective is the one that guides the ANC’s engagement with the role of
parliaments in general.

On occasions that relate to engagement with international institutions like
the Inter-Parliamentary Union, or IPU, on this subject, a combination of
the ANC’s foreign policy perspective as well as its political position on
the role of Parliament becomes the prevailing line of engagement. For
instance, at the level of the IPU, which is mainly a dialogue platform, the
ANC’s position on parliaments being important both for the oversight
function over the executive and as a democratic platform for the expression
of the interests of the people, remains the main point of departure. At the
heart of this perspective is the importance of participatory democracy and
mutual accountability, thus ensuring the ownership of democratic
institutions by the people in averting the threat to democracy.

Accordingly, the struggle for an apartheid-free South Africa within the ANC
perspective has always been about fundamental human rights. As such, human
rights have been canonised as the cornerstone of the ANC’s foreign policy
perspective. In addition, the foreign policy perspective of consolidating
the African Agenda; ensuring peace and stability in Africa and in the
world; creating partnerships for development; the south-south relations;
the north-south relations; good governance; and creating a global situation
where human rights are respected, guides the ANC’s approach to platforms
such as the IPU. This, however, is not without the fact that there is a
need for a strong and effective central government to handle national tasks
such as defence and ensure the basic security of the country and the
people. This further provides a mutually reinforcing approach of
accountability and transparency of the executive towards the people while
Parliament also ensures the executive’s accountability through a
transparent and democratic platform.

The notion of a balance between the role of a parliament and its oversight
towards the executive only emerges where there is not a clearly articulated
vision between the legislative arm of the state and the executive arm of
the state. Accordingly, instances of sensationalism in public debate and
wild accusations aired under parliamentary privilege are potentially
dangerous and could amount to a security risk with regard to issues of
national security and defence.

The kind of balance that could be raised can only arrive under such
circumstances, particularly when it comes to the security sector and
intelligence. This is where parliaments should exercise their oversight
role to a level of a broader strategic approach of ensuring first and
foremost the security of people and the respect of civil liberties. There
is, however, an absolute affirmation that parliamentary oversight of the
security and intelligence services is a necessary and acceptable phenomenon
in democratic societies. Parliamentary oversight in these areas of national
security and defence, however, needs to be afforded the level of
discreteness required, yet maintaining a good balance of upholding the
constitutional prescriptions without posing a threat to democracy.

The kind of openness and accountability that the ANC has always fostered in
constructing a democratic ethos in all spheres of government is derived
from the notion that government must be the government of the people, by
the people, for the people. It must be chosen by the people in free, fair
and regular elections. This amplifies the point that the security
architecture of South Africa and the role that Parliament is
constitutionally mandated to play reinforces the ANC’s approach of the
security of the people.

Consistent with these views, the ANC believes that the organs of government
shall be accountable to Parliament and to the whole community. It is not
their function to serve the interests of any party or sectional grouping.

Impartiality presupposes a balanced composition of the bodies concerned and
sensitivity to the needs and aspirations of all sections of the community.
The ANC further articulates its perspective on the role of Parliament in
relation to both the Constitution and national security as stated in its
principles for a democratic South Africa that the Constitution will make
provision for a state of emergency to be declared when the life of the
nation is threatened. Such power will be subject to strict controls by
Parliament and the judiciary. The Constitution will provide for the
recognition and the protection of fundamental rights during the period of
emergency, as far as possible. This approach would as such be translated
into all platforms engaged on these issues, like the IPU in this instance.
I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP believes that whilst it is imperative
to take steps to combat international terrorism such as we have done with
the passing of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist
and Related Activities Act, we need to be vigilant against excesses of
state power, particularly where human security and individual freedoms are
infringed upon.

Section 56 of the Constitution provides that Parliament must ensure that
all executive organs of state are accountable to it and to maintain
oversight over all organs of state. This includes the whole ambit of state
security apparatus such as the police, defence force and intelligence
agencies. We need, as parliamentarians, to ensure that our security
services operate at all times lawfully and within the confines of our
Constitution and the enabling legislation.

This is the basic question or the answer to the timeless question: Quis
custodiet ipsos custodes? [Who will guard the guards?] The incident last
year of the unlawful investigation of Mr Saki Macozoma by the NIA
highlights the need for Parliament to exercise an effective oversight
function over the security apparatus, particularly in this case, the
intelligence sector. There must thus be oversight, but with the necessary
degree of confidentiality to enable security organs to protect citizens and
to avert any threats to our democracy. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I quote the then Secretary-General of the UN,
Kofi Annan, at the Workshop on Human Security held in Mongolia in 2000,
where he defined human security:


   Human security in its broadest sense embraces far more than the absence
   of violent conflict. It encompasses human rights, good governance, access
   to education and health care and ensuring that each individual has
   opportunities and choices to fulfil his or her own potential.

He described the building blocks of human security as, “freedom from want,
freedom from fear and the freedom of future generations to inherit a
healthy natural environment”.


South Africa has attained a democracy and we are signatories to many UN
treaties that advocate the necessity to preserve human rights globally. On
the African continent we have progressed with Nepad, the SADC and the PAP.
We have a responsibility beyond our borders, and as one of the greatest
democracies on the continent we cannot afford to turn a blind eye.

As a country we still have a long way to go before we overcome our
challenges in health, education, poverty, and rural and urban land
development. But we need to investigate how much of this we have inherited
from our neighbours through the high rate of illegal immigrants that are
tapping into our social benefits system. I thank you.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, the Inter-
Parliamentary Union topic for discussion and debate namely: “The role of
parliaments in striking a balance between national security, human security
and individual freedoms, and in averting the threat to democracy”, is an
important one, as the contributions of previous speakers show.

Within the time at my disposal, I will make a few cursory remarks on some
elements of the topic under discussion. History reveals that until the
advent of the Second World War, in the main, what shaped relations among
states was relatively straightforward, namely that nations needed military
power to exert influence and security, and this was achieved mainly through
military alliances.

In the second half of the 20th Century, however, the militarist
dispensation was displaced by another system of relationships characterised
by the UN rules governing international relations. These rules are based on
dialogue, negotiations and collective decisions.
Today, in the 21st century after the advent of globalisation, political,
economic and national security relationships are becoming increasingly
complex. Although international relations are still governed by traditional
notions of military and political power, multilateral and regional
relationships are increasingly playing a more important role.

In terms of national security, section 1 of the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa states, amongst other things, that the Republic of
South Africa is one, sovereign, democratic state founded on:

   (a)      Human dignity, the achievement of equality and the advancement
        of human rights and freedoms.
   (b)      Nonracialism and nonsexism.
   (c)      Supremacy of the Constitution and the rule of law.

Furthermore, section 12(1), which deals with freedom and security of the
person, states that:


   Everyone has the right to freedom and security of the person, which
   includes the right –


   (a)      not to be deprived of freedom arbitrarily or without just cause;


   (b)      not to be detained without trial;
   (c)      to be free from all forms of violence from either public or
        private sources.

As governments derive their rights and legitimacy from their citizens, it
should first and foremost be citizens who should evaluate the role of
parliaments in balancing national and human security and individual
freedoms in the context of a democratic state. The oversight role of
parliaments should thus be driven by the aspirations of citizens.

However, it should also be borne in mind that parliaments cannot take
decisions on behalf of their governments. As the legitimate representatives
of the constituency who elected them, parliamentarians have a
constitutional mandate to fulfil; that of forming an important link between
government, the public and civil society.

Critically linked to any decision-making process is the consultation
process which should shape the nature and substance of decisions.

Furthermore, it is for governments to govern and to negotiate international
treaties on behalf of states and it is the prerogative of parliaments to
scrutinise government action, influence policies, ratify agreements and
implement them through appropriate legislation and budget allocations, and
also to oversee the implementation process as a whole.
Finally, for democracy to thrive and flourish, it is important for
electorates to keep an eye and a finger on the pulse of their governments,
parliaments and judiciaries. I thank you. [Applause.]

          PARLIAMENTARY OVERSIGHT OF STATE POLICIES ON FOREIGN AID

                            (Debate on IPU topic)

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Chairperson, members of the House, parliamentary
oversight of state policies on foreign aid is a very critical component of
people’s participatory democracy. Indeed, I know that I am not just talking
to myself, but all of us here in the House, and also in our country,
broadly speaking, know that Members of Parliament have been entrusted to
protect and ensure not only the sovereignty of the state, but also that the
mission we actually came into Parliament on is effectively delivered to
members of the public, the people of South Africa, our citizens.

Now what has this got to do with state policies on foreign aid? A great
deal. The ANC has made it clear that development partners, otherwise known
as recipient countries of aid, need to create an environment where these
countries can author their own developmental framework. Just as we
understood that our freedom could not be won by others, so too we
understand that only our actual deliberations and development of
programmes, when it comes to foreign aid supporting them, will be adopted
and effectively implemented and accepted by the people of South Africa.

The challenge today in foreign aid is how to separate rhetoric from
reality. Recipient countries know only too well how their achievement of
independence has been undermined. This undermining has involved the
privatisation of industry that robbed African countries of a key source of
revenue. The conversion of these resources into shares held by foreigners
has also placed unsustainable pressures on these economies.

What amounts to the impoverishment of African countries has led to huge
foreign debts which in so many cases are exacerbated by foreign aid. This
robbery, conducted with such impunity in Africa by the North, could
arguably be interpreted as the first money-laundering exercise, and to
boot, conducted by sovereign countries and not simple gangsters that we
know today.

Having said this, though, it’s quite clear that the multilateral approach
of the South African government, and indeed our people and country, in the
pursuit of structural change in the Bretton Woods Institutions of the IMF
and the World Bank, has in fact achieved some progress. This includes a
recognition by these institutions that the ownership of programmes is
essential, albeit not sufficient, for the effective achievement of things
such as the Millennium Development Goals.
In short, what do the Millennium Development Goals mean? They mean the
eradication of poverty, not simply the alleviation thereof. They mean
making history of the high infant mortality rate, increasing women’s
empowerment, enhancing education, eradicating diseases like malaria,
HIV/Aids and similar terrible diseases. They also mean, in fact, developing
our institutions and looking at maternal welfare.

Our decision to reintegrate the South African economy with the global
economy created unprecedented challenges in addressing the various
pressures, risks and opportunities that derived from that process.

But, notwithstanding that, perhaps it was our own ideological preparation
since 1912, expressed more recently in the Freedom Charter, in the RDP and
indeed in the work that this Parliament has done and the policy that the
ANC government has brought to bear on transforming the structures in our
country, that recognised that foreign aid alone or foreign investment alone
will not transform our country, but that we will require to develop
programmes and to adjust ourselves fiscally to ensure that we create the
fiscal space that will in turn enable us to allocate more funds socially
and to governance mechanisms to ensure that we can implement our goal of
eradicating poverty.

We have often heard of the so-called soft options and hard options. The
North has a way of trying to impose its views on other countries. Some of
us may call it peddling policy; the kind of thing that technocrats draw up
and you hardly recognise. Now parliamentary oversight is critical in this.
It is not only critical in the rest of Africa, but also right here in our
own country.

What are portfolio committees, what is the finance committee, the Joint
Budget Committee, doing about ensuring that indeed the allocations in the
budget are aligned with the strategic plans, number one, and that in the
very first place, these allocations reflect the policies of our party and
government? What has this got to do with aid? A great deal, because so
often we find even within our own budget that it has been distorted because
certain programmes not transparently clear are being funded by foreign aid.
So, we are not sure just how efficiently, how effectively, our own policies
are working and what the impact is of that.

We are not saying we do not need foreign investment and that foreign aid
only has a negative impact on a country. What we are saying is that it is
increasingly important for us to be able to separate foreign aid, foreign
investment, from our own direct generation of investment, our own revenue
gained from the people of this country, and ensure that the two together
are effectively used. So, we need to unpack that global amount of
expenditure by departments and ensure that we know how much foreign aid is
coming into the country.

The soft option on foreign aid and so on is often linked to phrases such
as, not battle fatigue, but aid fatigue. I am sure many of us have heard on
TV, we have read in the press, about donor countries saying Africa is a
bottomless pit. Indeed, it wouldn’t have been so bottomless if they hadn’t
taken the bottom away! But be that as it may, South Africa, as I’ve said
before, has developed its own RDP and therefore it is no surprise that we
feel a sense of ownership here.

But I want to alert members of this House to the other aspect of foreign
aid that we should be mindful of. Foreign aid has not always been used only
in a human rights manner for humanity; it has also been used, and more
frequently, to achieve strategic imperialistic objectives. For example,
what I am talking about is issues since the Second World War, for example
the Marshall Plan. Long before that was to deliver bread in Germany it was
motivated by the national security agenda of the United States. It was also
motivated by the desire to prevent Soviet expansion.

Again, during the Cold War, funds were allocated in aid to Korea, South
Korea, South Vietnam and even Zaire. And of course, we know more recently
that Americans themselves funded people on whom today they have just
dropped their bombs, trying to destroy the civil population.

Aid has also been used to promote regional security agendas in Egypt and
Israel in support of Camp David accords and others. Again, what I want to
point out is that aid, as I have said before, has had this strategic
significance long before it was accepted by the Bretton Woods Institutions,
and that global poverty was far more critical than anything else, and that
eradicating global poverty would be their best insurance against any
interpretation of terrorism.

It would be interesting to learn, for example, that they actually gave aid
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or DRC, that really amounted to 82
cents in the dollar per capita; Ethiopia, $2,11 per capita; Egypt, $7,26
... and I am reeling these off. Consider the populations in these
countries, consider the poverty in these countries, the underdevelopment
achieved by privatisation of industry and removing the primary wealth, and
then understand that even after serious cuts they continue to fund Israel
$71,88. Now you can see the distortions in the foreign aid agenda.

But let me come back to the importance of this particular debate in the
oversight of state policy on foreign aid. It is extremely critical for
Parliament; Parliament as an institution that in our country in some
measure is only second to the Constitutional Court, but in the three arms
of government is the premier instrument for ensuring, not simply what the
North would want to term law and order and security for its citizens, but
in ensuring that the potential of our people is developed and we eradicate
poverty and so on.
But the problem that is posed here in this dilemma is: how do we exercise
oversight effectively, not only within our own Parliament, but also in
ensuring that we play a key role in influencing the Bretton Woods
Institutions, the Doha round, the WTO, other international institutions by
way of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, of which we are a member and in which
one of our own Members of Parliament is also sitting on the Executive, and
where I believe we can play a very influential role?

Oversight, we should remember, is not simply oversight, forgetting to do
something. It is not simply a visit to a building site or whatever. But
oversight in its essential understanding and defining of the word means the
custodianship which is effectively implemented through rigorous analysis
and evaluation of policy against implementation. I thank you.

Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, thank you for allowing us this opportunity to
debate the issue of parliamentary oversight of state policies on foreign
aid. The Inter-Parliamentary Union is an international organisation which
considers the question of international interest and concern, and expresses
its view on such issues in order to bring about action by parliaments and
parliamentarians.

Foreign aid is defined as international aid or development assistance when
one country helps another country through some form of donation. Usually,
this refers to helping out a country that has a special need caused by
poverty, underdevelopment, natural disasters or armed conflicts.

In essence, foreign aid as it was originally intended, namely assistance
from one country to another, was a good thing, but in many cases it causes
more problems than good and aid often comes with strings attached. It is
right here where the problems lie and why proper oversight over state
policy on foreign aid is extremely necessary. For example, food aid has at
times been disastrous for Third World countries, especially on our
continent, Africa.

Dumping millions of tonnes of surplus grain and other foods on a country
lowers the agricultural prices, driving many of the country’s farmers into
bankruptcy. In turn, this then leads to more food shortages and more
appeals to foreign aid, causing a dependency on handouts.

In some cases, it also leads countries to believe that their dire situation
is beyond their control and therefore they must depend on begging for food
or money rather than being able to rebuild and revive their own economies
themselves.

Foreign aid, in other words, creates an enormous moral problem.
Unfortunately, the uncomfortable truth is also that some donors of foreign
aid are not always motivated by generous causes either.

Yet, some of the donors do believe in giving to solve a humanitarian
crisis, but to other countries it is a practice of giving aid which amounts
to buying influence in the recipient country’s government.

In some cases, the recipient country then loses some of its sovereignty,
which is not the way in which it should be done.

So, the question then is how does Parliament exercise proper oversight over
state policy on foreign aid? The IFP believes that it should be done
through our constitutional duty which states that parliamentarians from all
parties as leaders and the representatives of the country should exercise
meticulous oversight over the executive, oversight that is robust, strong
and without fear. Parliamentarians should exercise oversight that will
serve as a deterrent against the executive offering or receiving foreign
aid with hidden motives.

As the Inter-Parliamentary Union we have a duty to do so. We have a duty to
make sure that countries don’t become morally impoverished through foreign
aid. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs L MALONEY: Chairperson, hon members of Parliament, distinguished guests
- if they are still here - it is an honour for me to take part in this
crucial debate.

The topic is straightforward: What is Parliament’s oversight role on
foreign aid? Parliament as an institution is regarded as one of the
powerful state machineries in the allocation of state funds. Funds are
scarce resources which should be handled with proper care. Proper
structures and institutions are put in place in order to control the
movement of this scarce resource.

As a country, so far, we have progressed very well in making sure that the
fiscal institutions and supporting staff of our democracy are in place.
South Africa has a systematic way of collecting money through revenue
collection. This cake grows on a yearly basis, because of our political
awareness campaign led by the ANC government in embarking on making sure
that people are contributing more and more to our tax revenue.

One of the good strategies that the government has implemented was to do
away with functions that the government has no capacity to perform, which
sometimes is called privatisation. This has released government’s burden in
respect of the issues that are not so very important to it.

Revenue collection alone is not enough in addressing the social development
legacy that our country is confronted with. Government should be met
halfway in achieving this economic strategy goal.

As Members of Parliament we salute the role the private sector plays in
assisting government in achieving these economic goals. Donor funding is
one of the injection tools to sustain our social development programmes.
Foreign aid is not just a hand-out, it is about forging a lasting
relationship between countries, but the terms of reference should be sound
and clear between participating countries. It should not be a Big Brother-
type of relationship.

Parliament should play a crucial role in monitoring those institutions that
are handling that foreign aid. As much as we should welcome the kind of
willingness to assist, we should not lose sight of intended consequences in
terms of manipulation and dictatorship. Although foreign funding is
welcome, we should stay vigilant and always be aware that there is no such
thing as a free lunch.

Our sovereignty, the state principle of democracy and our legitimacy should
always be guarded. We should not enjoy the comfort of foreign aid all the
time. Although this is a good gesture, we should not find ourselves putting
our democracy on sale.

Chair, the ANC-led government ...

... akalelanga, uguqe ngamadolo. Uza kuyijonga ngeliso elibukhali le nyewe.
[... is not sleeping, but kneeling. It is going to look at this matter with
a hawk’s eye.]
No country should take our country for granted.

Ndiyabulela. [I thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The next speaker is the hon
Madikiza. My sincerest apologies for having passed you by.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, the apology is accepted.

Chairperson and hon members, the provision of foreign aid is globally a
multibillion-dollar annual occurrence that involves every nation, either as
a recipient or donor, or member of one of the multilateral organisations.
In principle the concept of foreign aid is a laudable expression of
goodwill and compassion among nation states. It reflects our basic human
compassion that we would come to the aid of our neighbours and peers when
they are struck by disaster or conflict, or when we realise that we have
wronged them and need to recompense them.

Regrettably, good intentions do not mean the suspension of realpolitik in
global relations. Foreign aid has become a political football, often
promised, but far less often actually delivered. Also, it is unfortunately
true that foreign aid can become part of a carrot-and-stick type of
diplomacy for the donor country to entice and punish other countries
according to the whims of its current bureaucracy. This is where
parliaments are best placed to analyse and monitor the disbursement of
foreign aid.

In a similar vein it is vital that parliaments in recipient countries must
carefully monitor the management and application of foreign aid that is
received. It is important to ensure that the foreign aid actually reaches
the intended beneficiaries. This can only be enhanced and ensured with
effective financial accounting policies which are consistently applied by
the oversight agencies or public accounting bodies. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP notes with interest that a recent study by
the World Bank assessing aid offers useful insights. It found that aid had
a positive relationship with growth in countries where the recipient policy
environment was supportive. It concluded that with good management aid can
reduce poverty and attract private investment.

In fact, supportive recipient policy environments apparently tend to be
equated with the economic policies of privatisation, deregulation and trade
liberalisation, amongst other things.

The study states that when donor projects fail it is often because of weak
institutions and organisations in recipient countries. It is also often the
case that aid agencies have difficulty understanding the local environment
and lack the capacity to manage the complex interventions they choose to
implement.

The need for government reform in recipient countries, however, is also a
factor, as accountability, transparency, democracy and protection of human
rights impact on the failure or success of aid interventions. Government
officials and politicians who protect their interests by excluding or
misrepresenting aid projects in terms of public budgetary processes and
fiscal statistics are problematic.

The ACDP of course supports parliamentary oversight of state policies on
foreign aid. I must say, it’s quite interesting; my experience in
committees is that it is near impossible to get relevant information from
departments during the budget process in terms of foreign aid expenditure.
Hopefully this will change. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, oversight is extremely crucial in a democracy
if we are to secure development and the inculcation of our system
effectively. However, this is progressing in every relationship South
Africa has paved beyond our borders. We have progressed greatly with global
relations with the UN and the African continent.

However these relations may be forged, growth and development should under
all circumstances be representative of South African values, principles and
dignity. However, having overcome apartheid and survived its horrific
treachery, we need to relate to the struggle of nations in similar
circumstances, and we need to expand our commitment to human rights and
dignity by assisting global peacemaking to oversee these processes in terms
of parliamentary duty, policy, legislation and oversight.

The MF calls on Parliament to bring to the table a foreign aid policy.
Zimbabwe has had a major retarding effect on our country, and though its
government may portray a very democratic electioneering system, the
sabotaged economy and horrific standard of living that people are being
forced to live under, is enough reason for concern. I thank you.

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chairperson and hon members, does the government have any
policies on foreign aid that it gets, whether it is financially, military
or humanitarian? That is the question we should be asking ourselves.

Unfortunately, hon Mars, dumping does not only create the dependency
syndrome, but it also kills initiatives of our country as far as economical
development is concerned. It will be difficult for Parliament to answer
this question because I personally have not come across such a policy, nor
have I heard of any.
Foreign aid has played a crucial role in sub-Saharan Africa for decades and
there are still countries on our continent that rely heavily on financial
aid for their survival and development. Consequently, Parliament needs to
be abreast of all foreign aid flowing into the country. It should not be
the preserve of the Cabinet only to determine foreign policy on aid.
Ideally, civil society should do so through Parliament in a democratic
state such as ours.

Such policies need to be robustly debated. Why is it important for
Parliamentarians to do a robust oversight of foreign aid policy? It is
because most aid comes in the form of donor funds with conditions attached.
This has a tendency to override local priorities and needs in favour of
donor country interests. As a result, the country’s foreign economic policy
or even foreign policy, for that matter, is determined outside its borders,
depending on who the highest bidder is.

To our advantage, as the ANC, we have vast experience on donor funding and
have had an opportunity to come up with appropriate organisational policies
as far as this issue is concerned.

We do, however, seem to have erred by being complacent regarding donors’
agenda and funding after we took over the reins of power. Parliament
exercises very little if any oversight work over donor funds. They are
usually channelled through the RDP fund, which resides with the National
Treasury.

According to the Budget Review of 2007, there will be a yearly inflow of
R1,5 billion over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period. To hon
Madikiza, it amounts to R4,6 billion over the MTEF period from now until
2010.

The International Development Co-operation unit is responsible for the
establishment of an effective and efficient policy framework and management
systems that deal with official development assistance, ODA, to South
Africa. The crux of the matter is, how much oversight does Parliament
exercise over policies attached to these funds?

The parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Finance, PCOF, had an interaction
with the Minister of Finance on 29 August to be briefed about his
international commitments. The committee touched on broad developmental and
economic issues discussed on these international forums but it did not
discuss policy on foreign aid per se.

As outlined earlier, that aid from international communities could be in
different forms. I believe that the ultimate responsibility for robust
oversight work in respect of these donor funds and the conditions attached
to them rests with the portfolio committees overseeing departments where
these funds are disbursed. Rigorous interrogation of the policy positions
attached to these aid funds should be in line with organisational policy
positions espoused in the Freedom Charter.

I think a new international framework for aid must ensure first and
foremost that it is used to encourage and supplement national resource
mobilisation and to fill the gap between national rates of savings and
rates of investments required to meet national developmental goals,
including the Millennium Developmental Goals.

There is now greater recognition of the need for aid to be increasingly
used for budget support, thus implying that it should be seen as part of a
comprehensive fiscal and financial package for the implementation of
national programmes and priorities, and as such it should be subject to
parliamentary oversight and scrutiny in the recipient countries.

Such a process will reinforce both the ownership and national programmes
and the accountability of governments to their national constituencies
rather than to foreign donors or multinational financial institutions.

However, the institutional capacity of the receiving countries has been
regained by the pressures to reduce the size and function of the state, a
prominent feature of the adjustment programmes driven by international
finance institutions, commonly known as the Bretton Woods Institutions. The
situation is exacerbated by the presence of numerous new bodies such as
nongovernmental organisations through which aid is often dispersed with
little or no oversight by the recipient government to national institutions
such as Parliament.

In conclusion, the development committee of the World Bank held on 15 April
2007, remarked that if donors’ recognition of the need for greater local
ownership of aid programme is to be taken at face value, the
depoliticisation of aid, greater policy space for the recipients of aid and
less intrusive policy conditions are all prerequisites for ensuring that
aid results in more positive outcomes. This, however, does not water down
the need for rigorous interrogation of the policies attached to donor
funding in developing countries. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:20.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

    (a)    Pension Funds Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2007 (Reprint)] – Act No
         11 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 26 August
         2007).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 27-2007].

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited
         (Eskom) for 2006-2007, including the Reports of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries Board
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 170-2007].

    (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal for
         2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 125-2007].

    (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit Regulator
         (NCR) for the ten months ended 31 March 2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for the ten
         months ended 31 March 2007.

    (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
         Institute for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
         Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
         Board for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
         Administration Commission of South Africa for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 91-2007].

    (h)    Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
         Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (i)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
         finance Apex Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007


    (j)    Report of the Strategic Industrial Projects (SIP) for April 2002
         to March 2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
     76), dated 5 September 2007:

         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2007] (National
         Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 31A - 2007].
2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
     Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16 - 2007] (National Assembly –
     sec 75), dated 4 September 2007:

         The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having
         considered the subject matter of the Human Sciences Research
         Council Bill [B 16 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred
         to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75
         Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 16A - 2007].


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
     Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill [B 17 - 2007] (National Assembly –
     sec 75), dated 4 September 2007:
         The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having
         considered the subject matter of the Astronomy Geographic Advantage
         Bill [B 17 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 17A - 2007].

