---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-09-12
---

WEDNESDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:07.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                         CHANGES IN PARTY MEMBERSHIP

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Before we proceed with today’s business, I wish to
announce the following changes in party membership that occurred today in
terms of Schedule 6A to the Constitution.

Ms M N Mdaka had, on 12 September 2007, left the United Independent Front
and joined the ANC. Ms Z A Ndlazi had, on 12 September 2007, left the
United Independent Front and joined the ANC. Mr C M Morkel had, on 12
September 2007, left the Progressive Independent Movement and joined the
ANC. Mr V C Gore had, on 12 September 2007, left the Independent Democrats
and joined the ANC. [Applause].

Order! Hon members, the first item on the Order Paper is questions
addressed to hon Ministers in the economic cluster. Hon members may press
the “to talk” button as usual on their desks if they wish to ask a
supplementary question. The first question has been asked by the hon G T
Madikiza to the hon Minister of Public Works.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

     Rent owed by Members of the Executive for their ministerial houses

308.  Mr G T Madikiza (UDM) asked the Minister of Public Works:


      (a) How many members of the Executive owe rent for their ministerial
      houses, (b) how much do they collectively owe and (c) what does her
      department intend doing to rectify this?NO2084E


The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon members. As
background to question 1, I should remind this House that as a custodian of
state assets one of our responsibilities as the Department of Public Works
is to offer accommodation to government departments, state entities,
Members of the Executive and Members of Parliament.

The residential accommodation therefore falls under the function known as
“prestige accommodation” in our budget. Hon members will recall that in
1994, when the new democratic government was set up, the Melamet
commission, which looked at conditions of service for Members of Parliament
and the Executive, made a proposal as part of the salary structure, that
members need to pay for residential accommodation if they take occupation
of such as offered by the state.

This decision was then operationalised by the Department of Public Works
through the ministerial handbook, as well as communication through the
parliamentary board with Members of Parliament. Cabinet further decided
that should an MP utilise both residences in Cape Town and in Pretoria he
or she will pay rental on one of them. At the time, hon members would
recall, the valuation of an amount to be paid by the MPs was bench-marked
to be market related, and included a formula that was developed then.

In 2002, Cabinet took a decision after recommendations by the mandate
committee that members of the Executive will pay 1% of their annual salary
divided by 12 on a monthly basis. On the other hand, Members of Parliament
and session officials are also accommodated in state accommodation in the
parliamentary villages according to the Parliamentary Acts. The
determination of their rental payment is done after consultation between
the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Public Works, following
consultation with the parliamentary board.

If I were to come to the answer directly, Madam Speaker, there is no Member
of the Executive that is still owing money and therefore question b and c
fall away. Thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Thank you, hon Minister, for such a comprehensive
response. Are you telling this hon House that the case of the axed Deputy
Minister of Health was an isolated incident, where we read that she owed up
to R26 700, which is about 72 months’ rent in arrears? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Well, I will be very kind to the hon member
because the matter does not necessarily arise, but it might be related. It
is not an isolated question. Every Member of the Executive, or even a
Member of Parliament who is owing is reminded in accordance with the
agreements that have been made with Members of the Executive through their
departments about the amount that the member has to pay or the amount that
is owed. Arrangements are therefore made on how a member would actually pay
back that amount to Public Works.
As we speak now, with regard to the Members of the Executive, there are no
arrears that have accrued. They have paid the money. Those who were in
arrears have made good their payment in accordance with the statements.
Thank you very much.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Hon Minister, does that mean that the former Deputy
Minister Madlala-Routledge was in arrears and did not pay or did you have a
special dispensation for her not to pay? Why did the department leave it
until such a late date to collect that money from her? It seems to create
the impression that some people are untouchable until they leave the
Cabinet. Can you please just tell us what happened there and why it
happened?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question was:
How many Members of the Executive owe the state? I think I have answered
that. The former Deputy Minister of Health is aware of what she owes to the
state. Her office has actually consulted us in terms of the ministerial
handbook on whether she is vacating the house belonging to the state. As we
all know, one month after Members of the Executive have been released of
their duties, they have to vacate the residences. Again, if she or he was
using a state car, we will pay attention to that, as well as the vacating
of offices. There are timelines that have to be honoured.

Obviously, where a Member of the Executive has been released from duty, we
will have to do our reconciliation to see whether or not that member owes
money or not. If she or he owes, we will communicate with the member in
question. There is no isolated incident. As I have said, Members of
Parliament who owe us to date are reminded and they will be reminded as we
always do with the statements that are sent to them.

Mr B A RADEBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Comrade Minister, the ANC-led
government passed a Constitution which guaranteed equality to all its
citizens, irrespective of whether a person is a Minister, a Member of
Parliament or a member of the public. As long as the person owes the
department any money, that money will be collected by using just
administrative procedures, which means that a person can be made to
acknowledge the debt and make an arrangement to pay that debt. Is this
principle still going to be applied to any person or entity or department
owing any money to the department in future?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Certainly, such is done. Actually, in the
case of the former Deputy Minister of Health we have had discussions and we
will indeed enter into negotiations with regard to the money that is owed,
which is accrued as a result of the rental, and which arrangements she is
going to make to be able to pay us back. We do not doubt that because we
understand that the former Deputy Minister understands clearly her
obligations, as do all other Members of Parliament. Where there is a debt
we will inform hon members of such.

However, I must say, that clearly, in terms of administration there are
also things that we ourselves must deal with in terms of our monthly
invoices which have not been done, because statements have been sent either
quarterly or even every six months. I think those are the issues that we
have to correct as a department to ensure that all members who get
accommodation from the state are reminded on a monthly basis about what
they owe and how they must pay back as well.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ACDP shares your concerns, hon
Minister, when it comes to debts owed to the state in this particular case,
and in general. Could I just enquire from you: One of the concerns relates
to the time period over which the debt was incurred. As you are aware, that
prescription takes three years from the date when the debt becomes due.
What steps have been taken to ensure that the debts are not incurred where
persons do not pay and it goes back beyond three years, which then becomes
legally unenforceable?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Clearly, in this case that has not arisen,
hon member. As I said, we will enter into a debt recovery agreement with
the hon former Deputy Minister or any other member. I want to indicate to
this House that there are many of you here who have debts with me as a
landlady. I will make sure that I send reminders to you and if you owe me
for more than two months I will also explain as such and I trust that you
will pay me. If you do not pay, we also know what happens if someone does
not honour the debt obligations. Scopa is there in Parliament. You will
also put me on the spot if I am not following up on the members who are not
paying as we all know that these are our obligations

               WELCOMING OF NAMIBIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before we proceed to the next question, I would
like to recognise our guest delegates from the Parliament of Namibia who
are in the gallery and they are led by the hon Dr Muzei Amoelo.

               Process and methods to proceed with land reform

346.  Mr P J Groenewald (FF Plus) asked the Minister for Agriculture and
      Land Affairs:

      In the light of her statement that land reform will not be suspended
      until 30% of agricultural land is in the possession of black people,
      (a) what process will her department follow and (b) what methods will
      her department use in order to proceed with land reform?
                  NO2128E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, it is
an interesting question, because he is so confused! Hon Groenewald, with
respect, through the Speaker to you, you are talking (a) about what
process, and (b) what method. In actual fact a process is just a particular
method to attain a certain objective and a method is a procedure of
attaining an objective or a result. So you are actually asking the same
question twice. If I may say, it creates the impression of being quite
erudite, but I think it’s destitute of knowledge.

The answer is obviously that many documents give explanations of the
processes that are being followed. You can consult the White Paper on Land
Policy, the Constitution itself – section 25(6) - and you can consult the
Provision of Land and Assistance Act, Act 126 of 1993 as amended in 1998.
And, as a Member of Parliament, having sworn to obey the law, you, of
course, support the Provision of Land and Assistance Act, where you will
find all the procedures and all the powers that government has in regard to
land reform. All of these will be used. They were put in place in 1994 and
dynamically adapted from time to time to address policy and legal gaps and,
of course, attended to on a continuous basis. If you see anything
addressed, like it was at the Land Summit, of course, the necessary steps
will be taken to address those.

Many techniques are available to the government. Methodologically, there
are differences between a demand-led approach and a supply-led approach.
More and more, we are following a supply-led approach. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Mev die Speaker ... [Hon Madam Speaker ...]
I can’t blame the hon Deputy Minister if he sounds a bit confused. I just
hope that his policies are not as confused as he sounds.

Maar Mev die Speaker, ek kan nie die agb Adjunkminister kwalik neem nie.
Die vraag is verkeerd op die vraelys. Die oorspronklike vraag wat die
Vryheidsfront Plus gevra het, verwys na wat gaan gebeur nadat die 30%-
grondverdeling plaasgevind het. Dit lyk my ons het bietjie ‘n probleem met
vertaling by die administrasie. Maar miskien kan die agb Adjunkminister vir
ons sê wat die proses is - ek wil nie in `n debat betrokke raak met die agb
Adjunkminister oor die proses nie - nadat die 30% bereik is.

Wat gaan u dan doen? Want die agb Minister het gesê dat grondhervorming nie
dan gaan ophou nie. Ek dink die landbousektor in Suid-Afrika is geregtig om
te weet wat gebeur ná die 30% afgehandel is en of dit nog die moeite werd
is om in Suid-Afrika te boer al dan nie. Miskien kan die agb Adjunkminister
vir ons daarop antwoord. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[But Madam Speaker, I cannot blame the hon Deputy Minister. The question is
wrong on the Question Paper. The original question submitted by the FF Plus
asked what was going to happen after the 30% land distribution has
occurred. It appears as if we have a bit of a problem with regard to
translation at administrative level.

But perhaps the hon Deputy Minister can tell us what the process is – I do
not want to get involved in a debate with the hon Deputy Minister regarding
the process – after the 30% mark has been reached.

What are you going to do then? The hon Minister said that land reform is
not going to stop then. I think the agricultural sector in South Africa is
entitled to know what is going to happen once the 30% has been distributed
and whether it would still be worthwhile to farm in South Africa or not.
Perhaps the Deputy Minister could give us an answer.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, Speaker.
Well, you are going a bit too far into the future, I would say.

U gaan bietjie ver in die toekoms in. Kyk, u moet asseblief verstaan dat
die 30% `n teiken is vir `n bepaalde tydperk. Dit kan nie die einde van die
proses wees nie. Jy kan nie sê dat, met ‘n bevolking van x teenoor y – op
die oomblik – jy op 30% gaan stop nie. Dit is net `n teiken wat ons gaan
behaal en ek dink grondhervorming is ‘n kontinue proses wat baie, baie lank
nog sal aanhou tot die regte getalle bereik is.

Sedert die vorige Minister in 1999 in die pos gekom het, word daar
ekonomies gedink, en u weet dit goed. Die samewerking wat ons met landbou-
unies het, is in die algemeen daarop gerig om ekonomies-vatbare eenhede te
kry.

Eintlik moet ek vir u sê dat daar `n ander vraag van u is wat bietjie
verder aan is – dis vraag 246 – wat eintlik basies dieselfde vraag is as
wat u nou vra. Die antwoord daarop is ook “Nee”, maar ek dink nie ons gaan
vandag daarby uitkom nie.

Die hele punt is dit: Jy kan nie in Suid-Afrika sê soveel hektaar gaan jy
per persoon uitdeel nie, want die land verskil soveel. Jy kan wel van
gemiddeldes praat en dit is hoofsaaklik vir begrotingsdoeleindes. Nee, ek
dink nie hierdie proses sal ooit by 30% kan ophou nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[You are going a bit too far into the future. You have to understand that
the 30% is a target for a specific period of time. It cannot be the end of
the process. One cannot say, with a population of x to y – at the moment –
that one is going to stop at 30%. It is merely target that we want to reach
and I think land reform is a continuous process that is going to continue
for a long, long time until we reach the correct figures.

Since the former Minister came into the position in 1999, we have started
to think in terms of economics manner and you know that very well. The co-
operation that we have with the agricultural unions in general is aimed at
getting economically viable units.
I really have to point out that there is another question posed by you
further down on the Question Paper – it is question 246 – that asks
basically the same question that you are asking now. The answer to that is
also “No”, but I do not think we will get to that today.

The point is: In South Africa one is not able to say that you are going
distribute so many hectares per person, since the country differs so much.
One is able to talk about averages and that is primarily for budgeting
purposes. No, I don’t think that this process can ever stop at 30%.]

And I’m sure that is the policy of this government, that we will have a
continuous land reform process. Also, agriculture itself must be attended
to. Our production in this country, as you well know, must increase
considerably. Thank you, Madam.

Mnr C H F GREYLING: Mev die Speaker, agb Adjunkminister, een van die
doelwitte van die Departement van Grondsake is die herverdeling, teen 2014,
van 30% landbougrond wat tans in besit is van blanke boere. Of dit nou 30%
of meer is, is die belangrike aspek dan hier nie juis die 30% of meer nie,
en nie sodanig die datum nie. Watter verdere stappe sal geneem word om
landbouhervorming en die herverdeling van grond in Suid-Afrika te
bespoedig? Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C H F GREYLING: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy Minister, one of the aims of
the Department of Land Affairs is the redistribution, by 2014, of some 30%
of agricultural land that is currently owned by white farmers. Whether it
is 30% or more is the more important issue here not the 30% or more, and
not necessarily the date? What further steps will be taken to speed up
agricultural reform and the redistribution of land in South Africa? Thank
you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, that
question was also put in Afrikaans, if I remember correctly.

Nee, inderdaad, enige landsbestuur plaas datums op enige proses. Jy moet
datums plaas, want andersins het jy nie beheer oor die prosesse nie. Maar
dit is nie te sê dat jy daardie datum presies op die dag en uur gaan bereik
nie. Die belangrike punt op die oomblik is dat ons minstens binne hierdie
periode daardie 30% kan behaal. Dit is nog eintlik `n baie klein minderheid
teenoor wat die behoefte regtig is in hierdie land. Maar dis ook `n baie
ingewikkelde en moeilike proses. Omdat enige landbouaktiwiteit op
langtermyn kapitaalbelegging berus, bou mens dit op oor tyd en jy probeer
ten minste om daardie 30% te behaal. Dit is nog glad nie die einde van die
pad nie en dit kan nie die einde van die pad wees nie. Baie dankie.

Mnr A C NEL: Speaker, hierdie vraag is na aanleiding van `n vraag wat ek
aan die Minister gevra het en toe het sy aangedui dat die demografie van
die land weerspieël moet word in grondbesit ten opsigte van ras en geslag.
Ook het sy gesê: “The needs of the most needy must be addressed.” Nou my
vraag is: Ons het nou redelike goeie voedselsekuriteit. Hoe gaan hierdie
intensies van die Minister
voedselsekuriteit in die toekoms raak, veral in die lig van die hoë
persentasie grondhervormingsprojekte wat nie slaag nie? Baie dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[No, indeed, any government places dates on any process. You have to impose
dates, otherwise you have no control over the processes. But that does not
mean that you will reach that date at the exact day and hour. The important
point at present is that we should attain this 30% at least within this
period. It is actually a very small portion when compared to the actual
need in this country. But it is also a very complicated and difficult
process. Because any agricultural activity relies on long-term capital
investment, one builds over time and one tries, at least, to reach that
30%. It is not the end of the road at all and it cannot be the end of the
road. Thank you.

Mr A C NEL: Speaker, this question is as a result of a question I posed to
the Minister and she indicated that the demographics of the country should
be reflected in land ownership with regard to race and gender. She also
said: “The needs of the most needy must be addressed.” My question is
therefore: We currently have reasonably good food security. How will these
intentions of the Minister affect food security in future, particularly in
the light of the high percentage of land reform projects that do not
succeed? Thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Speaker, food
security will have to stay in place. Except for some production problems
that we have at the moment - for example, too little wheat production on
account of climatic conditions - we are working towards all these projects
being sufficiently supported. Quite a lot of support programmes are in
existence.

My point will still be this: I think that Act 126 of 1993, as amended in
1998, should be implemented with greater intensity, because it is a support
programme and a land acquisition programme. We can do it. We can get good
production on emerging farms, as we have shown in many cases. It is really
the case. You can look at some excellent projects that have been done
together with Grain SA and together with Sugar SA in Mpumalanga in the
Sunday River Valley. These are excellent, successful projects and it can be
done. We can even attain large numbers and really bite off this 30% and
then continue after that.

I am sure that when you start asking whether this is a quota system, that
is not what this is about. In the end, the reasonable approach is to
reflect your population composition. There’s no doubt about it: That is the
policy of this governing party and that is what we are going to get and I’m
sure no one and nothing with regard to our food production will be
affected. We will manage it. Thank you, Chairperson.

            Utilisation of liquefied petroleum gas by households

315.  Mrs B Tinto (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:


      Whether liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as an alternative source of
      energy is making inroads into the household market; if not, why not;
      if so, what is the extent of its utilisation by households compared to
      other forms of energy?             NO2094E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, I thank the member for
the question. The response to the question is: At this stage we cannot say
that liquefied petroleum gas, LPG, is making inroads into the household
markets, mainly because the total annual growth, which is at 15,4% as we
speak from 9 percent in 2003, emanates mostly from the industrial sector
and not households.

The department has undertaken pilot projects on the use of liquefied
petroleum gas by households, and we are piloting the project in Tembisile
in Mpumalanga and in Atteridgeville in Gauteng, to gain valuable
information to properly promote LPG, should it be required.

What is important for us is to appreciate that central to the use of an
energy carrier is its reliable, availability, accessibility and
affordability. When it comes to LPG, given that South Africa does not have
natural gas, we still have a challenge as far as availability and
affordability of LPG goes. However, we still have to assess all of these
and the pilot project is meant to begin that process. Thank you very much.

Mrs B TINTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker ...

Enkosi Mam’ uSonjica ohloniphekileyo ngempendulo yakho ecacileyo, umbuzo
wam olandelayo uthi okokuqala, ingaba la malinge -pilot projects
ayakuphunyezwa nini na, okwesibini ingaba ixabiso le-liquid petroleum gas
okanye iLPG nalo nilijongile na nilisebe, ngoba abantu abaninzi
abahluphekileyo abafikeleli kakuhle kula maxabiso nanjengokuba ubusele
uthethile ngokufikeleleka kwamaxabiso- affordability. Leyo yenye ingxaki ye-
LPG le yala maxabiso.

MPHATHISWA WEZIMBIWA NAMANDLA: Enkosi lungu elibekekileyo, lo mcimbi
wokuphanda ngokusetyenziswa kwale LPG sijonge ukuwuxovula kwi-Summit esiza
kuba nayo apha kuSeptemba okokuqala, kodwa siza kuyiqulunqa yonke le nto
kunyaka ozayo phambi kokuba kuphele lo nyaka-mali sikuwo. Ngoko ke siza
kube sibuyela apha ePalamente size kunika ingxelo yokuba ezo zifundo
sizifundileyo zisimisa ndawoni na. Eneneni abantu abahlelelekileyo kunzima
kubo ukusebenzisa i-LPG ngenxa yexabiso layo.

Njengoko benditshilo ukuba asinayo irhasi apha eMzantsi Afrika kufuneka ke
ukuba siyithathe kwamanye amazwe. Siyithenga kwamanye amazwe, sixabane
noMnu Trevor Manuel ngoba kaloku lo nto yenza ukuba ixabiso ezincwadini
ngakuthi –balance of payments linyuke size sibe nemali eninzi
esiyisebenzisayo ngokuthenga kumazwe aphesheya izinto ezinje ngerhasi.

Lo nto ekugqibeleni iphelela ekubeni mna ndingumthengi kufuneka ukuba
ndiyihlawule loo nto. Abantu ke abahlelelekileyo abasebenzisa le rhasi
enyanisweni bathi bakujonga iparafini nerhasi bakhethe kwaparafini nangona
inobungozi ngoba yeyona nto bakwaziyo ukuyithenga ngemalana abanayo. Ngoko
ke eli xabiso le-LPG eneneni liza kuba ngomnye wemibandela esixoxa kakhulu
ngayo ukwenzela ukuba sincedisane nabantu abahlelelekileyo ukwenzela ukuba
bakwazi ukuyifumana le rhasi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs B TINTO: Thank you, hon Sonjica, for your clear answer. My next
question is, firstly, when will the pilot projects be completed? Secondly,
has the cost of liquefied petroleum gas, LPG, been considered by the
department, because many poor people cannot really afford these costs, as
you have already spoken about affordability, which is another problem with
LPG?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, hon member. Investigating
the use of LPG will be discussed in a summit that we will hold for the
first time in September, but we will extensively discuss this matter next
year, before the end of this financial year. We will come back to
Parliament to give a report on what we have learnt and where that puts us.
In reality, poor people find it difficult to use LPG because of its cost.

As I said, we do not have gas in South Africa and we have, therefore, to
get it from other countries. We buy it from other countries and we always
clash with Mr Trevor Manuel because that increases the balance of payments
because we have to use a lot of money to buy things such as gas from
overseas countries.

This in the end leaves me as a buyer having to compensate for that. In
truth, when poor people who use gas compare it with paraffin, they choose
paraffin even though it is dangerous because it is what they can afford
with the little money they have. The cost of LPG will be one of the items
we will seriously discuss in order that we can assist poor people to afford
to buy gas.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, I understand the argument concerning the
balance of payments, Madam Minister, and it is all good and well to
implement and spearhead a campaign to make LPG appliances available to the
public, but it quite honestly defeats the objects of the exercise when we
as a country run out of LPG, as happened earlier this year. What, hon
Minister, are you doing to ensure that the supply of LPG will not run out
and is available at all times, particularly in light of the fact that it
should be available to the poor? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Firstly, the study that we are
conducting will ensure that we know the demand in the market, but we are
also looking at our own capacity to supply the product. It is a challenge
that we don’t have gas, and it is still a challenge.

We are going to import it. We need to know to what extent people will use
it when we have imported it. Otherwise, it would be a futile exercise for
us to import and not get the market. I think it’s important for us to do
this feasibility study, and get our facts correct before we can move
forward in terms of distributing the LPG. It’s important as one of the
energy sources in South Africa, for us to be able to meet our security of
supply of energy.

  Resources for local economic development and progress made in this regard

322.  Mr S M Rasmeni (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:


      (1)   Whether his department has allocated enough resources to its
            agencies, like Seda, Khula and NEF, for them to execute their
            mandate for local economic development; if not, why not; if so,
            what are the relevant details;
      (2)   (a)what successful projects have been launched in the poorest
            provinces, (b) what progress has been made with regard to local
            economic development across the country and (c) what are the
            major constraints in this regard?

            NO2103E


The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, it was the Minister of
Finance who was disturbing me and I apologise for that. This is a fairly
broad question for which there isn’t a straight answer because the issues
differ from agency to agency, and very often the issues that relate to
resourcing matters are subject to ongoing review and are often issues that
are difficult to assess according to the different circumstances of each
institution.

But, in relation to the Small Enterprise Development Agency, Seda, it is
important to mention that this is an organisation that has been involved in
a twin process of amalgamation where we are bringing together various
institutions to create one agency and at the same time it was involved in
the process of rolling out new infrastructure to support small enterprise
development at national, provincial and local levels.

I think that, following largely the conclusion of that process, we have a
better sense of the new scale of resources that are required and where the
gaps are. For the record, for this year the Small Enterprise Development
Agency has had a scale of resources of R253 million. With a better sense of
where the gaps are, we have begun a conversation with the National Treasury
around further needs for the organisation.

Secondly, in relation to Khula, more recently the work that it has been
involved with has related to the expansion of its footprint, as well as the
expansion of the scale of funding for small business support. This is
something that has been done quite successfully by Khula and it is an
ongoing task. To sustain and further scale up the resources there are
issues of recapitalisation that arise in relation to Khula as the scale of
resources can only be supported by the degree of capitalisation of the
organisation. And again, in this regard, conversation has begun with the
National Treasury to begin to explore those issues around possibly further
capitalisation for the organisation.

Thirdly, the National Empowerment Fund has steadily grown in size, budget
and operations over the past three years. This growth is envisaged to be
sustained over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period. In the
implementation and delivery upon its mandate the NEF has up until now each
year nearly doubled its staff complement and the Department of Trade and
Industry has supported these additional budget requests to allow the NEF to
sustain this growth in resources and implement its operational mandate.

The NEF received transfers of R561 million from the department for 2006-07.
The allocations for the MTEF period are R710 million, R470 million and R481
million, mostly for further capitalisation, and no additional funding
requests are being made at this stage.

On the question about successful projects, there are few that we could
cite, and these include projects funded through the NEF rural and community
development programmes. One such project is a raspberry farm in the Amajuba
District in KwaZulu–Natal funded in conjunction with the Industrial
Development Corporation. The NEF funding portion for this project is R19,4
million.

A further transaction in support of local economic development is a
community-owned dairy farm in the Middlesdrift area of the Eastern Cape,
and R9 million has recently been approved for the project.

In an attempt to address the issue of local economic development, the DTI
has launched the South African Micro Finance Apex Fund and the Local
Enterprise Fund. To date, 707 business loans to marginalised groups have
been made through the Apex Fund.

The Local Enterprise Fund was funded by the United Nations Office for
Projects for three years in four of the nine provinces, namely Limpopo, the
Eastern Cape, the Northern Cape and Mpumalanga. The aim was to provide
financial and nonfinancial services to the four selected district
municipalities in these provinces utilising the capacities of the
provincial development corporations as channels for support and funding.
The pilot ... [Time expired.]

Mr S M RASMENI: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon Minister for the response.
Minister, since you mentioned that these institutions are different, the
question that arises is about co-ordination. What form of co-ordination
exists between the department and local government with regard to these
institutions so that it gives impetus to growth and development at local
government?

The second question that I want to pose is: To what extent has the protocol
meant to access the funds been made user-friendly to ordinary people at the
local level?

Lastly, given the high rate of illiteracy and unemployment amongst our
people, what administrative support does the department gives to strengthen
drafts of business plans that are focused on the second economy?  Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I think the issue of co-ordination is
an important one and it happens at various levels. At one level within the
broad DTI family we do have a co-ordination forum, which is the Council of
Trade and Industry Institutions, where as the department we meet formally
with all of the agencies that fall under the department. Within that forum
we do have a subforum of the Development Finance Institution and second
economy and small business support agencies, who would then deal with
issues that are germane to the kind of work that they are doing.

But there is a second level where co-ordination happens, and in that regard
we have started to strengthen our co-operation with the provinces through
Minmec and, more specifically, we have developed a three-year work
programme among the DTI economic affairs fraternity where there are very
specific programmes that we have prioritised. Some relate to industrial
development and some relate to small business development - that is the
other level at which this co-ordination is happening.

The more challenging issue for us, of course, is the issue of co-ordination
with local government because of its diverse nature, but we are working in
that area as well because one of the challenges that faces us today as the
Department of Trade and Industry is how we register a presence on issues of
local economic development. That is work that is in its early stages of
development but it is work that is being attended to.

I think the issue of user-friendliness, of products and services, is
something that is attended to on an ongoing basis. With Khula, for example,
they do not just facilitate finance, they also provide pre-loan and post-
loan support to small enterprises. Also, one of the products provided by
the Small Enterprise Development Agency is precisely aimed at assisting
small businesses to develop their business plans. That is the work that is
ongoing. Thanks.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Minister, up to half of all working South Africans are
employed by small businesses and they are responsible for up to 80% of
formal jobs created in recent years. Yet, in spite of government’s good
intentions, policies and programmes, small businesses struggle under the
dead weight of government bureaucracy and red tape. For example, Khula
pleads for an expanded mandate regarding loan facilities and Seda is
supposed to provide major support. Now, Seda offices are by and large
dysfunctional and not fully rolled out yet.

Last week we learnt of another debacle in your department when a forensic
investigation on Seda reported that a lot of money went on irregular
expenditure.

Mr Minister, there are too many institutions and duplications. The question
is: Why do you not institute an effective, simplified one- stop operation
for small business support coupled with swift, strict action against
miscreants? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, perhaps it is important
to say that our objective is to make sure that the contribution of small
business to growth and employment creation rises beyond the level where it
is at the moment. All our efforts are geared to ensure that we can create
the right institutional infrastructure and provide the right services, but
also create the right climate for small businesses to succeed because it is
one thing to intervene on the supply side by providing various forms of
nonfinancial and financial support, but it is quite another to create an
environment within which there is enough demand for the goods and services
that are provided by small businesses.

That is why we’ve had to also identify things that we need to do on the
demand side to make sure that there is that environment for consumption of
the goods and services that are produced or supplied by small businesses.
This is the context within which we’ve got to examine the various things
that are being done.

The identification of the need for government to set aside certain products
to be bought from small businesses is one such measure, but also the work
that we have done through the codes of good practice on black economic
empowerment creates further room for greater demand for the services of
small businesses.

Secondly, let me say that at the moment small business is growing in South
Africa at a faster rate than the Gross Domestic Product, and I think that
is a good sign, and it will always be an ongoing challenge getting the
institutional mix right and getting the services right for small business.
It is not a task that you tackle and finish. It is an ongoing
responsibility. We worked very closely with the Indian government and
institutions. They have been doing this for decades and it is an ongoing
challenge all of the time to improve and perfect the institutions and the
services that you provide to small businesses. So, we just have to keep
doing it all of the time for a very long period of time.

Democratic South Africa is only 13 years old. So, I think that we should
not despair; we should just keep up the work that we are doing and keep on
carrying out the refinements that are necessary in order to support small
businesses.

With regard to the issue around the forensic audit that has been done at
the Small Enterprise Development Agency, well, for us it is not a new
issue; we instituted that forensic audit. It may have come to light for
yourself, hon member, just recently, but the issues emanating from that
forensic audit are being handled between the department and the board of
the Small Enterprise Development Agency.

I am satisfied that we moved in terms of identifying what went wrong and
moved also to strengthen the systems of the organisation because, as I said
earlier on, this is an organisation created out of various agencies that we
amalgamated. We had to look at the issues around strengthening the systems
of those organisations. Thanks.

Prof E S CHANG: You say that the resources are different from agency to
agency. I agree with you 100%. But, do you know how many resources of those
agencies there are? Instead of asking you let me tell you something that I
believe, which is that no matter which agency we are talking about, they
must have human resources, knowledge, skills, financial and marketing
resources and, most importantly the quick response of raw material
resources.

Minister, can you tell me how you are going to address the killer of our
economy at the moment, which is the absence of a quick response to the raw
material resource? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Is this still a question that is
related to small business and the agencies? Okay. [Laughter.] I think that
the issues around raw materials, generally speaking, are issues that affect
the entire economy.

If we look, for instance, today at the levels of demand that we are
experiencing for such things as steel and cement, it is an issue that is
generally facing the economy and I think that to an extent those small
businesses would face a crunch in terms of accessing those kinds of raw
inputs. I am not sure, hon member, that I am quite clear about your
question, but I would imagine that those would also impact on your smaller
enterprises.

If we look, for instance, at the issue of steel in the country at the
moment, we’ve been quite vocal and consistent in raising the issues of
access to steel in terms of pricing. Our interest in raising this issue is
because we would like to promote downstream fabrication and manufacturing,
and access to steel becomes quite a critical issue and so it is also with a
view to those smaller scale manufacturers that we have particular concerns
around such issues as the pricing of steel.

But, I am really making an attempt to answer a question which I am not so
sure I fully understand. [Laughter.]

               Launch of Motor Industry Development Programme

331.  Dr P J Rabie (DA) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      On what date will the new Motor Industry Development Programme (MIDP)
      be launched which will take the South African motor industry past
      2012?                                                    NO2113E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, the Motor Industry
Development Programme Review Report that we received from the consultant
had, as one of its recommendations, the introduction of a new programme and
an improved programme. The development of a new programme is a long and
detailed process, especially if one considers that it took about three
years to design the current Motor Industry Development Programme.

Part of the work is to ensure that whatever programme is designed is both
simple to administer whilst robust in controls to limit the risk of abuse.
The programme also needs to be aligned to government’s goals and vision.
The new scheme also has to be flexible to the extent that it allows for
periodic reviews and amendments.

Finally, the new scheme needs to be designed so as not to be unduly costly
to the country as there are competing needs for the available limited
resources. In the next few months, work aimed at designing this new Motor
Industry Development Programme will be led by Prof Anthony Black, who has
been appointed by the Department of Trade and Industry to fast-track this
process. He will be working with an interdepartmental team of the
Department of Trade and Industry and National Treasury, including agencies
such as the International Trade Administration Commission, as well as the
SA Revenue Service. An update on the finalisation of the MIDP will be made
available within the next six months. The new programme will be launched in
due course. Thanks, hon Speaker.

Dr P J RABIE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon Minister, for
your answer. The MIDP has been very much of a success, but according to
reports in a number of financial magazines and so forth, the motor industry
in South Africa is extremely perturbed about the delay in the finalisation
of this motor programme. Is it possible to furnish the House with other
reasons why there has been such a delay because our manufacturers compete
with emerging countries like Russia, India, China and so forth and
thousands of jobs are at stake? Their request is that this programme be
speeded up so that they can negotiate contracts with their overseas
counterparts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, the critical issue here
is that when we received the report as the Department of Trade and
Industry, or upon receipt of the report by the consultant, it became quite
evident to us that there is still further work that needs to be done in
order to fully respond to the issues around coming up with a scheme that is
in line with our international obligations; coming up with a scheme that
will respond to the new objectives that we have set for the motor industry.
It is this work that we have set out to undertake and achieve over the next
period.

There is really no other reason, except the fact that we’ve had to
undertake further work that will ensure that we can respond to the critical
issues. We need a scheme that is World Trade Organisation compliant because
it is not quite comfortable as a country to always be facing a risk of
being challenged at the World Trade Organisation, as happened with the
leather aspect of the Motor Industry Development Programme. So, we’ve had
to pay very close attention to that issue of a scheme that will be
confident, that we can implement without fear of being taken to the WTO.

I think the report enabled us to immediately achieve the necessary
alignment of all the different instruments that are part of the MIDP to
achieve harmonisation between now and the end of the life of the MIDP as it
currently stands, whilst the work around a new scheme needs a little bit
more time.

Let me say that last week we had a very good meeting with all of the CEOs
of the original equipment manufacturers. It was a very good meeting that
enabled us to identify the critical issues, to talk about the timelines and
to look at the things that would enable them as the local operators to give
confidence to their capitals around the work that is being undertaken in
South Africa. We will be issuing a joint statement arising out of that
meeting. I think the atmosphere and the environment between the department
and the CEOs of the automotive companies are healthy.

Prof E S CHANG: Thank you, Minister. The IFP suggests that the MIDP be
extended to 2020 with the condition that the car industry must be
encouraged to gradually increase the use of South-African-made cars and
components to over 85% by the year 2020. It is the only way to ensure that
the motor industry is sustainable and competitive.

In 2005, the Minister of Finance, in response to arising questions, stated
that Import Rebate Credit Certificates, IRCCs, were issued to the motor
industry in 2003 to the value of more than R23 billion and more than R22
billion in 2004. Based on this, we estimate that IRCCs amounting to at
least R100 million were issued to the motor industry for the period 2000-
06.

My question to you, Minister is: Have you ever started to see during these
periods how many components in the factories were established from 2007 to
2012? I want to pose the same question to you. How many companies and
factories will be built between 2012 and 2020? How many companies is the
manufacturer going to establish?

Minister, do you agree with that?

Some motor manufacturers import the cars from their mother companies, which
are in other countries. And it is easy for them to sweep the profits back
to the countries they come from. It doesn’t benefit our country. The prices
in our country benefit other countries. Ours are the highest in the car
market at the moment. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Indeed, a large quantum of resources
has gone into supporting the motor industry through the Motor Industry
Development Programme. That is why to us it continues to be an important
issue to pay attention to, and it is important to recognise that the
support we make available to the motor industry is support in the context
of a lot of competing interests. We therefore have to continue to be
concerned around ensuring that we get the maximum benefit for the country
from the resources that we plough into any particular industry, for that
matter. We will continue to be seized with the question of ensuring that we
don’t make more resources available to any particular industry than is
necessary or sustainable.

Secondly, I think around the issues of components manufacturing, there has
been some growth in components manufacturing. Some of the automotive
companies actually export components to other facilities from South Africa,
but in terms of the industrial policy action plan that we have prioritised
amongst four sectors, including the automotive sector, one of the key
objectives that we are setting for the period up to 2020 for the automotive
industry is to deepen local content and to increase components
manufacturing in South Africa.

It becomes important as we move to expand components manufacturing to also
expand the volume of production, because in order to sustain the components
manufacturing you need increased volumes of production. That’s how you
actually ensure that you can grow your local components manufacturing. This
is one of the key objectives in terms of the industrial policy action plan.
[Time expired.]

Ms D M RAMODIBE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker and thank you, hon
Minister. The ANC welcomes the initiative. Would the hon Minister share
with the House the level of employment that will be generated by this MIDP?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you, hon member. In terms of
current employment levels, in automotive assembly we have 35 000 people
employed and in components manufacturing we have 70 000 people employed. In
the service industry of the automotive sector we have 100 000 people
employed.

While I cannot give you figures of the sorts of employment levels that we
would expect to attain, let’s say over the period for which we intend to
double the volume of production, I think from the current employment trends
it should be expected that we would be able to generate a lot more
employment across the entirety of the value chain in automotive assembly
and in components manufacturing, especially where we are growing the
manufacture of components locally, as well as in the service industry
because the size of the sector will actually be expanding.

       Progress made to stop the eviction and violation of farmworkers

324.  Mr D M Dlali (ANC) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land
      Affairs:


      What progress has been made to stop (a) the eviction of farmworkers by
      white farmers in particular since a nongovernmental organisation’s
      report on the matter on which the media reported and (b)(i) the human
      rights violations and (ii) beating of farmworkers by white farmers in
      northern KwaZulu-Natal (details furnished)?
      NO2106E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: The hon Dlali is
asking an important question. I will surprise him today. Normally there are
two pieces of legislation which inform us of what we should do with regard
to this problem of evictions. This problem is a medieval practice that
continues. Normally we have the Extension of Security of Tenure Act, ESTA,
and the Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act, with which we are trying to
handle this matter.

Actually, there are three pieces of legislation. I think that we should
start using the third one for the purpose of working against these
evictions as in accordance with the 1993 law, and that is the Provision of
Land and Assistance Act as we amended it extensively in 1998 - as I’ve
mentioned earlier today. We cannot generalise regarding the protection of
farm dwellers’ rights. As you are rightly saying, there are serious things
happening.

In problematic instances we have started using this Act, which for example,
says that the Minister may, from money appropriate by Parliament for this
purpose, acquire land for residential purposes and, further, for securing
land and tenure rights may designate certain land and expropriate it.

Now, if you start doing it in a few instances, I’m sure this practice will
stop in midair. We use the ESTA and the LTA. We are contracting firms of
attorneys; we’ve developed a land rights management facility in the
Department of Land Affairs; we are rolling out the national awareness
campaign of rights; we are facilitating social mobilisation on these
evictions and somewhere we always say, without explicating it really, that
we will aggressively acquire land, including through expropriation, to
secure long-term tenure security.

The cases that you’ve refer to are being followed up in court. It is
unfortunate that these matters are continuing, as we see a stream of
reportage on this matter. In the cases that you’ve reported the law will
take its course. It is also true that this land support Act is our law and
the government is expected to implement it. Thank you, Madam.

Mr D M DLALI: Thank you, Comrade Deputy Minister. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got
this article here which clearly states the case of a child that has not
been finalised until today. At that stage she was 14 years old. To date she
has lost her dignity as a human being particularly because of the white
commercial farmers. Today we are saying that we are free but the
farmworkers are not free.
Then I want to know from you, what are the short-term, medium-term and long-
term mechanisms to address this particular crisis? It is clear that the
white farmers are not prepared to handle the farmworkers as human beings.
These things are still happening even today, particularly in northern
KwaZulu-Natal where people are being terrorised almost every day. Thank
you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I agree completely
with you. I must say quite honestly that we don’t have a separate short-
term, medium-term and long-term plan. All that I can say is that we have to
act seriously now; we shouldn’t just play it softly anymore. There are
cases similar to the one you’ve mentioned being reported. We must now start
acting in a determined fashion as we have the powers and the co-operation
of at least two of the agricultural unions on this matter.

Those people who are not members of those agricultural unions are just out
on their own and dealing with this in their own way. They are just trying
to throw people off their land. We must then send the message and the only
way they will understand is when the land is affected and only then it will
stop. The legislation is in place so it should be the strategy. Then of
course we can come and implement our facility. Our land rights management
facility is implemented in any event and it has all these management tools
available. But you must have a place where the buck stops. I think that our
Minister has repeatedly said that this must end. Yet, it doesn’t end. If
something which must end doesn’t end, then we must act as a responsible
government and do something about it. Thank you.

Mnr A H NEL: Speaker, ek wil eerstens sê ek maak ten sterkste beswaar teen
wat mnr Dlali gesê het. Hy het gesê dat alle wit boere verantwoordelik is
daarvoor. Dit is wat hy gesê het.

Dit is absoluut nonsens. Ek dink die Minister behoort ook hierop te
reageer. Daar is enkelinge. Die regte ding om te doen, is om hulle te vang
en hulle voor die hof te bring en te straf. Om hier te kom staan en te sê:
Alle wit boere is skelm en hulle vat mense aan en hulle slaan mense, is
absoluut onwaar. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Speaker, hierdie vraag is gebaseer op die Nkuzi-verslag van twee jaar
gelede. Hierdie verslag dien so elke ses maande, dan voor die Raad van
Provinsies en dan voor die komitee van die landbou. Dit is ’n verslag wat
strek oor 21 jaar. Hier word gesê, onder meer dat 67% van die mense wat van
die plase af is, vandag in die stede sit. Hulle sê dat dit vir hulle beter
is daar. Wat die verslag nie sê nie, is dat in hierdie selfde tydperk is
ongeveer 10 ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A H NEL: Speaker, firstly I want to say that I object in the strongest
terms to what Mr Dlali has said. He said that all white farmers are to
blame. That is what he said.

It is absolute nonsense. I think that the Minister should also respond to
this generalisation. There are individuals. The right thing to do is to
arrest them, bring them before the courts and punish them. To come and
stand here and say: All white farmers are villains and they take people on
and beat people, is absolutely untrue. [Interjections.]

Speaker, this question is based on the Nkuzi report of two years ago. This
report comes up more or less every six months, sometimes before the Council
of Provinces and sometimes before the committee on agriculture. It is a
report that stretches over a period of 21 years. Here it is mentioned,
inter alia, that 67% of the people who are from farms now live in cities.
They contend that life in the city is better for them. What the report does
not mention, is that in the same period approximately 10 ...]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member. The time allocated ...

Mr A H NEL: ... is ongeveer 20 000 boere ... [ ... approximately 20 000
farmers were ...]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: ... for the follow-up question ... Will you please take
your seat! Will you please take your seat, sir? Thank you. I think if you
need to comment on that, hon Deputy Minister, you may.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Ma’am, perhaps the
member didn’t understand when I was speaking English. Let me tell him. Not
that my English is that good, but ...

... nee, my broer, luister nou mooi vandag vir my. Ons het nooit gesê ons
veralgemeen nie. Daar is baie verantwoordelike boere. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Nee, nee, nee, luister mooi wat ... Jy moes ook geluister het wat die
Minister sê. Daardie mense wat nie wil hoor nie, gaan ons nie net in die
hof kry nie, maar ons gaan hulle grond ook onteien. Al is dit net vir
daardie mense wat van plase afgesit word. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[... no, my brother, listen carefully to me today. We never said that we
are generalising. There are many responsible farmers. [Interjections.] No,
no, no, listen carefully to what ... you should also have listened to what
the Minister said. Those people who do not want to take heed, we are not
only taking them to court, but we are also going to expropriate their land.
Even though it may only be for those people who are being evicted from
farms. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, let us then move on to the next question.
What is the problem now? I can’t listen to all three of you at the same
time, okay.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, is there a chance for another follow-
up on this question, please?
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately there is. Will you please take that?
Unfortunately for the people, I am saying that there is no more time
allocated. There is time allocated.

Mr A H NEL: Did you say: “unfortunately, there is a question left”?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You did not understand me. Listen.

Mr A H NEL: What is this all about?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think you have a problem. The people were saying
that there was no other slot. I am saying to those people who are saying
that there was no other slot, unfortunately, we do have another slot. What
is your problem?

Mr A H NEL: I accept that.

Minister, laat ek aangaan oor die Nkuzi-verslag. Wat die verslag nie sê nie
... [Minister, let me continue with the Nkuzi report. What the report does
not mention ... ]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Agb lid, laat ek eers ... [Hon Member, allow me to
first ...]

Briefly I’d like to say don’t give a speech; ask the question because that
is how you lost your opportunity on the previous time. You wanted to react
to something and I can’t add any more time to the time allocated, so just
go straight to the question and the Minister will respond. Thank you.

Mnr A H NEL: Wat die verslag nie sê nie, mnr die Minister, is dat in
daardie selfde tydperk min of meer 20 000 boere ook van die grond af is.
Wat ek wil weet is, word dit in ag geneem wanneer oor uitsettings gepraat
word in die land? Dit is as gevolg van mense wat hulle grond verlaat dat
die arbeiders ook die grond moet verlaat. Dit word nooit in ag geneem nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr A H NEL: What the report does not mention, Minister, is that during
that same period about 20 000 farmers had also left the agricultural land.
What I would like to know, is whether this taken into consideration when
evictions are discussed in the country? It is as a consequence of people
leaving their agricultural land that labourers also have to leave the
agricultural land. This point is never considered.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: In short, the report
is the only real statistical report we have. It was done under the auspices
of the UN and it is an important report. Of course there are economic
reasons for which farmers leave their land and go to do something else.
But, it is quite a different question around tenure rights and the problem
of evictions. It is not the same question you are asking and we can talk
about it in more detail outside. Thank you.

   Implications of state’s custodianship of mineral resources in terms of
                                 legislation

318.  Mr S K Louw (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:


      What does the state’s custodianship of mineral resources, provided for
      by the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, Act 28 of
      2002, (a) mean in terms of the advocacy of transformation and (b) seek
      to achieve in the long term?NO2097E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Deputy Speaker, hon members, the
answer to the question is as follows: The principle of state custodianship
of the nation’s mineral resources confers on the Minister of Minerals and
Energy the authority and power to drive, direct and enforce transformation
in the minerals and mining sector.

The transformation referred to in the Mineral and Petroleum Resources
Development Act, MPRDA, is driven and directed within the context of
government constitutional obligations enunciated in the section 9 equality
clause of our Constitution and the transformation policy and agenda of this
government.

The mining charter and the social labour plans - that would include the
environmental management plan, as well as the BEE plan - are the
instruments in terms of which transformation is enforced in the minerals
and mining sector.

As a country which respects the rule of law, failure to implement
transformation vigorously would amount to the violation and the undermining
of the very foundation and fabric of this democracy, as well as the
Constitution of South Africa.

In this regard my department will continue to drive, to direct and enforce
transformation in the minerals and mining sector without fear or favour.
This government’s objective is to ensure that the South African minerals
and mining sector reflects the demographic representation of this country.

I must say that the charter has gone a long way in ensuring that there is
significant participation of previously excluded people in this sector. We
have seen a lot of black people as partners in the industry. This is also
happening at a professional level but we will ensure that the number of
black-owned and controlled mining and minerals companies is increased over
time and that the number of blacks at management levels in this sector is
also increased.

We are confident that we will achieve the transformation objectives of this
government through this Act. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr S K LOUW: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the Mineral and Petroleum
Resources Development Act is anchored on three legs, namely the social
labour plan, black economic empowerment and an environmental management
plan. Now, what are the other challenges affecting the transformation
agenda as advocated in the MPRDA?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, before I give
the challenges that we are experiencing in the course of implementing this
Act, I think we need to acknowledge that we can hail the charter as one of
the most important instruments that have facilitated the participation of
black people in the mining sector. But in terms of challenges, there are a
number of them confronting us.

Fronting is a problem whereby there is a “rent-a-black” situation.
Companies will employ black people as BEE employees or partners and in the
process they come back to own the whole project. So, that is the problem
and this amounts to dilution. Because our people do not have capital or
funds available to enable them to participate as equal partners in these
projects, they have to allow for dilution. This means, therefore, that the
parent company would come up with capital, and in the process the smaller
company would have to give away its rights to the parent company and, so to
speak, the very rights go back to the parent company. That does undermine
the transformation process.

The other challenge is the minimal participation of women in the industry.
We still have a long way to go in terms of ensuring that more women
participate in the industry.

The challenge also, as raised by the industry, is that some of the aspects
of the Act are onerous for them and then it becomes difficult for them to
comply with the requirements because they feel that some of these aspects
are onerous. These are matters that we are beginning to address. For
example, when it comes to the processing of the environmental management
plan they do encounter problems when it comes to that, because of what the
National Environmental Management Act requires of them.

So, we are beginning to address some of the areas without compromising on
what the objectives of the National Environmental Management Act are. But
we are looking at all of those. Those are the challenges that we have,
Madam Speaker. [Time expired.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, the MPRDA has set a basis for
transformation and in particular BEE, but has definitely had a negative
impact on investment, particularly international investment. The MPRDA
Amending Bill, which has not yet been passed by Parliament but by the
portfolio committee, in our view, definitely does not achieve the
objectives of the Bill as identified by the hon Minister at the Mining
Indaba earlier this year.

Now, there is a newspaper article in Business Day which basically says that
South Africa is still not reaping the full rewards of booming prices for
gold and other key commodities. Is the Minister of the view that the MPRDA
Amending Bill addresses the important long-term objectives of the Act with
regard to investment in the mining sector? We are of the view that there
are major problems in that regard, Madam Minister. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to
dispute the point made by the hon member. We need to appreciate that the
mining industry is characterised by booms and busts like any other
industry. It’s cyclical in nature. You will experience booms at some stage
and there will be busts at some stage. So, that’s the character of the
industry. But to say that it’s undermining investment, I don’t agree with
that.

This kind of Act is not unique to South Africa. Canada has a similar Act
which opens things up for the participation of its indigenous people and at
no stage has this disinvestment issue been a problem in that country. This
particular Act has been designed along the lines of the Acts that open
things up for the participation of black people in Canada. So, this is not
new to South Africa. We undertook road shows, both nationally and
internationally. We met with asset managers and got a sense of what the
investors were concerned about in as far as the Act is concerned. We never
had a sense that they were reluctant to come and invest in South Africa
because of the MPRDA. So, all this kind of hullabaloo in the media is pure
politicking. There is no evidence that shows us that the MPRDA has
undermined investment in the industry.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! We now come to Question 325, asked by the hon D
H M Gibson ... [Interjections.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Deputy Speaker, is there an opportunity for another
supplementary question?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is. But you don’t leave me to move from a
question and when I go to another question make that request.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Sorry, Madam Deputy Speaker, I did ask my colleague to
press the button and it did flash.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why didn’t you press the button yourself?

Adv H C SCHMIDT: I am sitting at the speaker phone, Madam Deputy Speaker
and as you can see it’s about half a mile from my seat. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That’s not an excuse but I wouldn’t really deny you an
opportunity for a follow-up question. Would you put it then?

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam Minister, we do not
take up cudgels at this point in time for this exercise about the
transformation in the BEE requirements. What we are saying is that if you
compare Canada with South Africa - and we don’t dispute the fact that there
might be relevant and similar legislation - look at the facts and the
figures. Canada’s profit has increased – I’m talking off the top of my
head, Madam Minister – by between 40% and 70%. Our increase has been 16%.
There is clearly a big disjuncture between the South African position and
the Canadian position where in terms of Australian law they ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the follow-up question is ...

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Why is there a disjuncture? Why is there that big
difference? Could you explain it, Madam Speaker?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, surely the hon member is
talking off the top of his head and he has given us no facts. The top of
the head will always be top of the head until you give me the correct
facts. So, really I can’t respond to top-of-the-head facts. What you could
do is put a new question, and then I can respond when you have the correct
facts.

But, I think you must appreciate that change is not easy and embracing it
has been a problem within the industry. Some of the companies in the
industry have been very reluctant to embrace the charter under the pretext
that they had a different interpretation of the various aspects of the law,
for their own convenience.

So, I say that it has not been easy for them and for everybody to embrace
the law – that is a fact – because transformation is not easy for anybody.

I also think that, although Canada has been successful in terms of
achieving the intended purpose, we will be getting there. It is still new
and it is only two years old. We only started to implement the Act in 2004.
So, teething problems will be there and we are not denying that. But, to
say that it is the MPRDA and transformation that is undermining investment
in the country is not true.

    Interventions and discussions around restoring the Zimbabwean economy

325.  Mr D H M Gibson (DA) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   Whether he or his department is involved in planning a rescue
           operation in respect of the Zimbabwean economy; if not, what is
           the position in this regard; if so, (a)(i) for what plans and
           (ii) in what circumstances will South Africa commit funds and
           resources and (b) how much will South Africa spend in the (i)
           short and (ii) medium term;


      (2)   whether any discussions have taken place with the Southern
           African Development Community, the European Union, the United
           States of America, the United Kingdom and the People’s Republic
           of China, as well as financial institutions such as the World
           Bank and the International Monetary Fund, aimed at involving
           some or all of them in efforts to revive and restore the
           Zimbabwean economy; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?NO2107E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon Gibson is obviously
not short on melodrama. His question is about whether we are involved in
planning a rescue operation, kind of “De la Rey, De la Rey, sal jy sommer
Zimbabwe ook lei?” [De la Rey, De la Rey, will you come and lead Zimbabwe
too?] That’s the kind of question the hon Gibson is asking. Nothing quite
as dramatic. There is work in progress.

The SADC Heads of State Summit met on 16-17 August 2007 and took account of
the work already done by the executive secretariat and also work on the
mediation which was requested by the political organ of SADC, and which is
led by President Mbeki and seeks to mediate between the different political
organisations, both parliamentary and nonparliamentary. The Ministers of
Finance were then asked to take responsibility for some work in the arena
of the economy. The leadership for this process would be by both the
executive secretariat and the new Chair of the SADC Ministers of Finance,
Minister Magande of Zambia. A task team has been set up, and the Ministers
will meet in early November to take stock of the situation, by which time
we should have an evaluation of the needs and demands of the situation but
more importantly also, that over which Zimbabwe will want to take decisions
in the short term.

The Deputy Speaker and hon members should be aware that just last week
there was a very significant announcement in Parliament by the finance
Minister of the devaluation of the Zim dollar that brings it much, much
closer to black market rates now. But in terms of decisions about the
currency in Zimbabwe that is quite unprecedented.

To get to the heart of your question, sir: Under what circumstances would
government lend or give money? I think that the circumstances are well
founded in section 213(2) of the Constitution. The Constitution is very
clear about the fact that money may be withdrawn from the National Revenue
Fund only in terms of an appropriation by this House. So, there is no
``under-the-table deal’’; it has to be by an appropriation and, if needs
be, by special appropriation, as we will undertake this afternoon. That
would be the route. If there are other circumstances such as a guarantee
issued by government that would have to be provided for in terms of section
218 of the Constitution.

Since these are constitutional dictates, there is no room to manoeuvre
around them – government will have to comply with the letter and spirit of
the Constitution before it can provide support to any country in any
circumstances. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Minister. I’ve a problem because you haven’t
touched the second part of the question. I would therefore allow you a few
seconds to do that.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: In respect of the second part of the question –
SADC – I have covered it, Madam Deputy Speaker. I don’t know whether the
government and the people of Zimbabwe have been involved with the other
agencies – the World Bank, China or the US. I have no knowledge of that,
but as a sovereign state we are involved in the SADC relations.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister
for that undramatic and factual response to this dramatic question. There
are of course many people in South Africa who care deeply about the plight
of our fellow Africans in Zimbabwe and this is not confined to De la Rey’s
fans. I think there are people on both sides of this House who feel the
same.

Now, the Minister has made it quite clear what the constitutional position
is. I would like to ask him whether that same constitutional position
applies to the Reserve Bank and to the parastatals. I would like to
specifically ask: Does the SA Reserve Bank give assistance or has it given
assistance, direct or indirect, to the Zimbabwean government aimed at
helping that government to meet its obligations?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I think the question on the Question Paper is
about direct governmental assistance. In respect of the Reserve Bank, Madam
Deputy Speaker, there is an arrangement. I think it was in 1965, at the
time of UDI or the Unilateral Declaration of Independence, when an
arrangement was struck between the then Rhodesian government and the SA
Reserve Bank which provided for a credit facility in the Reserve Bank which
was backed by Land Bank bills. The same facility has been rolled over and
in about 1987 it was reopened. We were advised by the Reserve Bank that the
guarantee facility isn’t even fully drawn down upon as we speak.

So, it’s a facility that central banks around the world have for those
kinds of arrangements. Central banks around the world have to have places
where they invest reserves and then negotiate these deals between central
banks. There doesn’t have to be the same kind of public accountability for
how they invest and where they invest them. The world knows, for instance,
that the People’s Bank of China has invested $1,3 trillion in the US. It’s
just the way in which the world works.

In respect of other state-owned enterprises, they are again our credit
facilities, and this would apply in the current milieu primarily to an
agency like Eskom that traditionally has sold electricity. From time to
time there would be debates about a settlement. There has never been a
refusal to settlement. There will be queries about the amounts in
particular bills.

I know that, in reply to another question from the hon Gibson, the amount
of R2,2 million that is being debated was given a lot of attention by some
journalists. But on the larger scale of things, in bilateral relations R2,2
million is a rounding error. I think that Eskom would say what the Reserve
Bank would say there has never been reluctance. The commitment of the
government and people of Zimbabwe to meet their obligation is actually
incredibly strong. We were all taken by surprise in late October 2005 when
Governor Gono of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe decided to pay the IMF an
amount of     $178 million. They take these things quite seriously because
they know that there might have to be a call tomorrow again.

Mr B A MNGUNI: Madam Deputy Speaker, could the Minister inform the House
what role macroeconomic convergence is going to play in the region and in
improving the economic situation of countries that are experiencing
difficulties, such as Zimbabwe?
The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, in the Regional Indicative
Strategic Development Plan – RISDP as SADC has named this document – there
are certain timelines set to meet certain objectives. For instance, in 2008
we would like to have across all of SADC a free-trade area. That means that
our tariff books must be aligned and we must then be able to facilitate
trade between all the countries in the region.

The second trend of issues relates to the need to have macroeconomic
convergence. We can see from evidence from around the world that countries
that have moved within the same balance of payments pack of key
macroeconomic indicators tend to be able to grow together. In the RISDP
there are convergence criteria for fiscal deficits for balance of payment
deficits or surpluses for inflation and so on. If you look at the common
monetary area, CMA, or the Southern African Customs Union, which is the CMA
plus Botswana, you will see that there is very, very high level of
convergence.

Now, part of what we need to do is to bring in countries that are
converging. Some may have to be brought in and then have their currency
pack. There would be proposals along this side even with countries that are
far out of line at the moment. But these aggravate some tough decisions
because once you’ve taken that decision the group of countries that have
taken it will need measures to ensure enforcement, like you see in the EU
after the Maastricht criteria were set down. When the criteria were there,
if a Minister of finance violated the deficit rule they had to go and
account to their colleagues. And you need similar rules and you need some
supernatural powers to be able to deal with some of these tough, tough
issues.

Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, as a follow-
up question to the second part of the question: The former Prime Minister
of Britain, before he left office, responding to a question in the House of
Commons about whether the promise to fund land acquisition in Zimbabwe had
been met, mentioned the fact that his government was still committed but
that they would rather put that money with an independent institution or
have it monitored by the UN or the World Bank and that they would avoid
involving Zanu-PF in the management of those funds. Do you know if anything
has transpired regarding that kind of promise, because as we know it is
central to this dispute?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s just go back: The
Lancaster House Agreement had the direct involvement of the Thatcher
administration representing the Conservative government. In the early
period, because there were certain agreements built into the Lancaster
House Agreement, including fixed representation for whites and a deferment
of the agrarian reform issues in Zimbabwe, there was donor aid. I am told
that in the late 1980s after the five-year period had elapsed there were
some transfers. I don’t know how significant it has been. That’s what
Whitehall would say - I think that Harare would have a different view on
the matter and these issues must still be resolved.

Inevitably, I think that some agency is going to have to assist Zimbabwe,
because all agriculture is driven by credit and you can’t have agricultural
credit without collateral. If you want collateral then you need a deeds
registry and if you need a deeds registry then you’ve got to resolve some
of the issues that have happened in the context of land reform. These are
matters that will be on the table to be resolved. The key issues depend on
that interrelationship between an economic plan that Zimbabweans will
develop and allow to be tested by peers and the speed of the political
solution that Zimbabweans find for themselves.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m indebted to the hon Minister for
the detailed answer which he gave to me, particularly concerning the
facility available to Zimbabwe and the nature of it. Could he please tell
me what is the extent of that facility that is available?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I don’t recall the figure off-hand,
but it is not more than R90 million. [Interjections.] Is it R80 million?
Pardon me, I just want to confirm. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The director-general should not participate in
the debate. [Laughter.] We may agree to send a response of the hon Minister
to the Ministry of Finance.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: But it’s far less than R100 million. I have a
sense that that balance of payments pack is between R80 million and R90
million.

 Compliance strategy for state-owned enterprises regarding the employment of
                                the disabled

311.  Mrs H I Bogopane-Zulu (ANC) asked the Minister for Public
      Enterprises:

      What (a) is his department’s strategy to ensure that state-owned
      enterprises (SOEs) comply with the provisions of the Employment Equity
      Act, Act 55 of 1998, in relation to the employment of the disabled,
      (b) monitoring measures are in place in this regard and (c) sanctions
      have been developed to strengthen compliance by the SOEs?
                       NO2090E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE (for the Minister of Public Enterprises): The
question relates to the compliance with the norms of the Employment Equity
Act by state-owned enterprises. I am advised that each of the state-owned
enterprises has a shareholder compact with the Department of Public
Enterprises. One of the performance criteria set out in there would be
compliance with the requirements of the Employment Equity Act.

I am also advised that an independent check of this is available through
the Department of Labour because the state-owned enterprises have to report
in terms of the employment equity plans on an annual basis. So, there is a
high level of compliance. The Department of Public Enterprises also secures
from the state-owned enterprises a report to it quarterly on their
performance in terms of the Employment Equity Act.

Mr C L GOLOLO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank the Minister for
his response to that question. Could the hon Minister further tell the
House what punitive measures will be imposed on those SOEs that do not
comply with this Act? What is the percentage of the physically challenged
persons currently employed by the department?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE (for the Minister of Public Enterprises): Deputy
Speaker, I don’t know what the answer to the second part of the question
is. I think it is important that we understand that the norms of the
Employment Equity Act are not optional. They must be complied with and the
compliance involves moving the power from the shareholder compacts to the
Department of Labour and that is where the enforcement happens.

I am pretty sure that all of the state-owned enterprises also have boards
that oversee this and there would be reports on the instances contained in
the annual reports of each of the state-owned enterprises. So, the targets
will vary - some of them are more dependent on high-level, scarce skills.
But all of the facts are readily available from the independent annual
reports.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Adjunkspeaker, as ’n mens in aanmerking neem, Minister
Manuel, hoe swak sekere openbare ondernemings presteer, veral Denel,
Alexcor en die Suid-Afrikaanse Lugdiens, dan weet ek nie of die situasie
van hierdie openbare ondernemings noodwendig sal verander – of daar nou
voldoen word aan die Wet op Gelyke Indiensneming of nie.

My opmerking aan u, Minister, is dat die SAL, byvoorbeeld, as ’n openbare
onderneming, nou 2 232 personeellede wil afdank en ander personeel se
voordele wil verminder. Daar is reeds kritiek in die openbaar uitgespreek
dat SAL-bestuur met sy uitvoerende hoof, mnr Ngqula, wat R5 miljoen per
jaar verdien, ’n uiters swak onderhandelingsproses volg met personeel en
dat vakbonde dreig met ’n staking soos in 2005, wat die SAL nou tot ’n val
kan bring.

My vraag aan u, Minister, is: Word wette wat op personeel van toepassing is
net gehandhaaf wanneer dit die departement pas, terwyl dit in ander
gevalle, soos nou met die afdankings om ’n openbare onderneming van
finansiële ondergang te red, geïgnoreer word? Daar sal ook gestremdes,
sekerlik, onder hierdie 2 232 afdankings wees. Dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Deputy Speaker, if one takes into account, Minister
Manuel, how poorly certain public enterprises are performing, especially
Denel, Alexcor and South African Airways, then I don’t know if the
situation of these public enterprises will necessarily change – whether
there is compliance with the Employment Equity Act or not.

My observation to you, Minister, is that SAA, for instance, as a public
enterprise, now wants to retrench 2 232 staff members, while reducing the
benefits of others. Criticism has already been expressed in public that SAA
management, with its chief executive, Mr Ngqula, who earns R5 million per
year, is following a very poor negotiation procedure with staff, and that
trade unions are threatening to go on strike, as they did in 2005, which
could now be SAA’s downfall.

My question to you, Minister, is this: Are laws relating to staff only
complied with when it suits the department, whereas in other cases, such as
now, with retrenchments in order to save a public enterprise from financial
ruin, these laws are ignored? There must surely be people with disabilities
among these 2 232 retrenchments. Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE (for the Minister of Public Enterprises): Deputy
Speaker, I am not sure if that is a follow-up question, but I will leave it
to your judgment. Let me restate, for the hon Van Dyk, the fact that the
norms of the Employment Equity Act, which is a piece of legislation from
this House, are not optional. They must be complied with. It is very
important that we don’t suggest in this House that state-owned enterprises
be spared or that we must have different norms. If we can’t meet the
criteria set out in the Employment Equity Act then I think it is important
that such enterprises should report to Parliament for their omissions. That
is how the system should work.

In respect of the restructuring by norms - and there are comparatives
available across the world - South African Airways is personnel-heavy and
you can measure these personnel per aircraft. You can look at management -
and you can look at it in any part of the structure - these are issues that
have to be dealt with.

Nowhere in the world do people raise their hands and say that they would
like to be dismissed or that they are working because they are just trying
to fill the time. People are not easily separated from their places of
employment. These are always difficult negotiations. There are going to be
two sides of the story.

I am not directly involved as a line function but I have seen that the
general manager for human resources at SAA has written pieces that have
been placed in a number of newspapers. They have taken adverts and placed
them in newspapers. When I fly, staff members talk to me about these
issues. They have concerns, but I have the sense that there is much better
communication than pessimists would have us believe.

              Strategies to keep maize affordable and available

312.  Ms J L Fubbs (ANC) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land
      Affairs:

      What strategies have been developed to ensure that maize as a staple
      food continues to remain affordable and available in sufficient
      quantities?                                              NO2091E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, Madam
Deputy Speaker, for the question as well. Every evening my daughter checks
the prices for me. Yesterday, sunflower oil was R3 400 and something per
ton. Wheat is the one that is getting out of hand at, I would say, R3 100
per ton. Interestingly, a few months ago, the maize price rose over R1 900
per ton. Yesterday evening, it was reported as R1 550. At Pick ‘n Pay you
pay R24,50 for 5kg of maize meal.

What I would ask in answering this question is that you must distinguish
between sufficient food being available and the price of the food. Until
now, I think the market has been responsible in ensuring that there is
sufficient food available in the country for all our people, but there has
been a sharp food price increase. We have the quantities of food available
even by importing, like wheat, for example. The Free State didn’t have any
harvest for about two years and it is producing more than both regions of
the Western Cape. Wheat is actually the problem at the moment.

The free market was basically responsible, as the Food Price Monitoring
Committee has indicated, for a 0,7% decrease in real food prices for the
period from June 2003 to July 2006.

What is different from 2002 when maize prices went over R2 000 a ton, is
that our social security has dramatically changed, both in the monetary
value thereof as well as in the number of beneficiaries. That is why the
Minister of Finance has previously indicated that the government was not
planning to interfere in food pricing.

If you think, for example, of bread prices, hypothetically, if you take
away something from the price of brown bread so that brown bread is more
readily available than white bread at a lower price, your retail markets
will just put up the price of brown bread until it’s almost just under the
price of white bread, and they will take what could have been VAT. That is
simply what happens if you interfere with the food prices.
But our social security plans and programmes must be checked regularly to
see whether we have to increase that, or whether we should have food price
increases. For example, as we did once before for a limited period, we
could use food parcels for target communities.

The conclusion is that the market is responsible for the availability of
maize and it has performed rather well over the last 10 years. [Time
expired.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Thank you, Deputy Speaker and thank you to the hon Deputy
Minister as well. I must say that you and I share two things: My grandson
went shopping for me and unfortunately he can’t reach properly, or as high
as your daughter. He was looking at the lower shelves, but that’s by the
by.

I do, of course, study and enjoy the agricultural magazines and so on, but
that again is something else.

When you go out ... [Interjections.] ... and the question is coming and
thank you, you are not the speaker yet! [Laughter.] What I want to ask is
this - the question is a very simple one, and the concern remains that
maize is one of our staple foods and there is definitely a trend among the
commercial farmers to recognise that shifting their maize into biofuels
will generate them greater revenue.
My concern for the people of our country, who are mostly poor and in the
low-income group in the rural areas ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We don’t have time for your concern, but we have time
for your earlier question, which the Deputy Minister did not answer and
your follow-up question was also not related to your initial question. So,
Deputy Minister will you please give us the department’s strategies to make
sure that maize remains protected.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, Madam
Deputy Speaker. That was correctly said. The strategy is basically to keep
the market responsible for the sufficiency of food, but not to interfere
with the pricing of maize. That is the strategy at the moment and then your
backup strategy is social security plans when people can’t afford the basic
foods.

But, maize is more than just maize meal. It is like gold used to be in the
old days for the economy as a whole. It is the basis of food pricing in
South Africa. Marvellous things are thus produced from maize in general,
but it gives the trend for the whole food pricing market. So you have to
watch it all the time, but interference will not - I strongly believe -
give the results that you will have. You must give the assistance for food
security in another way, otherwise, you are going to get scarcity of
production.

At the moment a lot of emerging farmers in maize farming and cattle farming
depend on maize farming, especially yellow maize. We have seen that if the
price goes too low for them, like we experienced with meat, emerging
farmers would suddenly start to sell cattle on a far larger scale than
previously, because the price of meat was going up. We must get that
balance and keep in our minds that emerging farmers must eventually, if we
reach figures of over 30%, be able to make a living, otherwise no one would
want to go into farming, and certainly not maize farming. But maize farming
is the basis in the sense that our whole meat industry is, for example,
dependent on that. At the moment I am worried about the rain in the Free
State because that’s where the majority of wheat is being produced. Thank
you.

Mnr A H NEL: Dankie, Voorsitter. Adjunkminister, ek stem basies saam met
wat u sê oor inmenging in die hele ketting, maar daar ís sekere strategieë
wat gevolg kan word. As ’n mens kyk na wat die WHO-ooreenkomste is wat ons
het en wat oor die wêreld geld, kan ons ’n bietjie hoër tariewe hef. Die
graanboere het verlede jaar vir daardie hoër tariewe gevra, maar ongelukkig
het die landboudepartement hulle nie gesteun nie, en dit is my vraag: Moet
ons nie daardie roete volg nie, want dan sal die boere meer produseer omdat
hulle sekerder is van ’n sekere prys? Moet die landboudepartement nie
voortgaan en praat met hulle kollegas in Handel en Nywerheid sodat daardie
tariewe ’n bietjie nader kan kom aan waarvoor die graanboere vra nie? Baie
dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr A H NEL: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy Minister, I basically agree
with what you are saying about interference in the whole chain, but there
are certain strategies that can be followed. If one looks at what the WTO
agreements are that we have and that are valid all over the world, we can
impose somewhat higher tariffs. The wheat farmers requested those higher
tariffs last year, but unfortunately the Department of Agriculture did not
support them, and this is my question: Is that not the route that we should
take, because then the farmers will produce more, since they are more
assured of a certain price? Should the Department of Agriculture not go
ahead and talk to their colleagues in Trade and Industry, so that these
tariffs can be brought closer to what the wheat farmers are asking for?
Thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: No, the DTI recently
investigated the pricing with regard to maize and there was also an
investigation into wheat, which only had a low tariff, but in maize the
tariff model was investigated. It was, in the end, found that it is
functioning well at the moment and ensures that when domestic prices are
high there is no tariff on maize imports. It is only when domestic prices
are going the other way that your tariff kicks in. I think that is working
well; in wheat we want more engagement from the side of agriculture in the
tariff process, and we are sure we are getting there. Thank you.

                   Financial misconduct at national level

329.  Mr A H Nel (DA) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


      With reference to the Report of the Public Service Commission on
      Financial Misconduct for 2005-06 which reveals that the Department of
      Land Affairs were responsible for R20 million of the R30,6 million
      financial misconduct at national level, (a) how did this financial
      misconduct occur, (b) who was responsible for this misconduct and (c)
      why has none of this amount been recovered to date?
                       NO2111E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, this
question is about the Public Service Commission and financial misconduct.
There was a parliamentary question in this regard. Now, the allegations
were made of inflated prices of land purchase for restitution purposes in
Mpumalanga when there was awareness on the part of the restitution
commission and the Ministry of these allegations.

There were two investigations ordered by the Department of Agriculture and
Land Affairs; one by forensic auditors and one by a private evaluator. The
forensic auditors actually did not indicate particular potential losses.
That is not where the amount of R20 million comes from.

The private evaluator expressed an opinion in respect of prices paid, to
the extent that they were inflated by about R20 million more than the
market value of the relevant properties. Payment was stopped for those
projects which were still in progress and the actual loss therefore was not
R20 million - that just comes from that evaluator’s report.

Misconduct charges were brought against the official and there was severe
pressure to charge the responsible commissioner. He went to the Labour
Court to force the department to charge him and to reinstate him, and
eventually an order was made to charge him before a certain date. He was
then formally charged. By that time, the auditor’s report was out, but the
private evaluator only issued the preliminary report of another evaluator.

An amount of R20 million was not mentioned in the charge sheet. He was
charged with 13 charges and alternatives to each. He was found guilty on
three main charges or alternatives and given a chance by the then Minister,
on the recommendation of the chairperson, to resign or be dismissed. He
subsequently resigned.

The department sought the advice of the state attorney and senior counsel
on the matter of possible recovery of the money. The advice indicated that
the department not be successful with any such claim unless the police
investigation uncovered evidence of fraud or corruption relating to the R20
million. To date the police investigation has failed to uncover any such
evidence. If new evidence comes to light, the department will obviously
seek new advice and reconsider its position. I thank you.

Mnr A H NEL: Voorsitter, dit is ’n baie ingewikkelde verduideliking, maar
baie dankie. Ek is nou so ’n bietjie meer op hoogte. Met ander woorde, die
departement het die ding opgegee vir die Staatsdienskommissie, terwyl hulle
nog net van die eerste gedeelte bewus was. Daarom het hulle nou die R20
miljoen aangedui en dit terwyl daar niks is nie. Gaan die departement
probeer om die geld terug te kry? Dankie.

[Mr A H NEL: Chairperson, that is a very complicated explanation, but thank
you anyway. I am a bit more informed now. In other words, the department
gave it to the Public Service Commission, whilst they were only aware of
the first part thereof. They have thus indicated R20 million and that while
there is nothing of the sort. Will the department try to get the money
returned to them? Thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Yes, as I’ve said,
that depends on the police investigation.
Dit hang af van die polisie-ondersoeke. As daar bewyse van bedrog of
korrupsie gekry word, sal daar voortgegaan word met die klagtes, maar ons
moet op advies van die Staatsprokureur en senior advokaat optree in hierdie
verband. ‘n Mens moet maar luister na die regsadvies wat jy kry. Hul advies
was dat ons nie suksesvol gaan wees nie, tensy die polisie vir ons
getuienis kan bring oor korrupsie en bedrog. Die R20 miljoen was net ’n
bedrag wat ’n privaat waardeerder genoem het. Dit is nie ’n ... al die
transaksies in daardie verband is toe al gestop. So, jy kan nie sê dit is
R20 miljoen wat verlore is nie. Dit is juis die probleem. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It depends on the police investigations. If proof of fraud or corruption
are uncovered, the charges will be proceeded with, but we must act on the
advice of the state attorney and senior advocate in this regard. One should
listen to the legal advice that one gets. Their advice was that we will not
be successful unless the police bring us proof of corruption and fraud. The
R20 million was just an amount that was mentioned by a private evaluator.
It is not a ... all the transactions in this regard had been stopped by
then. So you cannot say that it is R20 million that is lost. This is
precisely the problem. Thank you.]

Ms C NKUNA: Inkomu eka wena Mutshaviseki Mutshami wa xitulu. [Thank you,
hon Chairperson.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, let’s get the
hearing device working. Are you connected, hon member? You may proceed, hon
member.

Ms C NKUNA: Hon Deputy Minister, having listened attentively to your
response, I would like to commend the Ministry and the department for the
steps taken in this regard in ensuring that clean and good governance is
upheld. Hon Deputy Minister, what mechanisms have in place or do you intend
to put in place to ensure that such incidences do not reoccur?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you Madam,
through you, Chairperson, for the compliments to the department. The
Ministry is very strict about this matter and different forensic audits are
being conducted. In the end, you have the forensic audits; you have
controls through your Chief Commissioner of Land Claims and the restitution
commission and you have training and supervisory schemes in the offices of
the Restitution Commission, as well as Land Affairs and everywhere else, of
course.

The problem is to keep the pressure up that under no circumstances will
anything be tolerated which smells of corruption. Now, with regard to these
evaluations, we have decisions of the Land Claims Court as well as the
Constitutional Court which say that it’s an extremely relative matter and
that you will have one evaluator saying it is six million while another
evaluator will come and say it is 10 million. That is why the market value
is such an uncertain factor to base land reform and restitution on.

In fact, if you closely read the Constitution, especially section 25 (4),
you will see that market value actually is not the guide for land reform
and restitution and we will certainly keep it under close control and as
this has been proven we will certainly follow up any possible allegations
of fraud or corruption. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): That concludes the time allocated
for questions. Before I proceed to the next Order, I want to recognise the
Minister of Finance who is going to provide further clarity on question
number 325.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson, for your
indulgence. In responding to one of the supplementary questions asked by
the hon Gibson in respect of Question 325, I said I thought that the
facility the Zimbabwean government has with the Reserve Bank is around R90
million. I would just like to confirm for the record that the figure is R75
million, that it has been there since 1 March 1990 at that level and that
it is drawn down to the value of R73,2 million as at 31 July 2007. Thank
you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                   SPECIAL ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Before I recognise the Minister,
hon members, I just want to point out that copies of the Portfolio
Committee on Finance’s report on the Bill have been put on all members’
desks.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, today we take the
unusual step of tabling a Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill.

Although we have occasionally had to table second adjustments budgets in
previous years, this is the first time that an appropriation has been
required before the usual adjustments budget which is scheduled to be
tabled in this House on 30 October.

We tabled a Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill owing to the fact that
in this case we unfortunately do not have the option of waiting for the
normal adjustments budget. Both the government in general and I as Minister
of Finance have been hesitant to introduce more than one adjustments budget
a year.

Where we have done this, it was either due to an emergency or a clearly and
unambiguously unavoidable situation. While the items that we request
additional resources for today cannot be considered a natural or economic
emergency, we table this Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill after
exploring all options to meet the cash flow requirements in this instance.
Not providing this financial support may in some cases cost government more
than the amounts requested.

The first of these cases relates to stadiums. We want to ensure the speedy
completion of our 2010 Fifa World Cup stadium projects. In the Budget in
February this year we announced an amount of R8,4 billion over four years
for the 10 stadium upgrade and construction projects.

Today we are pleased to announce that in certain cases construction is
proceeding faster than anticipated. For this reason we are requesting that
R1,9 billion be brought forward from next year’s allocation to the present
year.

In addition to faster progress on the projects the additional funds will be
used to prefund the procurement of roofing structures, which in some cases
involves importing expensive fabricated steel products. Early payment
reduces the risks of cost escalation and currency risk. Particularly the
Soccer City Stadium project in Johannesburg and the Moses Mabhida Stadium
in eTthekwini entail complex roofing structures.

Since we announced the R8,4 billion ceiling on the stadium projects, we’ve
had a number of requests for additional resources. We’ve been firm in our
resolve not to provide additional resources for these projects and we
commend those city municipalities for ensuring that we do not exceed the
financial limits on all of these projects.

A review of all 10 stadium projects shows that we’re on track to meet the
deadline set by Fifa. This is again testimony to South Africa’s ability to
organise and manage large international projects to the highest standards.
We wish each of the host cities and local organising committees well in
their endeavours to host a memorable tournament.

Hon members, in 2004 government signalled a strategic shift in its approach
towards state-owned enterprises and our development finance institutions.
We signalled a stronger role for these enterprises and institutions in
driving our developmental agenda.

When we took this decision we were mindful of the fact that in some cases
our enterprises were not well managed in the past and not well capitalised,
and that governance and oversight were sometimes lacking.

In implementing this strategy we’ve had to work tirelessly in increasing
this strategic focus on improving management. Our approach attempted to
steer away from the sterile ideological debates about whether the public
sector or the private sector was better able to deliver the services to
businesses and households.
Instead, we’ve adopted a pragmatic approach that recognised that there were
areas where government had to exit from providing the service, but there
were also areas where we felt that the public sector could play a positive
role in driving investment.

In the Budget in February we announced a number of developments in state-
owned enterprises and development finance institutions in which we’re
working to assess business plans and increase the strategic focus. In
particular, we informed Parliament that we were reviewing the business
plans and activities of the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor project, Sentech,
the Land Bank and Broadband Infraco.

In respect of Sentech we are pleased to announce today that an agreement
has been reached on the business plan of Sentech. Government has approved
Sentech’s role in developing a national wireless network that can be used
by a number of enterprises, including private companies, to enhance
wireless Internet connectivity both to businesses and households. For this
purpose government is providing R500 million as an initial capital
investment in the infrastructure of Sentech.

The Land Bank is a key development finance institution, providing access to
credit in the agricultural sector. Clearly it’s a very topical issue; hence
so much time was consumed this afternoon in debating matters relating to
land and agriculture.
The bank has played a pivotal role for almost a century in the development
of commercial agriculture in South Africa. If we are to expand our
agricultural industry and, in particular, if we are going to succeed in
bringing black farmers into the agricultural supply chain, the Land Bank is
going to have to continue to be a key player in this sector.

There have been difficulties, but we must also report progress. Given the
progress that we have made, and noting the low level of capital on the
balance sheet, it’s prudent for government to recommend an injection of
R700 million in cash and the provision of R1,5 billion by way of a
government guarantee to ensure the sustainable operations of the bank.

I will give this House the assurance that I will continue to work with my
colleague, the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, but also with the
board of the bank to ensure that we can have the desired outcomes.

In respect of the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor, members of this House will be
aware that considerable progress has been made in recent years in the
design of an entirely new-generation nuclear power plant, know as a PBMR.
The construction of the demonstration plant has now begun, for which
government has made a financial commitment of R6 billion over three years.

This is a commitment that was made in the Budget Speech in February this
year. At the time of the Budget, the amount required this year and the
details of the business plans had not been finalised. At this stage
external funding for the project is not available and an amount of
R1,8 billion is therefore required for the period April to December this
year.

This amount will allow for the project to fund the ongoing recurrent
expenses as well as provide for contractual obligations related to the
design components of the demonstration plant.

In respect of Alexcor, I think we all are aware of the government’s efforts
to exit from diamond mining, but there was a need to resolve the protracted
land claim with the Richtersveld community. A deed of settlement was signed
on 22 April this year. The settlement constitutes the conclusion of a
lengthy court case in which billions of rands were claimed.

There’s now a joint venture with the Richtersveld Mining Company, which
will become the owner of converted land mining rights that currently belong
to Alexcor. Funding of R44,7 million is required for the operational costs
and working capital of the mine.

The final item in this special appropriation relates to an indemnity claim
in favour of Denel’s aerostructure subsidiary. The claim is currently being
verified by auditors appointed by the DPE and an amount of R222 million is
required as provision against this contingent liability.

In conclusion, in each of these cases it’s not possible to wait until the
normal adjustments at the end of October. It’s not the intention of
government to request approval for the appropriation of resources more
often than is absolutely necessary. If we could have avoided the need for a
special adjustments budget today, we certainly would have done so.

Turning our state-owned enterprises and development finance institutions
around so that they can become effective tools in the hands of a
developmental state requires huge efforts on all fronts.

I confess that in some cases we’ve been disappointed with our efforts to
focus the activities in a manner that ensures financial stability. We have
much more work to do to improve the quality of management and the strategic
direction of these enterprises. However, as a shareholder, it is also our
obligation to ensure that these entities do not engage in risky financial
arrangements that would inevitably cost consumers more in the long term.

It is our obligation to provide funding, after due diligence has been
completed, where these funds are required to increase investment or to
lower the cost of doing business in South Africa. In total an additional
appropriation of R5,195 billion is required for the Departments of
Agriculture and Land Affairs, Communications, Sport and Recreation and
Public Enterprises.

The anticipated revised total expenditure, and how it is to be financed,
will be dealt with as usual in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement to
be tabled here on 30 October this year. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr K A MOLOTO: Chairperson, hon members, allow me to focus on the Special
Adjustments Appropriation Bill of three entities reporting to the
Department of Public Enterprises and briefly speak on the Land Bank. The
hon Mbili will be dealing with the special appropriations for the
Department of Sport and Recreation and the Department of Communications.

State-owned enterprises play a critical role in the realisation of our
developmental objectives. They make a critical intervention in key sectors
of our economy. Therefore, it is important that state-owned enterprises
should operate efficiently and rely less on a constant cash injection from
the fiscus.

It is understandable for government to inject cash in state-owned
enterprises during their initial start-up phase. After the initial
capitalisation, it is assumed that they have to rely on the strength of
their balance sheet to borrow from capital markets. Obviously, we do not
want to burden the state-owned enterprises with so much debt to the extent
that they would have to increase their tariffs sharply to compensate for
much-needed capital expenditure and investment.

The sale of noncore businesses and assets is critical to the strengthening
of their balance sheet. It is also understandable for government to
recapitalise state-owned enterprises under special circumstances,
especially when undertaking a major turnaround strategy.

I must also caution that for such a strategy to succeed, Parliament has to
exercise proper oversight on the activities of the state-owned enterprises
and their turnaround strategies. Failure to do so will lead to state-owned
enterprises constantly depending on the fiscus for capital injections.

The core business for Alexcor is the mining and marketing of diamonds
sourced from the land and sea. The 2007 annual report of Alexkor indicates
that by the end of October 2006 the company was facing increasing operating
losses, resulting in a depletion of the cash reserve to the extent that
government had to provide the amount of R32,9 million to enable Alexkor to
continue operations.
The annual report indicates that Alexcor’s solvency position remains
critical given the limited operating cash reserves. The report indicates
that Alexkor will continue to operate at a loss until the recapitalisation
programme of the joint venture with the Richtersveld community is agreed
upon and implemented.
The R44,7 million allocated to Alexcor in this special adjustment is meant
to cover the operational expenses until the end of March 2007. It is
estimated that by March 2007 an agreement would have been reached with the
Richtersveld community on the recapitalisation of the joint venture
agreement. We hope that the turnaround strategy considered by Alexcor on
the transfer of noncore activities from the mining operations to the
relevant structures will be successful.

Regarding the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor, government expects nuclear power
to make a significant contribution as a primary source of electricity.
Government has made a commitment to finance 51% of the capital requirements
of the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor.

The development and commercialisation of the PBMR will unfold in four
phases: Phase 1 would involve the design and construction of the
demonstration power plant at Koeberg and the pilot fuel plant at
Phelindaba. Phase 2 would involve the commercial phase, which entails the
supply of power to Eskom. Phase 3 would involve the export of electric
nuclear power plants to the rest of the world, and phase 4 would involve
the development and supply of Pebble-Bed Modular Reactors for process heat
applications.

The R1,8 billion allocated to the PBMR is an interim arrangement to finance
the operational expenses and meet contractual obligations until the end of
December 2007.

The 2007-08 corporate plan of the Land Bank indicates that in the past
years the Land Bank’s net capital and reserves have been reduced
substantially due to large bad debt write-offs and provisions for bad debts
in line with new accounting standards.

This led to a reduction of the Land Bank’s capital adequacy ratio to below
10%. In fact, the current bank capital adequacy stands at 7%. This has
major implications as it impacts negatively on the bank’s ability for
growth and funding development. This makes private sector investors nervous
as they assume a greater risk for each of the bank’s loans.

National Treasury gave the bank a R1,5 billion letter of support to reduce
the concerns of the financial markets. The R700 million allocated to the
Land Bank in this special adjustment is meant to address the capital
adequacy ratio and liquidity shortfall.

The R222 million for Denel is required to pay for a claim against the
government guarantee granted to Denel. Denel is making major progress in
the implementation of the turnaround strategy it has adopted. There are
significant contracts that have been secured in the domestic markets. We
hope that it will break even in the coming few years.

Lastly, let me thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee, Mr
Nhlanhla Nene, and also the members of the portfolio committee for
insisting that heads of these state-owned enterprises and entities should
give a full explanation of why they need the money. Indeed, it was a very
robust engagement. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON:  Chairperson, we know from the Bible that the Lord loves a
cheerful giver.  I regret to tell the Minister that today I am a little
reluctant as a giver.

Members of the Portfolio Committee on Finance at the hearings on the Bill
showed their teeth. The message was conveyed loudly and clearly to the
National Treasury and the other departments concerned that a special
adjustments appropriation is very special indeed and should not be resorted
to lightly.

There was a feeling in the committee that some of the items in this Bill
should have been foreseen and might therefore have been included in the
main Budget, while the ordinary adjustments appropriation, to follow next
month, could have been used for some of the other amounts. I am relieved to
have the hon Minister’s assurances today in this regard and I am sure that
has impressed all the departments concerned.

I must say that my colleague, the hon Ms Smuts, says that the amount for
Sentech could and should have been foreseen and is because the Minister and
the Deputy Minister are not properly in control of their department. They
don’t know what is happening there. [Laughter.]

Let us deal with a few of the items. One of them is the Pebble Bed Modular
Reactor. This is experimental and requires continued financing.  It was a
political decision to continue with this project and we have now spent R4,2
billion since 1999. There is a worldwide swing towards nuclear energy.  If
the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor is a success it could have huge implications
for South Africa.  My party supports it because we are green and we
therefore support clean energy.  We will keep a beady eye on the PBMR to
help ensure that taxpayers receive value for money.

Let us talk about Alexcor. This must be the only diamond mine in the world
that makes a loss. I have a concern about whether there is a reasonable
prospect of returning it to profitability.  We are now entering into an
arrangement in which the people of the area are going to have a share in
this. I hope they are going to have a share in something that is worthwhile
and not in something that makes a loss. The taxpayers have invested
hundreds of millions of rand in this and we haven’t received any recent
dividend.

As far as Denel is concerned, we have some doubts about the amount there
but I intend pursuing this at a later stage when I have got more time.

Let us have a look at the Land Bank. They are receiving a big dollop of
money. It is a fact that many farmers in South Africa are dependent on the
Land Bank continuing and it would be a disaster for agriculture if the Land
Bank were to go insolvent. But, surely, it is more than time that there was
a proper turnaround strategy agreed upon, put into operation and more than
that that the turnaround actually happened. A financial institution such as
this should not operate at a loss.

I would like to deal briefly with the 2010 Soccer World Cup. We are
prepared to support these payments to local authorities for the erection of
football stadiums. It did concern me greatly to hear from National Treasury
that inadequate planning has been done for the use and management of the
stadiums after the World Cup. I want to suggest to the hon Minister that we
need some rigorous cross-questioning of local authorities that fail to have
viable plans in place when the taxpayer is providing hundreds of millions
of rand to help them to construct stadiums. We must avoid having white
elephants after our successful 2010 experience.

The hon Minister may be relieved to know that despite the few misgivings I
have expressed the DA will vote for the Special Adjustments Appropriation
Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson and hon members, I thought it was the preserve of
the IFP was to speak about elephants. I was also going to talk about white
elephants and hon Gibson has already said something about them. Maybe that
is where I should start, hon Minister.

The IFP support this Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill, but we note it
is an unusual step and it is only the second time in the history of this
Parliament that there has been a special adjustment - we are informed that
the last time was when there had been a disaster of some sort in the
country.

However, I don’t think it was possible for us in the committee to suggest
any amendments or to amend this Bill, even if we were satisfied that some
of the departments should not have gone this route of a special adjustment,
because if I look at the Constitution, section 77(3) says that an Act of
Parliament must provide for procedures to amend money Bills before
Parliament. I am sure the hon Minister of Finance may introduce such a Bill
in due course in this House.

As far as the funding for 2010 stadiums is concerned, we are pleased that
they are ahead of schedule, but I want to re-emphasise the point made by
hon Gibson that the hon Minister, as he has assured us, would work with the
Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs in terms of the R700 million.
Here as well we need the hon Minister to give us an assurance that business
plans submitted by host cities include sustained economic viability of the
stadiums post 2010.
We also would like the hon Minister to note that we were informed by Land
Bank officials that the R700 million would be used for development
programmes and would be ring-fenced as such. I think it is important that
that money be used for that.

With regard to the PBMR, we would just like to know whether the foreign
exchange rate was factored into fluctuations because a lot of the services
that are being acquired are denominated in foreign currencies.

We support the Bill and we trust that the relevant portfolio committees
will continue to interrogate these amounts that have been granted to each
of the departments. Also, with regard to the PBMR, hon Minister, we have
been informed that since 1999 R4,2 billion has been spent and in total R21
billion has been spent. So, that is why it is important for the exchange
rate fluctuations to be taken into account. [Time expired.] We support the
Bill.

Mr J BICI: Chairperson, the UDM has no problem with the appropriation of
additional funding for the requirements of Sport and Recreation South
Africa. The funds are intended for use by host cities of the 2010 World Cup
under the 2010 Fifa World Cup Stadiums Development Grant provided for in
the Division of Revenue Act.

We do, however, have a problem with the appropriation of additional funding
for the requirements of the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs for
buying land and the Department of Public Enterprises for Denel. These two
state-owned enterprises, that is, the Land Bank and Denel, show weaknesses
in their administrations, but to oppose the appropriation of funding to
them would be to shut them down. Shutting them down would not be in the
interests of South Africa as a result of the roles, aims and objectives of
these institutions. It is imperative that the funding of R5,2 billion be
granted.

Emanating from the aforesaid, the UDM supports the Bill. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, as far as the additional R700 million to the
Land Bank is concerned, committee members expressed grave concern at the
performance of the Land Bank, in particular the rapid turnover of senior
staff and alleged disappearance of assets, and have queried the
sustainability of the bank’s continued operation. We trust, however, that
the new business model will enable the Land Bank to be able to fulfil its
mandate.

As far as the PBMR is concerned, we undeniably need additional electrical
power sources and therefore we should support the research and development
of this project. Parliament needs, however, to closely monitor the massive
cost implications of this project where an additional R1,8 billion is now
allocated.

The ACDP also shares the concerns around budgets for stadium construction,
namely that they may be exceeded or that there may be cash flow problems.
Clearly, in view of the narrow timeframes agreed on for the completion of
these stadiums, they should not and cannot be constrained by cash flow
shortages; therefore, we support the additional amount of R1,9 billion
which will allay such concerns.

The ACDP will accordingly support the Special Adjustments Appropriation
Bill.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, there is always need for
flexibility to accommodate contingencies and unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure. The Bill seeks to do just that. We in the UCDP would like to
emphasise, though, that in so far as the allocation for agriculture is
concerned, special oversight should be exercised over the Land Bank and the
money used subject to such conditions as the Minister of Finance may
determine.

This we say in the light of the fact that experience has shown that the
Land Bank is wont to extend loans even for matters not really core
agricultural business. We are also aware that millions have been loaned to
people whose creditworthiness is suspect. Some of them have become regular
visitors to courts in this country.

We fully support the extension of funding to host cities of the 2010 Fifa
World Cup. The commitment by government to stage the best ever World Cup
revolves around the availability of resources which this Bill is asking
for.

Regarding the Department of Communications and state-owned enterprises, the
UCDP supports all efforts to modernise equipment and make the country ready
for international competitiveness.

The UCDP supports the Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: The MF accepts and acknowledges the need for adjustment made
in the budget allocated to Sport and Recreation South Africa, Public
Enterprises, Communications and Agriculture. However, an explanation for
this needed adjustment would be advisable in terms of adjudicating reasons
for the requirement and maintaining our system of checks and balances.

We appreciate that by this time of the year departments’ allocations are
already being utilised well and to fulfil their year’s endeavours. I use
this platform to enquire in terms of co-operative banks as to whether tax
relief is being considered and what the reasons may be for either
exercising this relief or instituting a payable tax.

We also call for faster pension reform to a more liveable rate and hope the
hon Minister of Finance will bring our pensioners greatest relief in 2008.

The MF supports the Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill. I thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr M E MBILI: Chair, the purpose of this Bill is to provide for both the
additional and interim funding requirements with regard to the departments
in question. The Minister of Finance, in terms of section 30 of the PFMA,
may table this adjustment budget in the National Assembly as and when it is
necessary. This adjustment, therefore, has been awarded special status
because the allocation cannot be delayed until October 2007.

The affected state-owned enterprises are confronted with unprecedented
financial pressures and, as a consequence, an early adjustment is required.
The amount of R1,9 billion requested with regard to the 2010 Fifa World Cup
stadium development conditional grant is provided for in the Division of
Revenue Act of 2007. This is not a new allocation; rather, as mentioned, it
seeks to fast-track the funding requirement flow for the upfront
procurement of input materials for stadiums such as roofs, structural steel
and site development, in order to minimise the cost owing to inflation and
exchange rate volatility.

Tight deadlines have been set for the completion of stadiums. Therefore, it
was necessary to bring forward R1,9 billion from the 2008-09 budget to
ensure that construction was not constrained by cash flow shortages.
Members, all this means, therefore, is that construction for the 2010
stadiums by host cities is well ahead of schedule.

In addition, stadiums such as Ellis Park, the Royal Bafokeng Stadium and
Loftus Versveld, should be renovated and ready for the Confederation Cup in
September 2009. The early allocation, therefore, for the construction of
soccer stadiums in terms of this Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill
will ensure that affordable facilities are constructed in accordance with
Fifa standards.

South Africa is convinced more than ever before that it will host a world-
class Fifa World Cup in 2010 here in South Africa for all the people of
this continent. There is no turning back, for we believe that the stakes
are too high and our people cannot be disappointed, at least not by the ANC
government as a trusted servant of the people.

Now, let me turn to the R700 million allocation agreed to by Cabinet to
recapitalise the Land Bank, subject to conditions in respect of its
executive mandate and provision of a turnaround strategy. Members are aware
that agriculture is the backbone of this country in terms of making sure
that it addresses poverty alleviation, hunger and, most importantly, food
security for our nation.

It is also important to address the thorny issue of access to land for the
majority of our people. In this regard, we have been assured by the
management of the Land Bank that all of the R700 million requested will go
towards development, amongst other things, to address this issue. It is
also important to immediately address the issue of the deteriorating
position of the bank, which has resulted from the writing off of large sums
of money owing to nonperforming loans.

It is worth noting, however, that of the R15 billion written off over the
past six to seven years, 95% of that was for white commercial farmers. We
do understand that the farming business is very complicated and has many
challenges. Some of these are beyond the control of the bank and the
farming communities themselves – issues like droughts and floods. We
therefore felt that this was a reasonable request in the short to medium
term to address the challenges mentioned above.

On the issue of Sentech, the committee was unanimous about the allocation
of R500 million to position Sentech as the wireless broadband wholesale
provider and infrastructure developer. We are of the view that this is a
highly competitive environment and requires highly skilled personnel.
Therefore this allocation, we believe, will go a long way towards helping
Sentech to retain and attract new skills.

On many occasions government entities or state-owned enterprises have been
accused of having a shortage of skills, which hampers service delivery. We
believe that this allocation seeks to address this question. Sentech is
expected to address the issue of network coverage which will cover the rest
of the country and, in particular, the underdeveloped areas of our country.
For instance, you can tune in to SAfm from anywhere in the country and it
will be predominantly white in nature.

The question therefore is: When will Sentech extend the coverage network
enjoyed by SAfm to other radio stations such as Ukhozi and Umhlobowenene,
to mention but a few? This is a critical issue which Sentech, through the
Department of Communications, must address honestly because it talks to the
issue of transformation.

We cannot, in this day and age, still speak about the underdeveloped areas
in which people cannot access the services of this department. Therefore I
take this opportunity to ask the Portfolio Committee on Communications,
particularly comrades serving in that committee, to make sure that this
issue is addressed as one of utmost importance, because in this day and age
we cannot stand tall and say why this has not happened 13 years after our
democracy.

The ANC therefore appeals to the National Assembly, because even though
there were questions on some of the issues, as I have mentioned, most of
the issues we were unanimous about, that this Bill must be passed. The ANC
supports this Bill, and I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Had I known it
would have been this easy and that the Special Adjustments Appropriation
Bill would be supported so gallantly by the House, it would have been five
times the size that it is. But, thank you very much for the support.
[Laughter.]

The one thing I do acknowledge is that the process here was incredibly
rushed, but I hope that, in the spirit in which the hon Gibson spoke, when
the adjustments are tabled at the end of October, committees will give all
of these issues attention so that the understanding of each and every line
item funded in here will be properly interrogated by Parliament as part of
the oversight function.

Regarding the issue of Sentech that the hon Gibson said he was raising on
behalf of the hon Smuts, the difficulty hasn’t been on our side. I think
that the least that taxpayers must expect of us is a rigourous analysis in
due diligence. If there isn’t a business plan that will pass muster, our
approach is that we shouldn’t fund it.
So, it is not that there is a breakdown. There has to be a business plan.
The hon Mbili may be disappointed because this money is about broadband
rather than all of the signal distribution that South Africa needs. There
are going to be a series of other things that Sentech needs to undertake,
including the digitisation ahead of 2010. It is a very costly exercise, but
we must ensure that we aren’t just going to go out on a wing and a prayer;
we need properly supported business plans that we can interrogate. And, I’m
sure Parliament needs that as well.

In respect of Alexcor, the issue to deal with in Alexander Bay is, of
course, the pigeons, but here we have a durable solution. The pigeons arise
because the pigeons are taken into the mine and the diamonds leave by the
route of pigeon post traditionally.

In respect of the Land Bank, we are dealing with two sets of issues. The
one is that the Land Bank, over decades, has not foreclosed anywhere and
the liabilities have actually just built up in the institution. Now they
come to a crunch and there is a huge difficulty with the liquidity of the
organisation. I gave the undertaking earlier - there is a forensic report
that has just been completed – that we will act, as we must act, to ensure
that this is a well-run financial institution. In all the development
finance institutions we are looking for a different model that will ensure
that it supports the developmental objectives more broadly.

On 2010: The Minister, Rev Dr Stofile, knows that we have spoken about
this. From the side of the Treasury, we’ve been bold enough to put on the
table for municipalities a ratio of 10% of maintenance a year. So the
R4 billion in current terms would require R400 million of maintenance a
year, failing which these stadiums look like a lot of those in the former
Bantustans and so on. We have that responsibility and that is what we must
ensure is delivered.

On the PBMR – the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor – the hon Singh spoke about
R21 billion – no, it’s the other number. I know that the Director-General
of Public Enterprises raised a number like this. But the commitment that
government has made is a R6 billion commitment, and we have to squeeze
maximally to ensure that we can get a return, get the new technology and
ensure that it’s clean and safe at the same time. Thank you very much, and
thanks to all parties for the support. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

                   SPECIAL ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon members, the
proceedings will initially take the form of a question-and-answer session.
I shall put each of the four Votes in the Schedule in turn, whereupon
members will have the opportunity to ask questions to the relevant
Ministers. Members must please press the to-talk button if they wish to ask
a question. Hon members should please wait until I recognise them before
putting their question.

Vote No 18 - Sport and Recreation South Africa – put and agreed to.

Vote No 24 – Agriculture – put and agreed to.

Vote No 25 – Communications – put and agreed to.

Vote No 30 – Public Enterprises - put:

Mr L W GREYLING: I asked the question last year and I will ask it again
this year: Where is the business model for the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor,
PBMR, that shows that this project will be economically viable and will
justify the spending of the taxpayers’ billions of rands, simply to get a
demonstration model up and running?

I also asked: Where are the other investors that we have been hearing about
for over a decade? Is the lack of investors now forcing us to use an extra
R1,8 billion of taxpayers’ money to fund an experiment that has already
cost our country over R3 billion?

Will the Minister also explain to the House when, in the best possible case
scenario, can we expect to see the first commercially available PBMR
module? Finally, has the design for the PBMR actually been finalised, upon
which we can base a due diligence study? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Can we lower the noise
levels, please. Hon Minister of Finance, are you responding to that
question?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: The truth of the matter, Chairperson, is that
there is no off-the-shelf model. There is nowhere in the world where this
technology that is safe and third-generation nuclear is available. If you
want it, part of what you have to work with are the designs of nuclear
engineers, but a lot of it is untested.

Part of what we have seen already includes the fact that, whilst a nuclear
plant may be small, the heat plant which may drive a hydrogen economy into
the future may be substantially larger. But, nobody will know this unless a
prototype is built. If you want to build a prototype, somebody has to pay
for it. Now, even the private sector or capital is a coward. Capital will
sit back until there is substantially more development.
We are advised that progress in this area in South Africa is quite
unprecedented in the world. We don’t want to take any risk but I think we
understand that we can’t rely on fossil fuels in perpetuity. Some changes
to the scale of the low-cost electricity that we have become accustomed to
in this country – something at that scale - will need to be done. You know,
a few wind farms and so on are not going to generate it. Somebody has to
bell the cat and that’s what this process is about.

Research and development is expensive. You don’t see the results in the
short term but I think we need an association with Parliament on this
issue, so that there is a higher level of trust, knowing that this project
will be watched, that due diligence will be in place and that we will
ensure that it isn’t money down the tubes – which it could become. However,
I think we have to provide the guarantees that Parliament is looking for on
this issue. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! I want to remind hon
members to be very specific with their questions regarding the adjustments
before us. [Interjections.] Order!

Dr S M VAN DYK: Voorsitter, die appropriasie van bykomende fondse ten
bedrae van R2,9 miljard verwys na drie openbare korporasies: Eerstens is
daar die Alexkor-myn wat R44,7 miljoen ontvang om sy operasionele koste te
dek tot die skikking met die Richtersveld-gemeenskap afgehandel is.
Tweedens is daar Denel wat te groot gehap het met kontrakte wat nie aan die
gekontrakteerde spesifikasies kon voldoen nie, terwyl die staat nou die eis
moet betaal. Die DA wil van die Minister weet waarvoor ’n eis teen Denel
ingestel is en wie dit ingedien het en welke kontrakte kon nie nagekom kon
word nie en waarom nie?

Die derde openbare korporasie, naamlik die korrelbed kernreaktor, het R1,8
miljard ontvang, omdat hulle nie behoorlike besigheidsplanne in die vorige
begrotingsjaar aan die Tesourie voorgelê het nie. Minister, u moet aan die
Parlement verduidelik hoekom die KBKR se korporatiewe strukture nog steeds
nie in plek is nie; hoekom dit so lank gevat het om die korporasie te
lisensieer, wat die projek Suid-Afrika uiteindelik gaan kos en hoekom hulle
nou al vyf jaar lank sukkel om buitelandse beleggings vir die projek te
kry. Ek dink die DA en die belastingbetaler het rede tot kommer.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, the appropriation of additional funds to the
tune of R 2,9 billion refers to three public corporations: Firstly, there
is the Alexcor mine, which receives R 44,7 million to cover its operational
costs until its settlement with the Richtersveld community has been
concluded.

Secondly, there is Denel, which bit off more than it could chew in terms of
contracts, and was then unable to comply with contracted specifications, so
that the state now has to foot the bill. The DA wants to know from the
Minister: What damages are being claimed from Denel, who lodged this claim,
which contracts could not be complied with, and why?

The third public corporation, namely the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor, has
received R 1,8 billion, because the corporation failed to submit proper
business plans to the Treasury in the last budget year. Minister, you have
to explain to Parliament why the PBMR corporate structure is still not in
place; why it has taken so long to licence the corporation; what the
eventual total cost of the project will be for South Africa, and why the
corporation has been struggling for five years to obtain foreign investment
for the project. I think the DA and the taxpayer have reason to be
concerned.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I believe that the questions from the
hon Van Dyk are asked for effect, because they are answered in the document
as it stands. In respect of Alexcor, there were two routes you could take.
The one route was that the land traditionally belonged to the Richtersveld
community. The Nama were given that land by Queen Victoria at the end of
the Anglo-Boer War. If the claim had succeeded at the scale that their
lawyers had argued for, we would have been talking billions. There is a
different agreement that was struck and concluded this year. If you want
the participation of the community, then it is going to cost you. You can
either continue to treat the community as dirt, as part of the Kgalagadi,
part of Namaqualand; just that – take the land, ignore their rights or
empower them. This money is about empowering the community to a new
beginning. That is the issue at hand. It is dealing with historic
injustices and that is important in understanding the issues of Alexcor.

In the context of Denel, I think that it is a difficult issue because there
are some corporate priority issues that are still being negotiated. I think
that the sensitivity of this would have been expressed in the Portfolio
Committee on Finance. We can’t go into all of the details. These issues
were canvassed today to the limits possible and I think we must respect
that some of the detail would be covered by the confidentiality agreements.


In respect of the PBMR, I think that my colleague, the Minister of Public
Enterprises, would be in the best position to explain this. As the Acting
Minister and as the Minister of Finance, there are issues that have to be
resolved quite speedily. Yes, I agree that a corporate structure is one of
those issues that needs to be resolved.

In respect of the business plan, let me repeat: If we had responded, in the
Medium-Term Expenditure Committee’s hearings, to the request for money,
without all of the answers that we have now provided, I believe we would
have been in dereliction of duty. We have held out for as long as we can,
to ensure that the answers are afforded us. They have come. The business
plan is on the table. We are now talking of an amount of money that will
carry not even to the end of the fiscal year. This is the nature of the
beast that is research and development.

Things are not as cut and dried as with a company that has been running for
a very long period of time. That is why, if I weren’t reasonably satisfied
with the answers that we got on the business plan, I wouldn’t have had the
confidence to put the request for resources for the PBMR before this House.
I do it in good conscience and in good faith, knowing that we have
interrogated the business plan to the best of our technical abilities in
the Treasury. [Applause.]

Mr Y WANG: Chairperson, hon Minister, the PBMR company has recently tabled
its first annual report. So, for those members looking for a business
strategy or business model, they must just look at the reports or come to
our committee meetings.

My question is one of a more practical nature. Before the proper
commercialisation of the PBMR technology or the particular project, will
the Ministry of Finance work closely with the Department of Public
Enterprises in terms of monitoring its cash flow projections against its
targeted timelines to ensure that there is no more special provision
needed, as we are going to need a greater appropriation each year until
things are commercialised?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, as the hon Wang knows, the first
audit is not just available, it is also an unqualified audit. That says
something about the environment that this body is working in and I think
that it provides us with the basis for addressing these matters going
forward.

A lot of the investment in the last while and the largest draw on cash flow
has been for personnel, and these are highly skilled, highly sought-after
people. You don’t get nuclear scientists sitting by the side of the road,
waiting for the odd bakkie to pick them up so that they can come and clean
a garden somewhere. These are highly skilled people and they are
unfortunately very expensive. This has been the largest draw on cash flow.

The project is now at the point where the contract for the supply of some
of the technology - some of this is in foreign exchange - has been taken
into account. That day is now upon us and that is why we have to proceed,
failing which all of the money spent to date will come to nought and then
the Auditor-General will be unhappy with us and say that Parliament had
approved expenditure which proved to be fruitless. Now you are either going
to sink or swim. This is why we need to ensure that the systems are in
place to ensure that the project will actually float and provide us with a
durable and safe energy source. Thank you.

Vote No 30 – Public Enterprises – agreed to.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): That concludes our question-and-
answer session on the Votes. We shall now proceed to decide on the Votes
and Schedule.

Schedule agreed to.

                   SPECIAL ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 18:09.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 36 –
              2007] (National Assembly– sec 76)

    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a money Bill:


         (a)     Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/08 Financial
              Year) [B 37 – 2007] (National Assembly– sec 77)

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly (floor-crossing)

    Membership status of the following member has in terms of Schedule 6A
    of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed as follows:


      ▪ Ms N M Mdaka left the United Independent Front on 12 September
        2007 and joined the African National Congress.


      ▪ Ms Z A Ndlazi left the United Independent Front on 12 September
        2007 and joined the African National Congress.


      ▪ Mr C M Morkel left the Progressive Independent Movement on 12
        September 2007 and joined the African National Congress.

      ▪ Mr V C Gore left the Independent Democrats on 12 September 2007
        and joined the African National Congress.

2.    Membership of Committees

    Mr F Bhengu has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
    on Defence with effect from 12 September 2007.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Social Development

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
         Agency (NDA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 159-2007].

2.    The Minister of Health

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
         Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill [B15-2007]
     (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 6 September 2007:

         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the subject matter of the Criminal Law
         (Sentencing) Amendment Bill [B15-2007] (National Assembly – sec
         75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         as a section 75 Bill, endorses the classification of the Bill and
         reports the Bill with amendments [B15A-2007].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
     Accession to the Framework Agreement for the International
     Collaboration on Research and Development of Generation IV Nuclear
     Energy Systems, dated 12 September 2007:

         The Select Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
         request for approval by Parliament of the Accession to the
         Framework Agreement for the International Collaboration on Research
         and Development of Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems, recommends
         that the House, in terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution,
         approve the said Agreement.


    Request to be considered.


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Special
     Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/08 Financial Year) [B 37– 2007]
     (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 12 September 2007:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
         the Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/08 Financial Year)
         [B 37– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77), referred to it, and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a money Bill, reports
         that it has agreed to the Bill.

