---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 November 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-11-20
---

TUESDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                      PROTEAS’ VICTORY OVER NEW ZEALAND

                             (Draft Resolution)

MR M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

    1) notes the Proteas’ innings and 59-run victory over New Zealand in
       the second Castle Lager Test on Sunday, 18 November 2007;


    2) further notes that this victory means that South Africa won the
       second test of the two-match series against New Zealand with two
       days to spare;

    3) recognises that this victory has lifted the team to third position
       on the latest LG ICC Test Championship Table;

    4) congratulates South African bowler Dale Steyn, who took ten wickets
       in each test, resulting in him being nominated Man of the Match for
       the second test and Man of the Series; and

    5) further congratulates the whole team on their superb performance and
       wishes them well in the upcoming one-day series against the Black
       Caps starting on 25 November 2007.

Motion agreed to.

                           AWARD FOR WOLWEDANS DAM

                            (Member’s Statement)

MS C C SEPTEMBER (ANC): Madam Speaker, on 4 November 2007, the Wolwedans
Dam received a prestigious award from the President of the International
Commission on Large Dams. Wolwedans Dam is situated on the Great Brak River
near Mossel Bay in the Southern Cape in South Africa.
The dam was nominated by experts from countries who pioneered and led the
construction of the roller-compacted concrete dams, of which South Africa
is one. The dam was built using a roller-compacted concrete, which is
basically ... a dry concrete mix compacted by equipment ... traditionally
used for earthworks such as bulldozers and vibratory rollers.

One of the major benefits of this method of construction is that it speeds
up the construction process. The cost of construction is further reduced
due to the fact that significantly less form work is used.

The ANC sees this as an honour and a proud moment for the whole of South
Africa to receive such recognition for outstanding technological
innovation, and that South Africa could share its experience with the rest
of the world. Similar RCC techniques will be applied in the De Hoop Dam
Project, and other projects still in the planning phase. I thank you.

                         SELECTION OF THE SABC BOARD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M SMUTS (DA): Madam Speaker, a letter has been sent to the Speaker by Ms
Gloria Tomatoe Serobe, and published in the ATCs dated 15 November 2007,
following notice of a substantive motion proposing an ad hoc committee to
conduct a preliminary investigation into whether Ms Serobe wilfully
furnished false or misleading information during an interview for
selections of the SABC Board. That letter, in our view ...

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, on a point of
order: I believe that a motion has been moved in this regard. Is this not
anticipating discussion of such a motion, I ask?

The SPEAKER: Actually, as we all know, the motion was put to the House by
the hon Vos, and therefore, I don’t think the statement would be in order
to come on top of that.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, may I address you on that? The motion was
indeed put forward by Ms Vos, but the statement by the hon Ms Smuts
actually covers various other aspects, and not just the issues that were
raised in the motion itself.

The SPEAKER: No, hon member, we will deal with the issue of the motion,
including the letter that is about that same issue that is the subject of
that motion.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, may I ask when we will deal with that, because
we are due to rise on Friday of this week, and time is running out rapidly?

The SPEAKER: We will deal with that issue, hon Ellis. Can you just take
your seat, and then we will deal with that issue, but not in this sitting.
The issue of the motion is part of the business that is before us as the
House. I would like now to proceed to the IFP.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, may I request ...

The SPEAKER: I heard two voices ...

Mr M J ELLIS: This is not a point of order, Madam Speaker, but if you are
going to rule that one out of order, could we not replace hon Ms Smuts’
statement with another statement from the DA?

The SPEAKER: Yes, you can do that.

                          PURCHASE OF ARMS BY SANDF

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): The DA has recently learned that 27,8 million euros were
paid for 17 missiles for the four Valour frigates, each costing
approximately R16 million; expensive toys, hon Minister. In addition, the
SANDF has spent approximately R990 million on the first phase of a ground-
to-air missile defence system that could escalate into many more billions.

The suppliers are – surprise - Denel and Thales Air Defence, Thales being
one of the weapon suppliers implicated in the arms deal. Denel is
furthermore allegedly behind schedule as a result of problems with local
suppliers and other issues.

The project is expected to finish in November 2009, 54 months after the
original deadline. Denel is expected to pay R80 million in penalties for
this. Arms deal related matters are currently being investigated by eight
countries and by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
for alleged bribery to secure weapons contracts.

Please tell us, how can you justify spending more and more taxpayers’ money
on sophisticated weapons that in any event we are unable to adequately
service and operate?  We don’t even have enough pilots for the Hawks and
the Grippens haven’t even been delivered yet. This is an absolute waste of
taxpayers’ money. Please, Mr Minister, tell us with whom are we at war and
who is the aggressor that we are going to have to face in the future?

Just on a closing note, why do we need frigates to chase rogue fishing
boats? Each one of those missiles that you used the other day to sink some
derelict old ship for practice purposes cost R16 million. How many more are
we going to fire off before we tell the world what a wonderful navy we
have? Surely we could have used other means to patrol our coast, not
frigates worth billions of rands. Thank you.

           16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM AGAINST ABUSE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Speaker, from 25 November to 10 December
2007, our country will again participate in the international 16 days of
activism against women and child abuse campaign. We have done so over the
past few years to highlight that abuse against women and children is
ongoing and remains one of the scourges of our society. Regrettably, it is
mostly men who are responsible for abuse of women and children. One of the
main aims of the campaign is to raise awareness among men that their
behaviour is unacceptable.

The IFP is therefore very happy to note that this year’s campaign will
include a million-man march around the country, with the main march
happening in Bloemfontein. This sends out a very strong signal that men are
prepared to stand up for women and children’s rights to not be abused and
to live in dignity without fear.

The IFP therefore calls on the men of South Africa to join the marches in
large numbers, to show their opposition to the abuse of women and children,
and to support women in their struggle for a life free of fear. Thank you.

                 PROVISION OF FREE TRANSPORT FOR FARMWORKERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M R SONTO (ANC): The ANC is committed to ensuring that freedom of
movement and safe transportation is provided to all. In the space of five
days, 18 farmworkers died in two separate road accidents in the Western
Cape. On Tuesday night, 13 November 2007, an open truck the workers were
travelling in overturned on the N1 highway near De Doorns. Eight workers
died on the accident scene.

Five days earlier 10 farmworkers who were travelling in a bus were killed
after the bus overturned near Piketberg. The ANC calls on government to
investigate the causes of these two accidents as part of the effort to
improve the working conditions of farmworkers. Thank you.

                 CLINICS BUILT WITHOUT ACCESS TO CLEAN WATER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu J BICI (UDM): Somlomo, i-UDM ikhwankqisiwe kwaye idanisiwe kukubona
urhulumente osezintanjeni eqhubela phambili nokufeda. Urhulumente
osezintanjeni wakha iikliniki, kodwa akugqiba ukuzakha akazifakeli manzi,
ntonje uzibonelela ngamatanki. Kuthi kwakufika imbalela, aphele amanzi
ematankini. Akuphela amanzi, kuye kufuneke ukuba oonesi baqhube iikiriva,
balayishe iimbombozi baye kukha amanzi emilanjeni.

Ayimelanga kwenzeka loo nto kweli xesha siphila kulo; kumele ukuba xa
isakhiwa ikliniki kube kufakwa namanzi ukwenzela ukuba izigulane namanesi
akwazi ukufumana amanzi afanelekileyo.

Aba ke benza ibango besithi ngababo aba bantu ndithetha ngabo, bathetha
into abayicingayo, kwaye lilungelo labo ukwenjenjalo. Enkosi, Somlomo.
(Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr J BICI (UDM): Speaker, the UDM is shocked and dismayed to see the
government continue to fail. Government builds clinics, but provides them
with tanks to store rain water, instead of providing them with water. When
the drought comes, the tanks run dry. When the tanks run dry, nurses are
forced to push wheelbarrows to fetch water, in plastic containers, from
rivers.

That is not supposed to be happening, not in this day and age; ideally,
what should happen is that when a clinic is built, it should also be
supplied with tap water so as to satisfy patients’ and nurses’ water needs.
Those who claim the people I am talking about as their own are just
expressing a wish, and it is their right to do so.]

                   CRIME PREVENTION AND WORKABLE SOLUTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Mevrou die Speaker, die VF Plus verwelkom
enige plan om misdaad te bekamp. Dit was lankal reeds ons voorstel dat
misdaad net effektief beveg kan word as daar onder andere behoorlike
koördinering is tussen die polisie, justisie en korrektiewedienste.

Die bekendmaking van ’n superplan om misdaad te bekamp is die soveelste
plan van die regering. Augustus verlede jaar het die Minister van
Veiligheid en Sekuriteit, mnr Charles Nqakula, ook ’n nuwe misdaadplan
aangekondig. Ten spyte hiervan het ander misdade, en spesifiek huisroof,
met 25% gestyg.

Dit het tyd geword dat misdaadplanne omskep word in werkbare oplossings om
misdaad te beveg. Voorheen was daar ook verskeie tienpuntplanne van die
regering om misdaad te bekamp. Die werklikheid is misdaad veroorsaak dat
mense onveilig is in hulle eie woonhuise, daar waar hulle veronderstel is
om met gemoedsrus by hulle families te kan wees.

’n Oorkoepelende instelling op kabinetsvlak word verwelkom, maar die
praktiese funksionering daarvan sal bepaal of misdaad effektief hierdeur
bestry sal word of nie. Die positiewe oorweging van Minister Charles
Nqakula om misdaadstatistiek meer as eenkeer in ’n jaar bekend te maak word
sterk ondersteun. Die VF Plus vra lankal reeds dat misdaadstatistiek
kwartaalliks bekend gemaak moet word. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Madam Speaker, the FF Plus welcomes any plan
to combat crime. It has been our stance for a while already that crime can
only be combated effectively if, among other things, there is proper co-
ordination between the police, justice and correctional services.

The government has announced its umpteenth super plan to combat crime. In
August last year, the Minister of Safety and Security, Mr Charles Nqakula,
also announced a new plan against crime. Despite this, other crimes,
specifically house burglary, have increased by 25%.

It is time to transform crime plans into workable solutions to combat
crime. Previously, the government also had various 10-point plans to combat
crime. The reality is that crime has caused people to start feeling unsafe
in their own homes, where they are supposed to have peace of mind with
their families.

An overarching institution at Cabinet level is welcomed, but its practical
functioning will determine whether or not it is able to combat crime
effectively. We strongly support Minister Charles Nqakula’s positive
consideration to release crime statistics more than once per annum. The FF
Plus has been asking for quite a while now for crime statistics to be
released quarterly.]

      HEROES PLEDGING THEIR SUPPORT FOR THE CAMPAIGNS AGAINST HIV/AIDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkszn N M MAHLAWE (ANC): Somlomo, umbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, ulothulela
umnqwazi inyathelo elithe lathatyathwa ngamaqhawe eentlobo zonke zemidlalo,
ngokuthi azibandakanye kwiphulo lokulwa nesifo uGawulayo neNtsholongwane
yaso.

La maqhawe aya kuthi abe nohambo ngeenyawo kwezi ntsuku zili-16
zilandelayo. Aya kuhamba esuka kweleNdunduma esingise kwiSixeko saseBhayi.
Apha endleleni aya kuhamba evula abantu amehlo ngesifo uGawulayo
neNtsholongwane yaso.

Thina singamalungu ombutho wesizwe, i-ANC, siyabakhuthaza abantu ukuba
bazihlole isimo sabo malunga nalo mbulala-zwe. Into ekufuneka icace gca
okwekati emhlophe ehlungwini, yeyokuba wonke umntu kufuneka aye kuhlolwa,
kodwa ngokuthanda kwakhe, hayi ngesinyanzelo.

Umbutho wesizwe uya kuthi gqolo usebenzisana naye nabani na ozimisele
ukufaka isandla ekwakhiweni kwesizwe sakuthi. Siyabulela. (Translation of
isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms N M MAHLAWE (ANC): Speaker, the ANC commends the step taken by heroes
from various sporting codes, who decided to take part in the fight against
HIV and Aids.

These heroes will embark on a long walk in the coming 16 days. They will
walk from Johannesburg to Port Elizabeth. On the way they will be giving
advice to people on HIV and Aids.

As the ANC, we encourage people to go and test so that they can know their
HIV status. What must be crystal clear is that everyone has to go for this
test voluntarily, and not by force.]

                        CRIMINAL ACTIVITY IN MTHATHA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge that the
SA Police Service is in control of crime and keeping it at a reasonable
level.

However, it is reported in the Eastern Cape in five villages outside
Mthatha that violence against women has reached alarming proportions since
2003. Nine people have been killed, and 11 women raped since last
September. This unbearable situation has forced some families to abandon
their homes and seek refuge elsewhere with neighbours or relatives or even
to live in the bush.

Surely, hon Minister, this is a very untenable situation which warrants
your concern. What impression are we creating for our tourism industry?
Could you please review the police visibility in such areas and reassure
the people of their safety? I thank you.

    NEED FOR CULTURAL REVOLUTION FOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC EMANCIPATION OF
                                  AFRICANS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Madam Speaker, our country needs a cultural
revolution to drive a national agenda for economic and social emancipation
of the majority of the poor. We shall destroy ourselves if we fail to
discover who we are, and where we should be now.

The greatest achievement of European colonisation was the conquest of the
minds of the African people. There is, therefore, a tremendous work to be
done before we can talk of being truly free. Poverty, inadequate education
and lack of technology to process our raw materials, the bastardisation of
African languages and alarming moral decay must be vanquished.
The propensity to protect Eurocentric values at our expense has led some
people to mistake our magnanimity for imbecility. Why should they not when,
for example, many of our former freedom fighters such as Apla and other
victims of apartheid are languishing in the prisons of this country? This
is despite the fact that the United Nations, through the International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid,
declared apartheid a crime against humanity.

Our country must fight over ideas instead of individuals. The destiny of
our people must not depend on personalities but on a national agenda that
results in their economic liberation and social emancipation. I thank you.

                    OVERSPENDING BY MAYORS IN FREE STATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr A J BOTHA (DA): Speaker, die Uitvoerende Burgemeester van die Noord-
Vrystaat se Makaka munisipaliteit het skynbaar ag geslaan op die kritiek
wat die agb Manuel moes verduur vir sy begrotingsurplus en beplan dus ’n
uitgebreide sosiale opheffing ter plaatse met ’n beplande verlies van
etlike miljoene rand.

’n Ekstravaganza vir Kroonstad wat in Sandton van stapel gestuur is sou die
Cheetah en Blou Bulle na Kroonstad bring asook die Professional Soccer
League, Orlando Pirates, Celtics, Stars en Super Sport United plus
internasionale sterre soos Tiger Woods en Ladysmith Black Mambazo. Nadat
die burgemeester reeds meer as R1 miljoen ongeoorloof vooruitbetaal het vir
hierdie gekke fantasie het slegs die sokker realiseer en nie in Kroonstad
nie, maar wel in Welkom omdat Kroonstad se stadion afgekeur is.

Minimum uitgawe sover is rofweg R5 miljoen. Terwyl slegs R200 000 inkomste
vir sosiale opheffing gegenereer is. Hierdie minimum verlies van R4,8
miljoen is dus die pyn by die skande wat die dorpies Viljoenskroon,
Steynsrus en Kroonstad moet verduur as gevolg van ANC onbeholpenheid en
moedswilligheid.

Die DA benoem gevolglik Burgemeester Mogorosi as munisipale mamparra van
die jaar, LUR Mafareka as provinsiale mamparra, omdat hy teen heftige DA
beswaar aan mamparra benoemdes uitvoerende magte verleen, en die ANC as
politieke mamparra van die jaar omdat die volk belas word met sulke
ondienstige mamparra-agtigheid. [Gelag.] [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA (DA): Speaker, apparently the Executive Mayor of the Makaka
Municipality in the northern Free State has heeded the criticism that had
to be endured by the hon Manuel for his budget surplus, and is therefore
planning extensive local social upliftment that will result in a projected
loss of countless millions of rands.

The extravaganza for Kroonstad, which was launched in Sandton, would see
the Cheetahs and Blue Bulls come to Kroonstad, as well as the Professional
Soccer League, Orlando Pirates, Celtics, Stars and Super Sport United, plus
international stars like Tiger Woods and Ladysmith Black Mambazo. After the
Mayor had already made unsanctioned payments of more than R1 million rand
for this fool’s paradise, only the soccer materialised, albeit not in
Kroonstad, but in Welkom, because Kroonstad’s stadium had been turned down.

The minimum expense to date amounts to roughly R5 million, while only
R200 000 was generated for social upliftment. This minimum loss of R4,8
million is thus the pain that accompanies the shame that has to be endured
by Viljoenskroon, Steynsrus and Kroonstad as a result of ANC bungling and
wantonness.

Consequently, the DA nominates Mayor Mogorosi as municipal fool of the
year, MEC Mafareka as provincial fool of the year because he, despite heavy
DA objection, accorded fool nominees executive powers, and the ANC as
political fool of the year because it has burdened the people with such
disobliging foolishness. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

                         MIRACLE CHILD OF BLUE DOWNS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms Z A KOTA (ANC): Madam Speaker, on 5 November 2006, a girl-child was
raped and set alight at Blue Downs. On 5 November 2007, a year after this
ordeal, the community of Blue Downs gathered at a local school hall to
celebrate the successful recovery of this miracle child. Her bravery can
never be forgotten. For this she was named the “Little Rock”.

The ANC thanks, in particular, the community for support given to this
family from day one. The community pooled resources together and placed
this child in a private school for her safety. That is why on that day they
launched a trust under the name ``the Little Rock Trust’’. The event was
attended by people from all over the Western Cape and across political
affiliations.

As we, on 25 November 2007, begin the annual campaign of 16 Days of
Activism for No Violence against Women and Children, we call upon all
communities to unite in support of similar victims of crime, and in
particular to uproot this scourge of violence against innocent children in
our communities. Forward with the caring ANC government! Forward! I thank
you, Madam Speaker.

                        REFINERY TANK FIRE IN DURBAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Madam Speaker, a storage tank containing more than
7,5 million litres of refined fuel caught fire at the Engen Refinery in
Tara Road, south Durban yesterday, causing confusion and fear amongst
residents.

This is a second major fire in the area in two months. In September a tank
at the Island View petrochemical and bulk liquid storage facility also
caught fire.

A thorough investigation must be conducted to determine the reason for the
fire. The refinery is situated in the heart of a residential area where
residents have, for many years, expressed their concerns in respect of
pollution, health and safety issues.

These two recent fires highlight the hazards that residents are confronted
with and the need for vigilance and open communication between the
refinery, the residents and the relevant city authorities.

It is obvious that the activities at the refinery pose a threat to
residents and therefore a sound and clearly communicated emergency plan
must be in place to ensure that residents are prepared for any eventuality.
I thank you, Madam Speaker.

               ADVOCACY FOR CHANGE IN WTO, IMF AND WORLD BANK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N M NENE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC supports the efforts by
government to advocate for change in the World Trade Organisation, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The G20 Conference, the
first to be held in Africa, convened in Kleinmond, outside Cape Town over
the weekend under the theme: “Sharing –Influence, Responsibility,
Knowledge”.

The work programme centred on, amongst other things, ensuring the continued
relevance of international financial institutions and sharing experiences
about the impact of high commodity prices on economic growth, which affect
countries of the South greatly.

We believe that the G20 Forum is united around the vision of a new model of
multilateralism which pulls together individuals with collective knowledge
and best practices to promote economic and social advances for the benefit
of the entirety of the global community of nations.

The ANC commends the government’s efforts to prioritise the fight against
poverty and the focus on building economies of developing countries. We
support the approach to make multilateral institutions more accountable to
the peoples of the South and to work to strengthen the United Nations and
its specialised economic agencies and promote greater coherence between the
different multilateral agencies. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

                       CLIMATE CHANGE - 2012 FRAMEWORK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Madam Speaker, climate change is one of the greatest
challenges both government and the members of this House will ever have to
deal with. Its effects will be felt particularly by developing countries
although the solution requires a global response.

The world leaders will gather in Bali in December for the next round of the
Conference of the Parties, a process that will begin pathing the post-2012
framework. It is important that the South African delegation plays a
leading role in these negotiations.

The DA urges the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to argue for
the following principles going forward. Firstly, 25 countries are
responsible for 83% of the world’s emissions and so it is critical that all
of these players are involved in the future framework.

Secondly, equity is a critical negotiation principle and therefore a post-
2012 framework must recognise historical and per-capita emissions of
greenhouse gases and the differing economic circumstances between developed
and developing countries.

Thirdly, the framework should allow different types of commitment to
accommodate different national strategies and circumstances.

Fourthly, climate change should be addressed within the framework of
sustainable development to achieve economic development, poverty reduction
and environmental protection.

Country delegations have a tendency to be selfish in such negotiations.
However, we trust those delegates present will arrive at a viable way
forward by the end of the conference. I thank you.

                              ENERGY EFFICIENCY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs B TINTO (ANC): Madam Speaker, energy-efficiency and conservation is the
cornerstone of the ANC-led government’s energy policies. This involves the
adoption of least cause planning approaches, the improvement of dwelling
thermal performance, the promotion of energy efficient appliances, the use
of solar water heaters, appliance labelling and the implementation of time-
of-use electricity tariffs.

In the past few days our government and the government of Japan signed a
memorandum of understanding which is aimed at co-operation on various areas
including the promotion of energy conservation and skills and technology
exchange programmes. Further, the two governments discussed the
reinforcement of relations between the two countries in the field of
mineral resources, energy and environment with reference to promotion of
energy conservation and nuclear energy.

The ANC welcomes the initiative and calls on our government to intensify
efforts for environmental education to all sections of our people. I thank
you.

                          PURCHASE OF ARMS BY SANDF
                    OVERSPENDING BY MAYORS IN FREE STATE
                              ENERGY EFFICIENCY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, the hon Trent ... Oh! He is back. I
thought he was a guerrilla, who hits and runs. Chapter 11 of the
Constitution enjoins us to establish a National Defence Force. It doesn’t
create an option. One will find in clause 200 of Chapter 11 one of those
posts that you have to have; there must a member of Cabinet responsible for
defence and the relationship between defence as set out in the Constitution
and Parliament is well catered for in chapter 11.

So, when the hon Trent asks the questions or makes statements as he does,
it needs to happen against this backdrop because once the Constitution
compels you to have a defence force one can’t then have unsophisticated
weapons. It is ludicrous because on the larger scale of things, we are not
investing as heavily as almost as every other member of the United Nations
in our defence capability. We are one of a handful of countries in the
world that spend less than two percent of its gross domestic product on its
defence capability. We are also one of four countries in the world that
spend more on provision of water than what we do on defence.

So, it can’t be a question of priorities, nor can it be a question about
the fact that the weapons we are investing in are too sophisticated.

In respect of the point he raised about Hawks and Grippens: The Hawks are
trainer fighters so we need to train people before they can fly the
Grippens, failing which they drop out of the sky, planes and all. It is a
perfectly rational approach that has been taken.

Finally, I want to draw to the attention of the hon Trent and other members
of the DA that the strategic defence procurement package arose from the
Defence Review and was supported by all parties in this House including the
DA or its predecessor the DP at the time. You were in the tent. Will you
protect me, Madam Speaker? Even from hon Van der Merwe.

The SPEAKER: Absolutely, you are protected hon Minister, from hon Koos van
der Merwe.

Mr E W TRENT: Speaker, may I ask the hon Minister a question?

The SPEAKER: The hon Minister is responding to the statement.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Uyazamazama wena. Hlala phansi! [You are taking
chances. Sit down!]

Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to hon Nene’s statement on the
hosting of the G20 Summit. I will also tie in a few other points that were
raised by the hon Morgan and the hon Tinto and perhaps the hon Seaton.

Indeed we hosted the G20 Summit, and it was an exceedingly well-attended
and exceedingly well-run meeting. We are very proud of the work done by
officials to prepare for the meeting. The focus of the meeting was broadly
on four areas: the state of the global economy and current market
turbulence and the impact of that on the ability of the countries to
provide services to their people; a discussion on the fiscal elements of
growth; the issue of commodity circles and financial stability; and very
importantly, the reform of the Brettan Woods hood institutions.

It is work in progress and I think we planted the big stake for change in
these areas and the President addressed the forum on Sunday and spoke at
length about the reform of the Britain hood institutions and why the
democratic deficits must be addressed in the interest of multilateral
governance.

One of the issues that will come onto the agenda of the G20 as it is taken
to Brazil next year and the UK in 2009 is indeed the issue of climate
change. It is an important issue. It’s part of what we must recognise as
global public goods. Financial stability and a sustainable environment are
two sides of the same coin.

It is very important to tie those up with the issues that the hon Tinto
raised because Japan, in hosting the G8 next year, has focused on the issue
of energy efficiency, and again that is part of the same discussion. What
we would like to see as a country is that all of those issues be brought
together so that we can maximise the effort in respect of the global
campaign into 2008-9 and beyond.

In taking this forward we need to exercise caution that the carbon
footprint does not become the next boundary of protectionism. Already it is
being used against the importation of fruit like strawberries from South
Africa. If one flies these things in aeroplanes there is a carbon footprint
one cannot deal with like that. We have to guard against these kinds of
issues.

I should also appeal to Madam Speaker and the Secretary to Parliament for
energy efficiency, Comrade Tinto, in the lighting in Parliament. Here too
we really must make an appeal about that.

Finally, in respect of the hon Seaton’s issues, one of the big problems
driving up petroleum prices in the world is refining capacity. What the
OPEC Summit in Riyadh said this past weekend is that there is sufficient
crude available and they are happy to open new fronts of crude, including a
very important new one discovered in Brazil just recently and all up the
West Coast of Africa.

Crude is available in its refining capacity. The one problem with
refineries is that nobody wants them in their backyard. There is an
enormous difficulty; perhaps it is one of the issues that the Portfolio
Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism must take up and examine,
namely how we will deal with this because if we do not have sufficient
refined products we have to import them. As we import them, this then has
an impact on the balance of payments. We must either do that or shift to
bicycles big time. Clearly there is a discussion that needs to happen and
Parliament needs to be involved in this matter.

In respect to what the hon Botha raised I think it is just the fight
between Kroonstad and Bothaville. Why else would he raise it? Thank you.

           16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM AGAINST ABUSE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
                        CRIMINAL ACTIVITY IN MTHATHA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the point
that was made by the hon Groenewald. In fact, if I understood him well, he
was making the point that when strategies have been formulated, they must
be implemented. I agree with him entirely on that point. However, if you
look at our statistics, particularly for the last quarter of last year, you
will actually see the effect of the strategy that was put in place by the
law-enforcement agencies, not just the police alone.

It is not just the police alone, because what that indicates with regard to
crimes during that period, which over the years have always indicated a
steep rise, particularly serious and violent crimes, is that for that
period statistics indicate that crime went down.

We had a meeting yesterday where we were briefed by the police with regard
to what they are going to do during this period and I hope, as you have
indicated, that once more there will be adherence to the plans that have
been formulated so that these are not just strategies that are adopted but
not implemented. I agree with you on that matter.

Therefore, we would also want to ensure that when these plans have been
defined, they must be implemented. I appreciate, nonetheless, the
observations that you have made.

The hon Ditshetelo is sitting quite close to the hon Zikalala from the IFP.
The hon Zikalala correctly says that it is not only the law-enforcement
agencies that we need to deal with when it comes to crimes against women
and children. She pointed out that in most cases it is men who are
committing these crimes and therefore her appeal was to men.

She said that men must change their behaviour. However, apart from that she
said that you have to be part and parcel of the South African people’s
programme to change the mind-set with respect to this particular matter.

I think that as we talk about the law-enforcement agencies, it must not be
laws to us. These are social crimes which in the main are committed by
people against people whom they know and therefore our message – although
we must always remind the law-enforcement agencies about their
responsibility – should be something akin to what the hon Zikalala was
saying.

Let us change the behaviour of people who are committing these offences.
Let us, particularly those who are sitting here, who are public
representatives, participate in those programmes. In fact, in your
response, hon Ditshetelo, you actually ought to have said that you support
what the hon Vilakazi was saying and you yourself would mobilise these men.
Thank you very much.

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, the hon member is the hon Zikalala and not
Vilakazi.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am very sorry, hon Speaker.

                 PROVISION OF FREE TRANSPORT FOR FARMWORKERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, in
reaction to hon Sonto’s statement on the farm accident, firstly, let me
express deepest sympathy from the side of the Ministry with regard to this
terrible loss twice in a short while. There may even be some foreign
citizens among the people who didn’t survive this accident and they must be
treated with the same humanity. One can’t really sleep well while this type
of thing is happening.

With regard to the statement of the member, more specifically in the first
part, he mentioned that it is about freedom of movement and safe
transportation. Yes, it is about that, but that is not all that is at
stake. He asked us to investigate the causes of these two accidents. It
goes further than the accidents. It is also about who is taking
responsibility for what happened in those two instances. It has been linked
in the discourse to systematic evictions.

What is quite clear is that there must be greater regulation of labour
consultants or people to whom this responsibility shifted with regard to
the transport of workers in these instances. We will certainly have to get
the intention of the Ministries of Transport, Agriculture as well as Labour
in this regard, because with great respect, there is something
fundamentally rotten in some practices with regard to farm-workers, and in
some areas more markedly than in others. Thank you.

                          PURCHASE OF ARMS BY SANDF

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance has
answered Mr Trent, because at the time when I raised my hand I didn’t know
who he was going to respond to. I can only say he has responded
effectively.

I can also advise Mr Trent to talk to Mr Sayedali-Shah. Mr Sayedali-Shah
was at the portfolio committee meeting today where the portfolio committee
requested the generals to tell them about the state of readiness, and Mr
Singh must lecture that ignorant member about the importance of having a
defence force that is ready to do its core business.

This ridiculous argument that, because there is no war, you should not be
ready, is something that I don’t even want to entertain and give it some
credibility which it does not deserve.

       16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM FOR NO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN
                         MIRACLE CHILD OF BLUE DOWNS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Thank you, Madam
Speaker; I almost became the Deputy Minister without portfolio today. I
would like to say to the hon member – I think it’s Vilakazi from the IFP
...

The SPEAKER: Zikalala.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Mzikalala, I beg
your pardon, madam.

The SPEAKER: Zikalala. There is no “M”; it starts with a “Z”.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Zikalala. Thank
you for that, Madam Speaker.

In raising awareness about the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against
Women and Children Campaign, which I support, I would like to urge you, hon
member, to mobilise your party, your various communities and constituencies
to support this very important period.

I would also like to caution you, hon Zikalala. For you to begin to raise
this awareness in your communities, start by saying that women have a right
to wear pants. No one should tell a woman what to wear. I am referring to
the woman who was assaulted by that particular community, because she was
wearing pants. You should start to raise awareness in that area. That is
part of women’s rights.

Thank you, hon Zoliswa Kota for raising and reminding us of what this
little girl went through. That is how it is supposed to be. It is supposed
to be across party lines. It is not a single party complaint, but it is
from all parties. It doesn’t matter what community you live in. Sometimes
discrimination against women is so subtle that you cannot see it, but it is
there in any given community. It is there; it exists. Hence, I want to urge
the male parliamentarians to go and join this triple M march – million-man
march in support of no violence against women and children. Thank you.
The SPEAKER: That brings us to the conclusion of the Ministers’ responses.
The Secretary will read the first Order of the Day.

               SOUTH AFRICAN JUDICIAL EDUCATION INSTITUTE BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                          CHILDREN’S AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I, with leave,
move without notice:

   That the House -

      1) notes that the National Council of Provinces has rejected the
         Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19D – 2006 (Reprint)] (National
         Council of Provinces – sec 76(2));

     1) elects the following members, as nominated by their respective
        parties, as the Assembly representatives to the Mediation Committee
        on the Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19D – 2006 (Reprint)] (National
        Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)): Bogopane-Zulu, H I (ANC); Louw,
        S K (ANC); Gumede, M M (ANC); Mkongi, B M (ANC); Morobi, D M (ANC);
        Nzimande, L P M (ANC); Semple, J A (DA); Skosana, M B (IFP); Solo,
        B M (ANC); and


     2) elects the following members as alternate members: Morwamoche, K W
        (ANC); Sibanyoni J B (ANC); Weber, H (DA).

Motion agreed to.

               SOUTH AFRICAN JUDICIAL EDUCATION INSTITUTE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, it
is with joy, and with gratitude to all those who made it possible, that we
have this Bill before us today.

The ground norms for the creation of this institute were extensively
discussed at a colloquium in April 2005. An Advisory Committee on Judicial
Education, under the leadership of Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke, crafted
proposals forming the basis of this Bill. Judges, magistrates, the Judicial
Service Commission, members of the Magistrates’ Commission, our drafting
team in the Ministry of Justice, the director-general, the General Council
of the Bar of South Africa, the Law Society of South Africa, the National
Prosecuting Authority, the Justice College and the Society of Law Deans of
South Africa were all represented and participated in the advisory
committee.

The Bill makes provision for the South African Judicial Education Institute
to be established as a juristic person with the mandate for judicial
education and training of judicial officers and aspiring judicial officers.
The governance of the institute will vest in the council of the institute
consisting of representatives of all interested parties and role-players,
as well as two persons from the public not involved in the administration
of justice.

The objects of the institute will be to: provide proper, appropriate and
transformational judicial education and training, having due regard to both
our inherited legacy and our new constitutional dispensation; and to offer
judicial education and training to aspiring and newly appointed judicial
officers as well as continued training for experienced judicial officers.
I must thank the portfolio committee indeed for the work that they have
done. I would like to congratulate our new Chair as I thank the out-gone
Chair for the work well done. I congratulate the new Chair and am saying
that I am certain that we will have a great time together working on
outstanding matters. With regard to this Bill, we should begin to deal with
substantive matters of actually setting up the institute.

We need to ensure sure that we align the process of restructuring what is
currently known as the Justice College with further consideration of the
detail in the establishment of the judicial education institute. It’s
important that we establish those synergies. Thus, we must design a phased-
out transfer of training of magistrates from the current Justice College in
the coming year. We must also have the council established. Hopefully then
they will also start dealing with content with insignia and all matters
that go with establishing a new institution.

I have a sense of hope, as we restructure the current Justice College,
regarding our ability, even in the preparatory process prior to actually
having the new institute and the transformed Justice College - which may
have another name, by the way, because it will be training officials that
serve in the justice system, including prosecutors.

I hope that with the establishment of these two important institutions we
will enhance expertise and efficiency. We will be able to use resources
that we have optimally, and hopefully this will enable us to escape the
stereotype that goes with debates today about the transformation of the
judiciary and the equation of race and colour with incompetence. Hopefully,
in time, when the institute comes into being, we will have no difference on
the basis of colour or gender, but we will have judicial officers who are
properly trained and trusted as efficient judicial officers by society at
large.

Let me say that what is important for us as we pass this Bill is to know
that without a waste of time, immediately at the beginning of next year, we
have to begin processes that will enable us to align the establishment of
both institutions, and that we really have these institutions supporting
each other conceptually. In other words, as we conceptualise both
institutions, we must see them as complementary because that is how we will
be assured of using the resources that we have at hand maximally.

This is in terms of having your very able and efficient trainers of
judicial officers also rendering services that enable us to have similarly
efficient and trusted service providers within the justice system such as
court managers, prosecutors, etc. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Chair, comrades and friends, this Bill, as was
suggested by the Minister a moment ago, is part of a package of Bills aimed
at facilitating the transformation of the judiciary. The Bill that is about
to be debated shortly after this, the Judicial Service Commission Amendment
Bill, is part of this package.

The department, we understand, is working on a policy paper on the overall
transformation of the judiciary. The committee understands that the policy
paper will be negotiated with the judiciary. We understand that several
Bills will flow from this policy paper. We welcome this process as a
committee and hope that the policy paper and the Bill will reflect
significant consensus amongst key stakeholders.

The South African Judicial Education Institute Bill that is before us
certainly does, and so it was easier for us as a committee to process the
Bill through Parliament. The committee has reported on the Bill and it’s
carried in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports. I will simply
take us through some of the issues that the report raises and some related
issues.

The committee feels of course that the establishment is sharing the same
view with the Minister that the South African Judicial Education Institute
Bill is crucial to the transformation of the judiciary and we certainly
welcome this Bill. If the institute is effective, our country will have a
more empowered, efficient, effective and representative judiciary, more in
tune with the values and the requirements of the new Constitution and the
new democratic dispensation. The institute would ensure, as the Bill
suggests, both independence on the one hand and judicial accountability on
the other.

The institute has a crucial role, we believe, of educating and training
aspiring judicial officers and so contributing to ensuring that the
judiciary becomes increasingly representative, but not just representative
in demographic and gender terms, as important as this is, but
representative too, very importantly, of the progressive values that are
the heart of our Constitution and the new society we are seeking, the
challenges notwithstanding, to forge.

The institute is also meant to serve newly appointed judges and, in this
regard too, can play a very valuable role. It needs to make itself relevant
to these judges, and the judges need to draw on the institute. It’s a two-
way process. Experienced judges, too, can and must benefit from the
institute. Does learning ever end? Is there ever a closure to acquiring new
knowledge and skills?

After all, we live in a constantly changing and dynamic world with streams
of new knowledge. Just about every major profession has some institutional
or other form of upgrading skills and improving knowledge - cardiologists,
physicists and architects, for example, have systems to improve their
professional skills. If we are to be effective and productive human beings,
we have to constantly learn and grow our knowledge.

Judges, surely, are not immune to this need. Theirs, too, is a field of
change and growth even if at a slower pace than others. The need for
replenishment is recognised, we are told, in most judicial systems
globally, and is very well captured in the preamble to the Bill which I
will read to you. It reads:


  And whereas law has become much more complex and varied, develops rapidly
  and is increasingly influenced by the globalisation of legal systems,
  trade, technology, new insights and challenges ...


   ... and so, of course, the Bill follows.

Essentially, the Bill provides for a 23-person council, headed by the chief
justice to govern the institute, with a director to take overall
responsibility for the administration of the institute. The council
comprises a broad - in fact a full - comprehensive range of stakeholders
including the deputy chief justice; the President of the Supreme Court of
Appeal; two judges president and two other retired judges; the director of
the institute, an advocate; an attorney and two law academics and so on.

The director-general of the department serves as the accounting officer.
The committee expects, though, that the institute will account to the
committee for its annual report through the DG, a nonexecutive
representative of the council of the institute.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member. Hon members, there are just too many
meetings taking place. [Interjections.] Hon member, please continue.

Mr Y I CARRIM: It is coming, Madam Deputy Chair, from my left-hand side and
they don’t even ... [Interjections.] So, I don’t know what they are talking
about, but in any case, the Bill that reached the committee was basically
sound, we must insist. The amendments we effected are not substantial and
do not affect the underlying framework of the Bill.

For example, the committee provided for a mechanism to designate members to
the council. Following representations to us, we also increased the
representatives of the magistrates in the council from three to five.
Perhaps the only amendment of any significance, if it is that, the
committee made was to remove the clause which provided for a judicial
officer to be a director of the institute. It reflects the committee’s
views that it is not appropriate to appoint a serving judicial officer or a
judge, just out from active service, as the director of the institute.

The Bill in fact provides for the director to be a CEO of the institute,
and he or she will bear the principal responsibility for the administration
and management of the institute. The committee holds the view that such
functions are distinctly removed from those associated with the holding of
judicial office.

They are not compatible, we believe, with the office of a judicial office
bearer, and should a judicial office bearer be appointed to this position,
the independence, impartiality and dignity of the judiciary is potentially
at risk. The same, needless to say, would apply to a judge, to some or
other degree, who’s been discharged from active service.

Now, of course, the committee’s amendment does not exclude a judicial
officer, active or retired, from serving as a director of the institute,
but it does not expressly provide for this. However, should the council
decide to appoint a judicial officer, the question of remuneration will
have to be addressed and the Minister will have to apply her mind to that.

The committee understands that the department has not yet worked out the
cost of implementing the Bill. Obviously, it would be unreasonable to
expect a precise costing to have been completed at this stage, but we are
concerned that there is not even a broad estimate of the cost.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the Ministry for their co-
operation with the department, in particular, Johan De Lange and his team.
I also want to thank Christine Silkstone, if she’s here at all, who’s from
the parliamentary research unit and our comrade Thando from the ANC unit
and of course, Phumelele Loli Sibisi, the very pleasant and efficient
committee secretary.

I note Minister that you have said - and this is in the House - that you
look forward to a great time together. Since you said it in the House, you
shall duly be held to account. I might mention, as you well know, that I’m
a new member of this committee and a new Chairperson; I am not even a
lawyer.

So the first thing we could do, Minister, is to look into the possibility
of us going off for a week to Mauritius while the Polokwane conference is
being held, so that we can talk about matters of state, and you can empower
me on what my role is. I shall exercise oversight of you in ways that you
didn’t imagine. [Laughter.]

I must also say that you referred to my predecessor as the ``out-gone
Chairperson’’. I need to remind you that she refuses to go. [Laughter.] She
is going to come back here in few minutes to lead the debate on the next
Bill. Mind you, I don’t want her particularly to go, nor do we want her to
go. She is most welcome to semi-co-chair this committee. Thank you very
much, and thanks to Fatima. I wish her well. Let me suggest to her that,
only this morning, Comrade Minister ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no Fatima in this House.

Mr Y I CARRIM: Ah, the hon Ms Chohan if she remembers that she is that. I
just want to remind her that, since I left the public enterprises
committee, SA Airways is sliding inexorably down. [Laughter.] Yet again,
this is the fourth time in a month that they were late! Again, this morning
... [Interjections.] ... SAA. Fatima, please, sort them out! [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Deputy Speaker, hon members, I’ve always been under the
impression that judges are appointed because they have the necessary
knowledge, wisdom and skills to fairly adjudicate. Unfortunately, this does
not seem to be the case anymore, and I only have to refer to the preamble
of this Bill, which the hon Carrim read to you just now.

It is also interesting that there’s no requirement in law that a judge
should have a legal qualification. The Supreme Court Act only stipulates
that a judge should be a fit and proper person. Now, there is also no
requirement that the chairperson of the justice and constitutional
development committee has to be a lawyer, hon Carrim, but, so far, I think
you are a fit and proper person.

We find the first reference to legal qualifications for judges in the
judicial reforms that were introduced after the retrocession of the Cape in
1803. The court had six judges, three of whom had to be lawyers from
Holland and three local appointees with, as far as possible, knowledge of
the administration of justice.

After the second annexation of the Cape by the British in 1806, a formal
qualification was introduced and a judge had to be a barrister of the
United Kingdom or advocate of the Cape Bar.

In the Orange Free State, judges were initially laymen but, in 1875, a
professional High Court was introduced, and the qualification for judges
was doctor of laws or advocate with at least seven years’ experience and 30
years of age.

In the Transvaal, the 1885 Constitution vested judicial power in popularly
elected landdrosten and jurors who were not legally qualified. However, in
1877, a High Court of Justice was created and judges were required to have
a diploma of doctor of law.

After the Anglo-Boer War, when civil governments succeeded military rule in
1902, the whole administration of justice was reconstructed and judges had
to be qualified advocates or judges of any British colony. At the National
Convention of 1908-09, it was decided that the judges of the Union would be
qualified advocates or judges of any British colony. However, this was not
enacted, with the result that there existed no criteria until 1959 when the
present principle of a fit and proper person was introduced.

Until fairly recently, the practice was that judges were exclusively
appointed from the ranks of senior council. The net has now been thrown
wider and appointments are also made from the ranks of attorneys, academics
and even junior council.

One of our senior judges, Judge President Bernard Ngoepe, recently
criticised the new pre-graduate LLB degree, and I want to fully agree with
him, although some of our senior judges don’t even have an LLB.

I think it is time that we revisit the legal qualifications of our lawyers.
If judges need special training, as provided for in this Bill, the ranks
from which they are appointed need it as badly. The DA supports this Bill.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Deputy Speaker, a well-functioning judiciary is one
of the cornerstones of a democracy. At present, our judiciary is not
functioning optimally, with cases taking far too long to be heard and
judgments sometimes outstanding for months on end.

There are reasons for this poor state of affairs, and one is the quality of
education and training provided to judicial officers. We are pleased that
comprehensive consultation took place with the legal fraternity and it is
my understanding that all role-players support the Bill before the House.
The IFP particularly supports the provision that the judiciary itself will
be in charge of training, with the Chief Justice playing a leading role.

Having addressed the training of judicial officers, we have scored some
points, but there are many other hurdles to cross before we can be sure
that we have an effective judiciary. We are still saddled with long waiting
periods for trials to be heard and long-outstanding judgments.

However, having listened to Mr Joubert, who talked about the judges in the
old days, I am reminded of the English judges of the early 1800s, who spoke
a very high kind of English. There was an interpreter who had to interpret.


And the judge said: “Tell the accused I find him guilty.”

And the interpreter said: “Die oubaas sê jy’s skuldig.”  [The old gentleman
says you are guilty.]

The judge said: “Tell the accused he’s a liar.”

The interpreter said: “Die oubaas sê jy lieg.” [The old gentleman says you
are a liar.]

The judge then said: “Tell the accused he’s a thief.”

The interpreter said: “Die oubaas sê jy’s ‘n dief.” [The old gentleman says
you are a thief.]

And then the judge said: “Tell the accused he’s an unmitigated scoundrel.”

En die tolk se oë rol so [and the interpreter’s eyes rolled like this] and
he froze and said: “Die oubaas sê jy’s ‘n stront.” [The old gentleman says
you are rubbish.] [Laughter.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the Bill before us is
the result of a protracted process, which was the subject in 2005. As is
often the case, the basic principles and objectives of the draft
legislation were generally accepted by parties, but there was disagreement
on what means to employ to reach that end.

There was also a definite concern that the original draft legislation, like
the rest of the package of Bills discussed in 2005, had, as a purposeful,
covert intention, the potential to undermine judicial independence. It is
thus good that the product we see before us today is, in most respects,
acceptable to all sides.

It is worth noting that the judiciary, not the executive, has the biggest
say in the operation of the institute, in the composition and election of
the council and in all of the activities of both these bodies. We sincerely
hope that the institute will achieve the desired outcome of a better-
equipped judiciary, capable of dealing with modern judicial complexities,
as well as the demands of a constitutional democracy.

The UDM supports the Bill. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Bill establishes a judicial
education institute in order to promote the independence, impartiality,
dignity, accessibility and effectiveness of the courts by providing
judicial education for judicial officers.

Now, the ACDP understands that the Bill was agreed upon between the
Department of Justice and members of the judiciary. This followed the
rejection of the first version of the Bill by the judiciary who were
concerned that it compromised its independence. This view was shared by the
International Bar Association and the Commonwealth Legal Education
Association.

Thereafter an advisory committee, consisting of representatives from
various law sectors, including the judiciary, was established to make
recommendations on the Bill to the Department of Justice and the Ministry.
This Bill is now a culmination of that process and, hon Minister, a vast
improvement on the first draft.

As far as legal education is concerned, the ACDP does wish to highlight one
aspect, and that is the need for training on sentencing, as vast
discrepancies exist from one court to the next in this regard. Whilst we
appreciate that this is only one aspect and that it will form part of the
training, the ACDP trusts that the institute will deal with sentencing
whilst we await the SA Law Reform Commission’s comprehensive sentencing
framework. This is particularly relevant following the amendments we passed
earlier this year on minimum sentencing. The ACDP will support the Bill.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, while the judicial system has received
much criticism for the backlog in cases and the management of the court
system, we have received insight from the budget hearings as to the
progress made in a number of areas. The MF welcomes a judicial education
and training institute that offers to both educate and further train
judicial officers to manage and uphold their portfolios effectively and
efficiently.

In view of the provisions of the Bill, all appears in order in the
formulation and management of this institute. It further appears to be
consistent with maintaining the independence of the judiciary. The MF hopes
that the provisions of this Bill will be inculcated most accurately and
that the training offered to judicial officers will involve comparative
studies of international justice systems so as to invite development and
growth in this arena.

The MF will support the Bill.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Deputy Speaker, the FD supports the ongoing training of
judges and magistrates and we believe that such training hinges on
providing the judiciary with skills to perform its task with objectivity,
independent thought and impartial judgment within the constitutional
dispensation of our country.

The establishment of the SA Judicial Education Institute must compare
favourably with its international counterparts while taking into account
our historic challenges as well as a strong and robust judicial legacy
which help shape the realisation of our constitutional democracy.

The proposed legislation aims to transform judicial education in line with
the democratic trends in other countries and to further opportunities for
judicial officers to enhance the expertise and mobility within the judicial
system.

The institute is rewarded with the scope and governance to function
independently and professionally to attain its objectives in training a
skilled judiciary.

The FD supports the SA Judicial Education Institute Bill without any
reservations. I thank you Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr G B MAGWANISHE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, let me take this
opportunity to thank all members who have participated in this debate. When
the former President Nelson Mandela said in 1961, ``I am a black man in a
white man’s court’’, what did he mean? If Comrade Ida Mntwana was in that
situation she would have said: I am a woman in a male-dominated court’’.
Comrade J B Marks would have said: I am a worker in a court which is a
symbol of superexploitation of the working class by the bourgeoisie’’.

What do the above statements really mean? To us as the ANC these statements
are at the core of what we mean by the transformation of the justice system
in general and the transformation of the judiciary in particular. These
questions are important because this is what our society seeks to achieve.
A society where there are no blacks or whites, just South Africans. A
society where there is gender parity; where women are not second-class
citizens but equal partners. A society where class contradictions are
managed for the common good of all classes and strata, arising from what
Comrade Mandela said in 1961. Further questions are still relevant today as
they were then.

What values do or must these men and women in the Bench uphold? Do women
who appear before our courts feel safe that they will not suffer secondary
victimisation? Are these values consistent with the type of society we are
trying to build? Are these values, amongst others, to include nonracialism,
nonsexism, a subscription to uphold the Constitution and promote democracy?

These values can take us a long way in assisting in resolving
contradictions created by colonialism of a special type, which are related
to class, race and patriarchy. If we do not commit ourselves to solving
these contradictions our democracy shall be shallow and meaningless to our
people; it will be like any bourgeois democracy. Then the question will be:
What happens to what Mark Gevisser refers to as “the dream deferred”?

The answer is simple: The people will revolt. Our people know what they
fought for and they know what to expect from this democracy. There can be
no rule of law in the absence of meaningful democracy. To us transformation
means representivity of all races on the Bench.

It means gender parity on the Bench. It means quality gender parity on the
Bench. Most importantly, it means judicial officers who uphold the values
and the spirit of the Constitution. The majority of our courts are working
well and some, like the Constitutional Court, have contributed to the
development of our legal jurisprudence both locally and internationally.

However, we cannot run away from the fact that most of our judicial
officers were trained when our country subscribed to the supremacy of
parliament, which needed a different way of interpretation. Our country now
subscribes to the view that says the Constitution is the supreme law of the
country and it has its own approach in terms of interpretation.

There are new developments in our society which our judicial officers need
to be aware of, like the introduction of the Internet which has created
other kinds of offences like cyber crimes.

Globalisation has its challenges for the economy and for the rule of law.
Continued education for the judiciary can be ignored at great cost to the
judiciary itself and to society as a whole.
Ignorance of our cultural diversity can render our laws irrelevant and
unjust, though legal.

The question is: What will happen to those communities whose cultures and
traditions are ignored even though those traditions are not in conflict
with the Constitution?

We often say that ignorance of the law is no excuse. In the same breath we
must say that ignorance of race, gender and class issues is no excuse
either.

Judicial training is not only a South African phenomenon. There are many
jurisdictions like Canada where this is done. One principle that we feel
very strongly about as the ANC is that judicial education must be
controlled by the judges themselves.

They will be responsible for the curriculum of the institute to a council
chaired by the Chief Justice. We are of the view that we cannot separate
continued education from transformation of the judiciary because part of
what the institution must do is to train aspirant judges, which will create
a pool from which judges can be appointed.

Surgeons are responsible for lives of people in theatres and continuously
need to improve themselves because medical science is developing.

Even judges are responsible for lives of people in the courtrooms and
society is not static; neither is the legal science. All professions need
continuous education and the judicial officers are no exception. We are
happy that our judges and hon members have the same values as the ANC on
this matter. The ANC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you Madam
Deputy Speaker. Hon members, thank you very much for the support you give
us in passing this Bill. We will take into consideration the critique that
the Bill is not costed. Let me just indicate to the House that the process
of costing the Bill has begun to the extent that in fact land has been
identified and it is being surveyed. However, we do need to come and
account to Parliament and bring forth a full costing of the Bill beyond
just infrastructure.

Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                 JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to get you a seat nearby. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker and
hon members, once more I present to this House a Bill, the substance of
which was considered by the consultative colloquia we held in 2005. Let me
just say that this Bill as well has been one that was considered by a broad
spectrum of stakeholders. I am aware that there are dissenting voices with
regard to some parts of the Bill. I will leave that to members of
Parliament to introduce and to debate further.

However, I have been told by the portfolio committee that during
parliamentary deliberations on the complaints provisions, a number of
concerns were raised. The most important of these are that, in terms of the
Constitution, judges are appointed on the advice of the Judicial Service
Commission and can only be removed from office upon a finding of
incapacity, gross misconduct or gross incompetency by the Judicial Service
Commission; and that finally, it is the National Assembly that has to call
for the removal of such judges, with a two-thirds majority.

The second point that has been brought to my attention relates to the
scheme of the Constitution which indicates that issues regarding
incapacity, misconduct and incompetency of judges fall within the provision
of the Judicial Service Commission – thus under the Judicial Service
Commission Act of 1994. This should, therefore, contain a legislative
framework relating to standards for judicial conduct and ethics, including
any envisaged complaints mechanisms and enquiry procedure.

The Bill as introduced did not make provision for procedure leading up to a
finding of incapacity, gross incompetence or misconduct by the Judicial
Service Commission. We all know that up to now, we haven’t had any
impeachment procedure, although there have been debates around ethics and
some judges. The Bill, as introduced, did not deal with a disclosure of
assets by judges, which is an established practice in a number of developed
countries and a modern way of disclosure if you hold high office as a
public office bearer.

Let me just say that this is before the House today, and I pray that it is
supported because we do need to have this kind of regulation for the
dignity and honour of our judicial officers. We need greater
accountability, and to have transparency. It is only in that way that they
will have the deserved respect from the public. I thank you.

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, with the advent of democracy in South Africa in
1994, the constructs of the executive as well as the legislature in this
country were completely overhauled and transformed beyond recognition. The
one arm of government that was not substantively and completely transformed
was the judiciary. It was envisaged during the historic negotiation process
that the transformation of the judiciary would be a more drawn out and
evolved process.

In this regard, the point has previously been made in this House that
transformation of the judiciary means more than just diversity of the
judiciary. Though it is true that a reflection of the diversity of the
general population on the Bench, in terms of race and gender, remains an
important element in a legitimately composed judiciary anywhere in the
world, this is particularly so in this country.

Transformation entails a mind-set change. In its fullest extent, it must
entail a progressive outlook, the adherence in the strictest sense to the
principles of equality and dignity so fundamental to our Constitution. It
must, importantly, also entail a meaningful recognition of the existence in
the country of the social contract between the legitimately elected
government and the majority of the people of the country to create a united
nation in all of its diversity based on a nonracial and nonsexist ethic
with a distinct predisposition to progressively redressing the imbalances
of the past.

This Bill is one of a trio of transformation Bills produced by the
portfolio committee a few years ago with a view to putting in place the
legal framework within which such a transformed judiciary would evolve.
However, the unexpected resistance to the proposed Bill seemed to suggest
that many in the country were of the view that the transformation of the
judiciary had in fact been achieved the minute it began in its leadership
structures reflecting the faces of essentially black men.

Indeed it is only now, given the recent controversies pertaining to some
members of the Bench, that some voices have sought to call for legislation
to implement a disciplinary procedure for judges. Some who had previously
labelled these Bills as a gross intrusion into the sacrosanct independence
of the judiciary were now suddenly asking what the delay was in passing
this legislation.

Let us be absolutely clear, neither this legislation nor any of the others
in the package of transformative Bills were ever intended to undermine the
good standing of the judiciary. Indeed from the outset the Bills recognise
that the legitimacy of the judiciary rests on the foundation of its
perceived integrity, its competence and its independence from undue
influence.

Section 1 of the Constitution envisages a system of government that is
based on accountability, transparency and responsiveness. That the
judiciary is the third arm of government or the state is trite. Thirteen
years into our democracy and while other aspects of our Constitution have
come to be realised, we have not had in place a procedure through which
complaints about judges from members of the public could be dealt with in
an effective and open manner.
The matter of the integrity of the judiciary, its accountability and the
matter of its independence are all interlinked. The Constitution, inter
alia, states that:


  The judicial authority of the Republic is vested in the courts. The
  courts are independent and subject only to the Constitution and the law,
  which they must apply impartially and without fear, favour or prejudice.

Judicial independence has in some quarters been argued to mean a complete
excision from any influence, no matter how remote, of the executive and the
legislature. The Constitutional Court itself in many decisions has declared
this interpretation to be absolutely wrong.

The UN Special Rapporteur on the independence of the judiciary in a
submission during 1998 to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission explained
the matter in these words:


   Judicial accountability is not the same as the accountability of the
   executive or the legislature. The judges are accountable; their
   accountability does not extend to their having to account to another
   institution for their judgments.

Judicial independence denotes freedom of conscience for judges and
noninterference in their decision-making. It is not concerned with judicial
misbehaviour. The judiciary must be beyond the undue influence of any
person, association, legislative or executive branches of government. The
fear of losing out on a promotion or their job must not weigh on judges in
any decision.

However, it is important to remember that the independence of the judiciary
is not a private right; conditions guaranteeing the independence of judges
were not created for the benefit of judges but for the benefit of the
judged.

While the Constitution stipulates that there should be freedom from fear,
favour and prejudice on the part of the judiciary, particularly in matters
where the state is a litigant, care must be taken by the judiciary itself
that the impartiality applies to all litigants, including the other arms of
government.
There have been developments, particularly in countries like France, which
strictly adhere to the doctrine of separation of powers that courts do not
usurp the inherent law-making powers of the other two branches of
government through the mechanism of judicial review.

While we do not in this country espouse the separation of powers in such a
strict sense, it is, nevertheless, incumbent on the courts to be wary of
over-reaching into the domain of the other branches given the very limited
nature of their accountability. This is a matter though for judicial
sensibility and discernment lest the referees become the players.

In his compelling book entitled The Judicial Process in Comparative
Perspective, Mauro Cappelletti makes the point that since the Second World
War, there has been an increased reliance on the so-called least dangerous
branch of government to curb the potential abuse of power of the
legislature and executive branches. The advent of the social welfare state
and the consequent development of big government have led to an increased
political terrain for the judiciary.

This is as true for South Africa as it is for those countries emerging from
the Second World War. The very nature of the constitutional state leads to
entrusting the power of review as well as law-making powers to the branch
of government most removed from democratic accountability.

It therefore becomes evident that the increased vesting of political powers
in our courts requires a more vigorous mechanism of accountability than has
been the custom certainly in this country.  That individual judges must be
free from personal influence or private interest is trite. However, we
should not forget that in this world where the asset bases of conglomerates
far exceed those of some states, the independence of the judiciary faces
another potential threat particularly from the private sector.

In this regard, it is very easy for judges who may have interest other than
the vocation of adjudicators to develop, if not a conflict of interest
itself then, certainly, the perception of one. The one can hardly be said
to be worse than the other in a world where nothing is beyond the reach of
those who wield heavy wallets.

Prior to this, the law provided a blanket prohibition on serving judges
holding other offices of profit with the proviso that permission could be
obtained from the Minister of Justice for such extra income-generating
activities.

With this legislation we do away with this proviso, except when it comes to
judges receiving royalties from legal books written or edited. Henceforth
judges will be judges, not directors of boards or companies, nor will they
hold any other office of profit.

As far as the category of judges who have been discharged is concerned,
this law retains the existing principle that they are to apply in writing
to the Minister for any income-generating work, not related to their
service to the state as judges for life. It has been argued that these
judges should be allowed in blanket fashion to pursue their vocations,
particularly in the lucrative arbitration industry.

This argument ignores the institution of the judges for life regime
implemented prior to the advent of democracy. This effectively means that
upon retirement judges get paid a salary for life without having to
contribute to a pension fund. This fact alone makes it not unreasonable for
the law to require that permission be sought for the privilege of earning
income over and above the salary provided by the state.

In addition, the fact is that even when discharged from the Bench, there is
the potential to be recalled for periods to serve on the Bench and the
potential to negatively affect the good standing and reputation of the
judiciary as a whole.

We provide in this legislation for a register of judges’ registerable
interests. This will entail that judges, like members of this House, will
have to disclose interests deemed to be registerable. This regime will
apply to judges and their immediate families. The position of a registrar
is, in addition, established in the office of the Chief Justice.

There are three categories of complaints that may be lodged against judges,
namely frivolous complaints that may be dealt with in summary fashion,
serious but not impeachable charges, and impeachable charges, which are
visited with more elaborate procedures. The conduct of the judges will be
measured against a standard of conduct stipulated in law.

In this regard, it was argued that it should be sufficient for the
judiciary to regulate itself in the form of broad guidelines. Indeed the
judiciary in this country, as far back as March 2000, adopted a code of
ethics which was aimed at being a guideline for judges both on and off the
Bench.

However, the application paragraph of the guidelines reads as follows:


   Ethical rules differ from legal rules in that they are seldom absolute.
   These guidelines describe the high standards to which all judges should
   aspire. Nor does any breach of any particular rule or guideline
   necessarily warrant censure.

This legislation envisages a code of conduct which alongside the code of
ethics will apply to all judges. Unlike the code of ethics it will have the
force of law and as such it will be passed by this House as the supreme law-
maker.

To fulfil its constitutional role, the judiciary needs public acceptance of
its moral authority and integrity. Accordingly, the Constitution commands
all organs of state to assist and to protect the independence,
impartiality, dignity, accessibility and effectiveness of the judiciary.
However, it is even more important – I want to suggest that judges
themselves at all times seek to maintain, protect and enhance the status of
the judiciary.

I began talking about transformation of the judiciary. Inherent too in this
transformation imperative apart from an effective and efficient court
system is the aspect of the unitary nature of our justice system. In our
Constitution justice is a national functionary. The existence in our
country of a federally based High Court structure is therefore incongruent
to the vision of the Constitution.

This though is a discussion for another time and another Bill, but we will
all do well to bear in mind that the legitimacy of the judiciary during the
apartheid regime was seriously tainted and tendencies to hang on to
structures originating in the apartheid past, including aspects as
ostensibly benign as the location of court buildings evoke strong emotional
responses.

The matter of transformation of the judiciary is multidimensional and in
the limited time I have I will not have begun to deal with many of its
essential components. Suffice to say that in transforming this vital sector
of government no effort should be spared to rebuild and guard the good name
and standing of our judiciary, among whom are outstanding sons and
daughters of this land.

While the executive executes decisions through tools more palpable in the
form of the security apparatus as well as the bureaucracy of government,
the reputation and legitimacy of the judiciary are its only real source of
power.

This legislation is aimed at restoring to the judiciary the tools to
preserve the source of their power. How the judiciary conducts and manages
the implementation of this law will determine ultimately their power in
relation to the other spheres of government in this country henceforth.

I thank you for your attention and before I leave the podium, let me please
make a few remarks, this being probably my last speech in this particular
portfolio. Firstly, I want to thank the Minister, seeing that these Bills
have been particularly difficult to process. I really want to thank you for
the stubbornness that you have shown to lead us along this path. I think
history will bear out that these Bills were enormously essential and
crucial to the transformation initiative. Hence I thank you for your
leadership. I know it’s been a very difficult situation.

Likewise to the director-general in his absence, Adv Menzi Simelane, as
tenacious as the portfolio committee members when it comes to driving this
Bill, I want to say to him - if you would please convey that in my book -
unlike the Mail & Guardian he is a 10/10 director-general and I really
appreciate all of his support that he has shown me as the chairperson.

People like Mr B M Skosana, Adv Johannes de Lange, Mr Deon Rudman and
others have been absolutely phenomenal and the department really has a lot
of treasures of that sort. Thank you all for the support and guidance.

Regarding the study group of the ANC, I could not have hoped for a better
team, and thank you very much to all of you, particularly to Imam Gassan
Solomon who is a repository of the institution of the justice portfolio
committee - he has been there since 1994. I don’t know how we would have
really progressed without his enormous assistance. Likewise to Mr Luwellyn
Landers, another stalwart of the portfolio committee, thank you very much
for your help as senior members.

We worked extremely well with the members of the opposition, particularly
Dr J T Delport. Thank you very much for your assistance, as well as Mrs
Camerer who has also departed. I also want to thank the hon Leonardus
Joubert, the hon Steven Swart and not forgetting the hon Koos van der Merwe
as well.

I must say with some disgust that the hon Koos van der Merwe has never
tabled a cake in the committee while I was chairperson and I would be
enormously disgusted if he should do so now that I have left the committee.
[Laughter.]

To the hon Yunus Carrim, who is particularly upset about SAA, I just want
to say one thing: The minute he left the chair of public enterprises the
management and board of SAA breathed a sigh of relief because what that
meant was that they could immediately cancel the route between Cape Town
and Durban, which is extremely unprofitable, and they tell me now that
because of this they will be registering a profit next year. [Time
expired.] Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Voorsitter, die DA ondersteun hierdie wetgewing, maar met
sekere ernstige voorbehoude.

In essensie kry ons nou die moontlikheid om ’n behoorlike gedragskode vir
regters daar te stel en dan ’n proses om nalewing van daardie gedragskode
af te dwing. Grootliks berus al hierdie sake in die hande van die regbank
self.

Die onlangse ondervinding wat ons gehad het ten opsigte van ’n klagte wat
moes behartig word deur die Regterlike Dienskommissie was nie baie
bemoedigend nie. Ons hoop dat die regbank deur selfdissipline baie angstig
en jaloers sal waak oor die hoë standaarde wat die regbank aan sigself
behoort te stel. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr J T DELPORT: Chairperson, the DA supports this legislation, but with
certain serious reservations.

In essence we are now given the opportunity to create a proper code of
conduct for judges and a process to enforce compliance with that code of
conduct. Most of these issues rest with the judiciary itself.

The recent finding we had in respect of a complaint that should have been
handled by the Judicial Service Commission was not very promising. We hope
that the judiciary, through self-discipline, will guard anxiously and
jealously the high standards that it should be setting.]

Now my reservation: Clause 11(2) of the Bill requires of judges who are
discharged from active service to obtain the consent of the Minister to
perform any work whatsoever for remuneration. At the portfolio committee
the DA formally proposed an amendment. The object of this amendment was to
allow judges who are discharged to do judicial and quasi-judicial work as
of right, in other words, without seeking permission from the Minister. For
any other work, we are happy that permission should be required.

The ACDP supported this amendment, but it was voted down by the majority
party. Two reasons were advanced. The first was that judges are judges for
life. They continue to receive a judge’s salary after being discharged and
should not earn double remuneration. This argument does not hold water. The
simple fact is that judges who are recalled in an acting capacity are in
any event remunerated for that service.

The second reason advanced was that discharged judges who act as
arbitrators prevent inexperienced judges from gaining the necessary
experience in intricate cases, because many of the big companies would
rather opt for arbitration than to trust the case in the hands of an
inexperienced judge. This is also probably why clause 11(3) dictates that
the Minister will not grant his or her consent if such work will undermine
any aspect of the administration of justice, especially the civil justice
system. May I point out that the right of parties to revert to arbitration
is part and parcel of the civil justice system and to act as an arbitrator
in fact strengthens the civil justice system?

The portfolio committee was privileged to listen to the views of no less
than three eminent retired, discharged judges, which included a former
Chief Justice and a former judge of the Constitutional Court. They were
opposed, very adamantly so, to the principle of ministerial permission.
Having carefully listened to their arguments, I have no doubt in my mind
that clause 11(2), as it now stands, will be tested in the Constitutional
Court. This, in my opinion ... [Interjections.] I will represent them.
This, in my opinion, must be avoided.

It can be avoided. I seriously appeal to the Minister to reconsider clause
11(2) and have a careful look at our amendment. Please amend that section
when the Bill comes before the NCOP. South Africa does not deserve to have
this issue tested in the Constitutional Court and cause a rift between the
judiciary and the legislature. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, the IFP supports the Bill with
reservations. The specific question I wish to address today is whether
retired judges receive pension upon retirement or continued salaries.

There can be no doubt that whatever law we are trying to make or whatever
law may be in place, people who retire get pensions and are free to
continue to work as hundreds of thousands of civil servants in fact do.

So, why are judges to be an exception? The answer is very simple. It is
because litigation is being taken away from the High Courts at an alarming
rate to be done outside of the courts by way of arbitration. Lawyers and
judges tell me that litigants are losing confidence in the capacity of the
High Court to effectively do civil work. They say civil cases, especially
in Pretoria, can be heard only after a waiting period of about two years,
because of the congestion of court rolls. They say litigants have to wait
months on end to get High Court judgments. There are even examples of
undelivered judgments for up to four years.

Madam Speaker, where does the problem lie? The problem lies in the judicial
system itself. Therefore, trying to prohibit judges from doing arbitration
work won’t cause the problem to go away. There are dozens of advocates and
attorneys who are getting progressively involved in arbitration and more
and more civil work is being taken away from the High Courts. The solution
to protecting the High Court lies in the hands of the Minister and the
judiciary. They must get the judicial house in order, because the problem
won’t go away by victimising retired judges.

Judgments must be delivered in good time; that is, within one month. Trials
should be heard within good time; that is, not more than six months’
waiting. Retired judges are unfairly targeted. They should enjoy the same
rights as hundreds of thousands of other retired people. Therefore,
although we support most provisions of the Bill, we cannot support clause
11(2) and we will support the DA’s amendment.

Finally, the time has also arrived for us to have a debate on what the
judiciary is. Where does the legislative aspect end and where does the
judiciary begin? We have to have a discussion on this because what is the
judiciary that we are trying to protect and keep neutral? Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, when the Judicial Service Commission dealt with
the ACDP’s complaint against Cape Judge President Hlophe, it recommended
that specific guidelines should be furnished as to when judges can do
extrajudicial remunerated work.

These guidelines, together with further provisions relating to the
disclosure of judges’ financial interests, are now contained in the
Judicial Service Commission Amendment Bill which the ACDP supports.
Following the outcry, as well, when the JSC’s decision not to hold a public
inquiry into the allegations against the Cape Judge President was made
public, the Cape Bar Council also stated that –


   It is acutely conscious that the Constitution and national legislation do
   not afford the JSC, or any other disciplinary body, powers of sanction
   over superior court judges short of recommending impeachment.


This, the Cape Bar Council said, is –


   ... a shortcoming that adversely affects the JSC’s ability to fulfil the
   role that the public expects from it in respect of matters of alleged
   judicial misconduct or incompetence which, although serious, are not
   sufficient to warrant impeachment.

The Bar Council then joined calls for this shortcoming “to be urgently
addressed by Parliament”, and this shortcoming is now addressed in this
Bill which seeks to make provision for structures and procedures relating
to oversight over judicial conduct, make provision for the maintenance of a
register of judges’ financial interests, and to establish a judicial
conduct tribunal to inquire into, and report on, allegations of incapacity,
gross incompetence and gross misconduct against judges.

The ACDP also agrees with the Cape Bar Council and various leading lawyers
and academics that “confidence in the JSC and the judiciary has,
unfortunately, not been wellserved by the manner in which the Cape Judge
President’s issue has been addressed”. The JSC should have shown greater
transparency in reporting on the matter, particularly following its
unanimous finding that the conduct of the judge concerned, in accepting
R467 000 from the Oasis Group and then granting the group permission to sue
a fellow judge, was “inappropriate” and that his explanations were
“unsatisfactory in certain respects”.

As former Constitutional Court judge, Johann Kriegler, stated: “On his own
showing, the particular judge was guilty of grossly improper conduct and
here we have a matter of elementary judicial ethics”.

This begs the question as to why it was decided not to hold a public
inquiry that might have led to impeachment proceedings. Whilst we
appreciate that the JSC did not exonerate the judge involved, the slap on
the wrist strengthens the perception that the JSC simply protected one of
its own. In our view, the honourable thing remains for Judge Hlophe to step
down as a judge and, more particularly, as the Cape Judge President.

Whilst the ACDP furthermore fully supports the provisions of the Bill, our
one concern also relates to the position of retired judges who will be
required to obtain ministerial permission for any work performed during
retirement. Whilst we appreciate the explanations provided by the portfolio
committee chairperson in this regard, this provision, we believe, should be
reconsidered as it may negatively impact upon attempts to draw legal
practitioners to take up permanent positions on the Bench.

In conclusion, let us be reminded of the words of Johann Kriegler that –


   Judges are fallible and people do not expect perfection, but what they do
   expect – and are entitled to demand – is, at least, honesty and
   impartiality. When judges are no longer seen to be administering justice
   to all alike, without fear, favour or prejudice, the immediate casualty
   is the administration of justice. Then the rule of law suffers and,
   ultimately, individual rights and freedoms.

The ACDP will support this Bill and I again want to thank the previous
chairperson, hon Fatima Chohan, for the gracious manner in which she has
chaired the committee and these Bills. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the independence of the judiciary has always
been a sensitive issue since the birth of democracy. However, their
independence is a crucial faculty to the development and conduct of the
justice system.

The MF believes that judicial officers cannot be held liable for the
backlog of judicial matters and the loopholes in the system. In fact, the
lack of capacity is a state issue that needs to be serviced if we are to
effectively transform and inculcate an efficient and democratic judicial
system.

As for the provision of remuneration for judicial officers and what the
legislation provides for, the MF has no objection - as long as remuneration
provided for is justified and well within the means to manage and maintain
the efficient and effective reliance of judicial officers.

The MF supports the Judicial Service Commission Amendment Bill. I thank
you, Chairperson.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, recently, judicial conduct has come under the
spotlight, and due to the lack of proper institutional capacity to deal
with such matters we have, in certain instances, witnessed division within
the judiciary.

The establishment of a Judicial Conduct Committee will hopefully provide a
framework instructing members of the judiciary on matters regarding
accountability and appropriate conduct. The conduct of judicial officers is
a matter of national importance, and the integrity and stability of the
state demands from officials the dignity required in conducting the affairs
of the state.

The Bill has given citizens the opportunity to report any gross misconduct
by an official, thereby keeping the judiciary in check of its service
mandate. It is, therefore, right and justifiable that the constraints
contained within the Bill and to which the judiciary is to be subject will
advance the overall dignity, independence, integrity and professional
service of the judicial system.

In the matter relating to receiving payment for any service outside of the
judiciary, a judge not in active service may only do so with the written
consent of the Minister. It has been reported that in the past judges were
given oral consent by the Minister to engage in such a service. Besides
placing the effective administration of justice at risk in granting such
consent, the practice is also unbecoming of the profession and should be
wholeheartedly discouraged.

We welcome the provision requiring judges to disclose a register of
financial interests since the independence of the judiciary implies
imposing checks, balances and controls to inhibit relations in order to
protect our fledgling democracy. The matter that is still outstanding is
compiling a code of judicial conduct, and we trust that this will be done
in the time allocated.

The FD supports this Bill with reservation for clause 11(2), and we concur
with the arguments of both the DA and the IFP as presented in the House
today. I thank you.

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Ngithokoze Sihlalo. Ngilotjhise woke amaLunga
ahloniphekileko wePalamende. Ikulumopikiswano yanamhlanjesi le, iqakatheke
khulu kwamambala ngombana imayelana netjhuguluko leenkoro zokusegela begodu
nalabo abahlulelako. [Thank you, Chairperson. I greet all hon Members of
Parliament. Today’s debate is of paramount importance, because it deals
with the transformation of the judiciary.]

The Judicial Service Commission was established in terms of the Judicial
Service Commission Act of 1994. In terms of this Act, there is no real
complaints mechanism for judges. The current system is half baked. Members
of the Judicial Service Commission who are members of Parliament, except
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, recuse themselves
whenever the commission hears complaints about judges. Our Constitution
deals with instances that can lead to impeachment of judges by Parliament.
There is currently no provision for wrongdoing or misconduct that does not
lead to impeachment.

I would like to draw every person’s attention to the fact that, as matters
currently stand, the commission is one of the independent structures that
were created with the advent of the democratic dispensation in South
Africa. Its independence should be respected. Once the commission makes a
decision, that decision should be respected in the same manner as a
decision of a court of law.

I would not agree with hon Delport by uttering negative comments as far as
the case which has recently been attended to by the Judicial Service
Commission is concerned. I also do not agree with hon Van der Merwe that
litigants, as they are losing hope in the High Courts, should proceed to
arbitration.

In terms of the Bill that is debated today, we are ushering in a new
dispensation, addressing an issue of judicial and disciplinary mechanism
for dealing with allegations of incapacity, gross incompetence or gross
misconduct against judges.

Yindlela yokunqophisa iingwegwe emejajini ahloniphekileko. [It is a way of
disciplining our honourable judges.]

They are honourable judges.

The Bill provides a grievance procedure and mechanisms for complaints about
judges. This forms part of the transformation of the judiciary. For the
benefit of our constituency, and for them to understand what this Bill is
all about, I hereby continue in isiNdebele.

UmThethomlingwa lo esiwuphetheko kulekulumopikiswano yanamhlanjesi,
ukhuluma ngamagadango athathwako lokha umuntu nakafuna ukufaka
isinghonghoyilo malungana namajaji. Omunye nomunye umuntu unelungelo
lokunghonghoyila kusiHlalo weKomiti yeNghonghoyilo, bese usiHlalo ukhetha
ihloko yekhotho bonyana iqale isinghonghoyilo leso.

Isinghonghoyilo kufanele siqaliswe entweni yinye nanyana eentweni
ezingaphezu kwayinye kilezo ezine ezikumThethomlingwa. Hlangana nazo
ngibala nazi ezilandelako: Kokuthoma, kubhalelwa kwejaji ukwenza umsebenzi
walo ngobujamo bamajaji namkha ukuziphatha kumbi nofana budlabha.
Okwesibili, ukungatlhogomeli i-Code of Conduct namkha umTlolo wokuziPhatha
kwamaJaji nanyana isiyalelo esisemthethweni. Okwesithathu, ukwamukela
namkha ukuphatha i-Ofisi lapho ijaji lirhola khona imali ngendlela
ephikisana nomThethomlingwa. Okwesine, ukungalaleli namkha ukungalandeli
isiyeleliso nanyana amagadango ijaji eliwalelwa namkha liwenze ukulungisa
umraro nanyana ukuziphatha nokwenza into engakhambisani nokuba lijaji.

Iinghonghoyilo ezincani zingapheliswa ngendlela erhabako. Singathululwa,
njengokuthi nakukufanele bona loyo onghonghoyilako adlulisele umlandu
ekhotho engaphezulu, ukufaka i-appeal ngamanye amezwi, namkha
isinghonghoyilo nasinganatlha.

Ikomiti ingaphakamisa bonyana kukhethwe ikoro ebizwa ngokuthi yi-Tribunal,
lapho kungathathwa khona amagadango wokobana ijaji lithokoziswe umsebenzi,
i-impeachment. Lokho kwenzeka uSihlalo nakanelisiweko bonyana
kungatholakala isiqunto sokobana ijaji libhalelwa msebenzi walo, kufanele
athumele isighonghoyilo ekomitini, lona elizakutjho bonyana isinghonghoyilo
kufanele siye ku-Tribunal namkha awa. Nasele kuqediwe nge-Tribunal begodu
kube nesiphakamiso sokubana ijaji lithokoziswe umsebenzi walo, indaba
ithunyelwa ngePalamendeni, kukhulunywe nge-impeachment. (Translation of
isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[The Bill under discussion today deals with grievance procedures for
complaints about judges. Every individual has a right to lodge a grievance
with the chairperson of the grievances committee. The chairperson will
appoint an official in charge of the High Court services to oversee the
grievance.

The grievance must be based on one or more of the four issues contained in
the Bill. Among others, I can mention the following: First is the
incompetence of the judge to perform his duties according to the code of
conduct for judges. Secondly, not taking into consideration the code of
conduct for judges. Thirdly, to be in a position of accepting remuneration
which is unlawful according to the Bill. Fourthly, to behave in a manner
that is against the acceptable code of conduct for judges.

Minor grievances should be attended to with immediate effect.  If the
complainant appeals and the High Court finds that the appeal has no prima
facie evidence, then the appeal shall be dismissed.

The committee can propose the election of a tribunal, where the decision of
discharging the judge concerned from his duties will be taken.  That
happens when the chairperson is satisfied with the decision that the judge
failed to perform his or her duties; then the impeachment could be applied
after this matter has been debated by Parliament. The chairperson must
forward the grievance to the committee, which will decide whether the
grievance qualifies to be forwarded to the tribunal or not. Once the
tribunal has finalised its process and recommended that the judge be
discharged from his or her duties, that recommendation should be tabled in
Parliament for debate on impeachment.]

Once a judge, always a judge! By this I mean that people who are appointed
as judges become judges for life. They earn a salary not only when they are
presiding on the Bench, but continue to get paid even after they are
discharged from active service and for the rest of their lives.

In terms of this Bill, serving judges will be entitled to do extra-judicial
work, such as writing books or lecturing as well as receiving royalties for
legal books written or edited by the judges, with the consent of the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, acting in consultation
with the Chief Justice.

The Bill provides for certain criteria to be met:

 Written consent may only be given if the Minister is satisfied that the
 granting of such consent will not adversely affect the efficiency and
 effectiveness of the administration of justice; adversely affect the image
 or reputation of the administration of justice in the Republic; in any
 manner undermine the legal framework which underpins the judge for life
 concept; result in any judge engaging in any activity that is in conflict
 with the vocation of a judge; and bring the judiciary into disrepute or
 have the potential to do so.

Honourable judges cannot have a blanket ability to do things such as
arbitration and get an additional income whilst they are getting paid as
judges. They cannot have their bread buttered on both sides.

The measures are for the good of the honourable judges to prevent them from
getting embroiled in controversies which may be seen as bringing the
judiciary into disrepute. Judges are expected to maintain the good standing
and respect of the judiciary.

In the past, judges have always been applying to the Minister for
permission to engage in extra-judicial activities. There is nothing new or
wrong in putting a procedure for judges to comply with, before engaging in
some work other than what they have been appointed to do.

Parliament, as a legislative body, intends to curb some of these activities
that may lead to complaints about the judges. The Bill gives effect to
accountability and openness. These are fundamental values that underpin our
constitutional democracy. It is not correct to act in a manner that is self-
serving. The ANC supports this Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, when
we refer to and talk about the separation of powers, we should not forget
that in our Constitution there is a principle of co-governance, that is, co-
operative governance. It is a very important principle. In my view, it does
apply even among the three arms of government.

The whole idea of the executive having a place within the administration of
justice, a place to anchor or play a part around the judiciary constitutes
checks and balances. It is very important that we should recognise that.
Similarly, in Parliament we have to try and recognise that the judiciary
cannot operate, strictly speaking, independently as in fairyland. We live
in a real world and need to have that kind of balance between organs of
state.

With regard to 11(2), we are in a continuous process of transformation of
the justice system. It is currently progressing very effectively and in a
focused manner. We are involved in the review of the criminal justice
system. Of course, we have our eye on and intend to begin effectively the
review of the civil justice system as we reported sometime back in this
House. All of these interactions among the three organs of state are always
under review. It will be in that context that people should look at all
these principles that are introduced in the Bills.

In any event, the whole question of permission for retired judges to do
extra-judicial work is current. It is not a new element introduced into the
Bill.

I should really thank all the parties represented in this House for
supporting, broadly speaking, the Bill. It is a very important Bill as we
all know. You’ve said it yourselves.

I should, in conclusion, quote the Deputy Chief Justice on ethics. The
quotation is so relevant and also shows that even the judiciary takes this
Bill very seriously. This is what he said in his speech at a conference of
the lower courts judiciary in Midrand – what we call the magistracy – on 15-
16 September 2007:


  A judicial officer is not involved in any undertaking, business,
  fundraising or other activity that may affect the status, independence or
  impartiality of the judicial officer or is incompatible with the judicial
  officer.


  It is important that a judicial officer is not engaged in financial and
  business dealings that may reasonably be perceived to exploit the
  judicial officer’s judicial position or are incompatible with the
  judicial office.


  A judicial officer shouldn’t receive income or compensation for work
  that’s not compatible with judicial office.

You would say that’s common sense and that you agree. However, I thought it
was important to refer to what he said because in effect he was endorsing,
broadly speaking, also what is entailed in the Bill.

In other words, I think most judicial officers will endorse this Bill.
Probably, we will have reservations, as you have said that there have been
judicial officers appearing before the portfolio committee having
reservations about section 11(2). However, let me thank you for the
support. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Minister, I deemed your
quotation and explanation very crucial and therefore gave you an extra two
and a half minutes.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): The Bill will be sent to the NCOP
for concurrence.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - WITHHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF MR M F MATHE,
                    AN ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT PINETOWN


  Question put. That the recommendation of the committee be adopted, and
  the withholding of remuneration of Additional Magistrate, M F Mathe be
  confirmed.


  Agreed to.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT WITHHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF MR I X MASIMINI,
                   AN ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT QUEENSTOWN

Question put: That the recommendation of the committee be adopted, and the
withholding of remuneration of Additional Magistrate I X Masimini be
confirmed by the House.

Agreed to.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - UPLIFTMENT OF PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF MR M S
                    MAKAMU, A SENIOR MAGISTRATE AT BENONI


Question put: That the recommendation of the committee be adopted, and the
upliftment of provisional suspension of Senior Magistrate M S Makamu
accordingly confirmed by the House.

Agreed to.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - REMOVAL FROM OFFICE AND WITHHOLDING OF
     REMUNERATION OF MR T V D MATYOLO AN ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE, AT PORT
                                  ELIZABETH


Question put: That the recommendation of the committee adopted, and the
restoration to office of Additional Magistrate T V D Matyolo accordingly
not confirmed by the House.

The House adjourned at 16:20.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         THURSDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Message from President

    The Speaker and the Chairperson of the NCOP received the following
    message, dated 14 November 2007, from the President, calling a Joint
    Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces:

    CALLING OF A JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
    COUNCIL OF PROVINCES


    In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
    South Africa, 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(a) of the Joint Rules of
    Parliament, I hereby call a joint sitting of Parliament at 14h00 on 21
    November 2007, in order to make an announcement regarding a process for
    the consideration of Presidential Pardons for persons who have
    committed what are alleged to be political offences.


    With kind regards


    Signed
    THABO MBEKI

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. I have received a copy of the recommendations of the Independent
    Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office-Bearers, under the
    chairpersonship of Justice Dikgang Moseneke, in respect of an annual
    inflationary-linked adjustment to the remuneration of public office-
    bearers for the 2007/2008 financial year.

    Copies will be made available to Members.

2.    On 20 September 2007, Ms S C Vos, MP gave notice of a substantive
    motion proposing, amongst others, the appointment of an ad hoc
    committee to conduct a preliminary investigation into whether Ms Serobe
    wilfully furnished the Portfolio Committee on Communications with false
    or misleading information.

    I have received the following letter from Ms Serobe in regard to this
matter:


    CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert - T071115-insert – PAGE 2264

3.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      1) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
             Agency (NDA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             159-2007].


      2) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health for consideration and report. The Report of the Independent
         Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.

      3) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Safety and Security. The Report of the Auditor-General is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
             Sector Education and Training Authority (SAS-Seta) for 2006-
             2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 84-2006].

      4) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Safety and Security for consideration and report:

          a) Report of the National Commissioner of the South African
             Police Service (SAPS) for the period 1 January 2007 to 30 June
             2007, in terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence
             Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).


          b) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
             July 2006 to December 2006, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
             the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).


      5) The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee
         on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women and the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for consideration and
         report. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 198-2007].

      6) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Public Works and Portfolio Committee on Housing. The Report of
         the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Education
             and Training Authority (CETA) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.


      7) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail
             Commuter Corporation Limited (SARRC) for 2006-2007, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007 [RP 188-2007].

      8) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
             Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 33-2007].

      9) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Safety and Security for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department for
             Safety and Security for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             199-2007].


     10) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and Independent Auditors are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
             Standards for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2006-2007 [RP 105-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
             Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
             Development Agency for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2006-2007.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
             Corporation of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.

     11) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
             for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2006-2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
             Reconstruction and Housing Agency for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
             Registration Council (NHBRC) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.


     12) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government:

          a) Government Notice No 522 published in Government Gazette No
             30013 dated 29 June 2007: Exemption for High Capacity
             Municipalities in terms of section 122(2) and (3) of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


     13) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Reports of
         the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
             Science and Technology for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 200-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
             and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 131-2007].


     14) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

          a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 6
             September 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
             informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of the
             South African National Defence Force in the Central African
             Republic.


     15) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
             Service (SARS) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             205-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
             Development Programme Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007 [RP 179-2007].


          c) National Treasury – Consolidated Financial Information for the
             year ended 31 March 2007.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
             Board on the Registrar of Pension Funds for 2005 [RP 97-2007].




          e) Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the
             Republic of Mozambique for the Avoidance of Double Taxation
             and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
             Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
             1996.


          f) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Republic
             of South Africa and the Republic of Mozambique for the
             Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
             Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
             Southern Africa Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2006-
             2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
             Board (ASB) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 85-2007].

     16) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:

          a) Government Notice No 809 published in Government Gazette No
             30247 dated 31 August 2007: Determination of interest rate for
             purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “official rate
             of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in terms
             of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


          b) Government Notice No 1062 published in Government Gazette No
             30220 dated 31 August 2007: Rate on the interest on Government
             loans made in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999).


          c) Government Notice No R.815 published in Government Gazette No
             30254 dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 1 (No.
             1/1/1342) in terms of the Customs end Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).
          d) Government Notice No R.816 published in Government Gazette No
             30254 dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 3 (No.
             3/618) in terms of the Customs end Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


          e) Explanatory Memorandum on the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill,
             2007.


          f) Explanatory Memorandum on the Securities Transfer Tax Bill,
             2007.


     17) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     18) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
             Council (ARC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             168-2006].


     19) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice an Constitutional Development for consideration and report.
         The Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
             Unit (SIU) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 206-
             2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Public
             Protector of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007 [RP 193-2007].

     20) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 27-2007].

     21) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited
             (Eskom) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     22) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and Independent Auditors are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
             Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 170-
             2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal
             for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 125-2007].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
             Institute for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
             Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          e) Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
             Administration Commission of South Africa for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 91-2007].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
             for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 142-2007].


     23) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry for consideration and report and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Finance. The Reports of the Auditor-General
         and Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit
             Regulator (NCR) for the ten months ended 31 March 2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for the ten months ended 31 March 2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
             Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
             finance Apex Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007


     24) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry for consideration:

          a) Report to Parliament on the Strategic Industrial Projects
             (SIP) of the Department of Trade and Industry for April 2002
             to March 2007.


          b) Report to Parliament on the National Industrial Participation
             Programme of the Department of Trade and Industry for 2006-
             2007.

     25) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
             Research Council (MRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 172-2007].

     26) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for 2006-
             2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     27) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements the National Productivity
             Institute (NPI) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.

     28) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Provincial and Local Government. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
             Education and Training Authority (LG-Seta) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 69-2007].


     29) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Transport. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education and
             Training Authority (Teta) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007 [RP 76-2007].


     30) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on the
         Auditor-General for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Auditor-General for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 134-2007].


     31) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury
             for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 139-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
             Bank for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
             Board (FSB) 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 91-
             2007].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud for
             Financial Services Providers for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
             Board for Auditors for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     32) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and Independent Auditors are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
             Communications Authority of South Africa for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 155-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
             Office Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
             Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 194-2007].

          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
             Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     33) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
             Schemes for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 75-
             2007].


     34) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
             Foundation for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing
             Finance Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.


     35) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education:
        a) Government Notice No 496 published in Government Gazette No
           29979 dated 8 June 2007: Appointment of ministerial committee on
           schools that work, in term of the provisions of regulations 20,
           Part 8, of the Treasury Regulations for Department, Trading
           Entities, Constitutional Institutions and Public Entities,
           issued in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act
           No 1 of 1999).


     36) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors are
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd
             for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama
             Trust Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 210-
             2007].


     37) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
             Fund (UIF) for 2006-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 162-
             2007].

     38) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report. The Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
             Authority for 2006-2007, including the Reports of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 and on the
             Financial Statements of the Criminal Assets Recovery Account
             for 2006-2007.


          b) Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2006-
             2007 [RP 123-2007].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
             Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007 [RP 132-2007].


     39) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Reports of
         the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
             Council (HSRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             128-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
             for Natural Scientific Professions 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
             Foundation (NRF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     40) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Public Service and Administration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service Sector
             Education and Training Authority (PSeta) for 2006-2007 [RP 73-
             2007].


     41) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment
             Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
     42) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry.

          a) Government Notice No 517 published in Government Gazette No
             30003 dated 21 June 2007: Repeal Part 1 of the Regulations
             published by Government Notice No. R2362 of 18 November 1977
             in terms of the Trade Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).




          b) Government Notice No R.544 published in Government Gazette No
             30023 dated 6 July 2007: Compulsory specification for cement
             in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          c) Government Notice No R.545 published in Government Gazette No
             30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment
             of levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
             specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
             (Act No 29 of 1993).


          d) Government Notice No R.546 published in Government Gazette No
             30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment
             of levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
             specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
             (Act No 29 of 1993).


          e) Government Notice No R.547 published in Government Gazette No
             30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment
             of levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
             specifications: Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993
             (Act No 29 of 1993).
          f) Government Notice No R.580 published in Government Gazette No
             30050 dated 13 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          g) Government Notice No R.581 published in Government Gazette No
             30050 dated 13 July 2007: Incorporation of an external company
             as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Revere
             International Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973
             (Act No 61 of 1973).


          h) Government Notice No R.582 published in Government Gazette No
             30050 dated 13 July 2007: Incorporation of an external company
             as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Delburne
             Holdings Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No
             61 of 1973).


          i) Government Notice No 643 published in Government Gazette No
             30074 dated 20 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          j) Government Notice No 644 published in Government Gazette No
             30074 dated 20 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          k) Government Notice No 648 published in Government Gazette No
             30092 dated 20 July 2007: Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office (CIPRO) – Intellectual Property Division:
             Notice in terms of regulations 3(7) in terms of the Copyright
             Act, 1978 (Act No 98 of 1978).


          l) Government Notice No 649 published in Government Gazette No
             30074 dated 20 July 2007: Repeal of Government Notice No 1322
             of 1 September 1995 and publishing of regulations in terms of
             the Trade Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).


          m) Government Notice No 698 published in Government Gazette No
             30144 dated 10 August 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          n) Government Notice No 741 published in Government Gazette No
             30189 dated 17 August 2007: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Kotze
             Investments (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973
             (Act No 61 of 1973).


          o) Government Notice No 781 published in Government Gazette No
             30225 dated 28 August 2007: Rules for the conduct of matters
             before the National Consumer Tribunal in terms of the National
             Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).


          p) Government Notice No 819 published in Government Gazette No
             30254 dated 7 September 2007: Proposed amendment of the
             Compulsory Specification for Vehicles of Category 03 and 04,
             in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

     43) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts
         and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 – Department of
             Arts and Culture for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     44) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund
             (RAF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 112-
             2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
             Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety
             Regulator (RSR) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             94-2007].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
             Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 146-2007].

          f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search
             and Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2006-2007.


          g) Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
             South Africa and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company
             Limited for 2006-2007.

     45) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy for consideration and report. The Reports of
         the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
             (CGE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 116-
             2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
             Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2006-2007, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007 [RP 96-2007].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
             Group of Companies (CEF) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group of
             Companies for 2006-2007 [RP 189-2007].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
             Board Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 111-
             2007].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
             Regulator (NNR) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             95-2007].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology (Mintek)
             for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 109-2007].


     46) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy for consideration and report and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Health. The Report of the Auditor-General is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
           Council for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 26-2007].


     47) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government:

          a) Government Notice No 824 published in Government Gazette No
             30264 dated 7 September 2007: Notice of allocations per
             municipality for Schedule 7 local government conditional
             grants, in accordance with sections 8(3) and 22(1)(a) of the
             Division of Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No 1 of 2007).


     48) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
             Transport for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     49) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development for consideration and report.  The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
             Social Development for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             203-2007].


     50) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development for consideration and report and to the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
             Security Agency for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             100-2007].

     51) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
             Communications for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             204-2007].


     52) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Science and Technology. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
             Media Institute of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 185-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
             Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 169-2007].


     53) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of
             Labour for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 49-
             2007].


     54) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Health. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 51-2007].

     55) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Minerals and Energy. The Report of the Auditor-General is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education
             and Training Authority (Eseta) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 61-2007].

     56) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa for
             2006-2007.


     57) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report. The Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department of
             Justice and Constitutional Development for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 119-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Presidents’ Fund for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 120-2007].


     58) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 80-2007].


     59) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy for consideration and report. The Reports of
         the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of
             Minerals and Energy for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             35-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity
             Distribution Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2006-
             2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
             Regulator (NNR) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             95-2007].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
             Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 167-2007].

     60) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors are
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of
             Water Affairs and Forestry for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007 [RP 201-2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Inkomati Catchment
             Management Agency for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 177-2007].

          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
             Commission for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 147-
             2007].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
             Authority (TCTA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


     61) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors are
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
             Agriculture for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 216-
             2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
             Land Affairs for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             209-2007].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
             Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 219-2007].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
             Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007 [RP 1-2007].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological
             Products Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


     62) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Foreign Affairs for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
             Foreign Affairs for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
             International Co-operation Fund for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.


     63) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 - Statistics South
             Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 104-
             2007].


     64) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
             Provincial and Local Government for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
             Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 218-
             2007].


     65) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report and to
         the Portfolio Committee on Finance. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Municipal Infrastructure
             Investment Unit (Pty) Ltd (MIIU) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 27-2007].

     66) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 – Department of
             Public Service and Administration for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 220-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 – Public Service
             Commission (PSC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             160-2007].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 12 – South African
             Management Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007.


     67) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of
             Public Works for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
             Environment (CBE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
             Development Board (CIDB) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.

     68) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Housing, the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and
         Forestry, the Portfolio Committee on Health, the Portfolio
         Committee on Education and the Joint Monitoring Committee on
         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women. The Report of
         the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
             Trust for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 182-
             2007].


     69) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
             Health for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 115-
             2007].


     70) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
             Housing for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 113-
             2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2006-
             2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
             (Pty) Ltd for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


     71) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Safety and Security for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Independent
             Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 223-2007].


     72) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Sport and Recreation for consideration and report. The Reports of
         the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
             Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 106-2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Drug-Free
             Sport for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 148-
             2007].

     73) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Science and Technology for consideration and report and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
             South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             215-2007].


     74) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Report of
         the Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Academy of Science of South
             Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     75) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report:

          a) Upliftment of the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr M
             S Makamu, a senior magistrate at Benoni.


          b) Report in terms of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates Act,
             1993 (Act No 90 of 1993): Suspension of a magistrate: Mr T V D
             Matyolo.


          c) Progress Report, dated 10 September 2007, to Parliament in
             terms of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
             of 1993): Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M F
             Mathe.


          d) Progress Report, dated 10 September 2007, to Parliament in
             terms of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
             of 1993): Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M K
             Chauke.


          e) Progress Report, dated 10 September 2007, to Parliament in
             terms of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
             of 1993): Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr I X
             Masimini.


          f) Report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr T V D Matyolo
             in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993
             (Act No 90 of 1993).


     76) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 15 – Department of
             Education for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 110-
             2007].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
             for Educators (SACE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
             Assurance in General and Further Education and Training –
             Umalusi for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
             Education (CHE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
             Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 180-2007].

     77) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Science and Technology for consideration and report and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Labour and the Portfolio Committee on
         Education. The Report of the Independent Auditors is referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Tshumisano Trust for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     78) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Science and Technology for consideration:

          a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Sultanate of Oman on
             Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
             Sultanate of Oman on Scientific and Technological Cooperation,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Argentine Republic on Scientific and
             Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.


          d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
             Argentine Republic on Scientific and Technological
             Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          e) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Slovak Republic on Scientific
             and Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          f) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
             Slovak Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          g) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of Australia on Scientific and
             Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.


          h) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
             Australia on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled
             in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          i) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Hellenic Republic on
             Scientific and Technological Cooperation, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          j) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
             Hellenic Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     79) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Correctional Services, dated 13
             September 2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
             terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
             Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
             tabling of the Annual Report of the Department of Correctional
             Services for 2006-2007.


     80) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
         Affairs and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Home Affairs, dated 28 September
             2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
             section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
             Annual Report of the Department of Home Affairs for 2006-2007.



     81) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services for consideration and report. The Report of
         the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of
             Correctional Services for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 217-2007].

     82) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report and to
         the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism. The
         Report of the Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
             Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.

     83) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Transport, dated 4 October 2007,
             to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
             65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
             of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
             Reports of the South African Maritime Safety Authority, the
             Cross-Border Road Transport Agency, the Urban Transport Fund
             and the Road Traffic Management Corporation for 2006-2007.


     84) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy for consideration and report and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Health and the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour.

          a) Report of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate for 2006-
             2007.

     85) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government, the Portfolio Committee on Health,
         the Portfolio Committee on Social Development, the Portfolio
         Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry and the Portfolio Committee
         on Education:

          a) Government Notice No R.824 published in Government Gazette No
             30264, dated 7 September 2007: Allocations per Municipality in
             terms of Sections 8(3) and 22(1)(a) of the Division of Revenue
             Act (No 1 of 2007) for the following Schedule 7 Local
             Government Conditional Grants: (1) Bulk Infrastructure Grant,
             (2) Backlogs in Water and Sanitation at Clinics and Schools
             Grant, and (3) Backlogs in the Electrification of Clinics and
             Schools Grant in term of the Division of Revenue Act, 2007
             (Act No 1 of 2007).


     86) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration:

          a) Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
             2007.


          b) Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank – 20
             September 2007.


          c) Government Notice No R.835 published in Government Gazette No
             30276, dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 1
             (No. 1/11344) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


          d) Government Notice No R.836 published in Government Gazette No
             30276, dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 3
             (No. 3/619) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).
          e) Government Notice No R.837 published in Government Gazette No
             30276, dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 3
             (No. 3/620) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).

          f) Government Notice No R.838 published in Government Gazette No
             30276, dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 4
             (No. 4/306) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


     87) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:

          a) Agreement Establishing the Collaborative Africa Budget Reform
             Initiative (CABRI), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement Establishing the
             Collaborative Africa Budget Reform Initiative (CABRI).


     88) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and report
         and to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
         Life and Status of Women. The Report of the Auditor-General is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Gender
             Equality (CGE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             176-2007].


     89) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport
         and Recreation and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister of Sport and Recreation, dated 10
             October 2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
             terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
             Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
             tabling of the Annual Report of the Department of Sport and
             Recreation for 2006-2007.

     90) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government:

          a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             investigation into the Management of Public Servants in Terms
             of Prevailing Provisions who re elected as Municipal
             Councillors in the Limpopo and Western Cape Provinces – August
             2007 [RP 152-2007].

     91) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Safety and Security for consideration and report:

          a) Proclamation No R.19 published in Government Gazette No 30162,
             dated 10 August 2007: Notification by President in accordance
             with section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy
             against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33
             of 2004).


          b) Proclamation No R.24 published in Government Gazette No 30252,
             dated 7 September 2007: Notification by President in
             accordance with section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004
             (Act No 33 of 2004).


     92) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

          a) Proclamation No R.21 published in Government Gazette No 30245,
             dated 31 August 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the
             Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).


          b) Proclamation No R.22 published in Government Gazette No 30245,
             dated 31 August 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the
             Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).


          c) Proclamation No R.23 published in Government Gazette No 30245,
             dated 31 August 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of the
             Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).


          d) Proclamation No R.25 published in Government Gazette No 30290,
             dated 12 September 2007: Referral of matters to existing
             Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals in terms of
             the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
             1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


     93) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Science and Technology. The Report of the Independent
         Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Support Programme for
             Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2006-2007.

     94) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Education. The Report of the Auditor-General is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
             Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007.


     95) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of
             Trade and Industry for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     96) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Public Service and Administration. The Report of the Independent
         Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees
             Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
             2007.

     97) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and report
         and to the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture. The Report of
         the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
             Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious
             and Linguistic Communities (CRL) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 126-2007].


     98) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of arivia.kom (Pty) Ltd for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
             for 2006-2007.


     99) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works for consideration:

          a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Cuba on the
             Employment of Technical Advisors, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    100) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister for Public Enterprises, dated 25
             October 2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
             terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management
             Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the
             tabling of the Annual Report of arivia.kom for 2006-2007.


    101) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified
             during a performance audit on the rendering of catering
             services at the Department of Defence – August 2007 [RP 221-
             2007].


    102) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration:


          a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Management
             of Poor Performance in the Public Service – August 2007 [RP 165-
             2007].

          b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Management
             of Conflicts of Interest through Financial Disclosures – May
             2007 [RP 20-2007].

          c) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Implementation of the Promotion of Access to Information Act,
             2000 (Act No 2 of 2000) in the Public Service – August 2007 [RP
             166-2007].

          d) Consolidated Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on
             Inspections of Public Service Delivery Sites – August 2007 [RP
             164-2007].

          e) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Citizen
             Satisfaction Survey 2006/2007: Department of Home Affairs,
             Department of Trade and Industry and Transport Services by
             Provincial Departments – September 2007 [RP 163-2007].

    103) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


          a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter, dated 26
             October 2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
             Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
             National Defence Force in Uganda.


    104) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport for consideration and report:


          a) 1991 Amendments to the Convention on the International Maritime
             Organisation (IMO), 1948, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
             the Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the 1991 Amendments to the Convention
             on the International Maritime Organisation (IMO), 1948.

          c) International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling
             Systems on Ships, 2001, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
             the Constitution, 1996.

          d) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention on the
             Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling Systems on Ships, 2001.
    105) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:

          a) Proclamation No 26 published in Government Gazette No 30297,
             dated 13 September 2007: Commencement of the Pension Funds
             Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No 11 of 2007).

          b) Proclamation No R.27 published in Government Gazette No 30338,
             dated 28 September 2007: Determining of a date on which section
             12(1) of the Act shall come into operation, in terms of the
             Second Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2004 (Act No 34 of 2004).

          c) Government Notice No R.834 published in Government Gazette No
             30275, dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1343), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 2004 (Act No
             34 of 2004).

          d) Government Notice No R.1002 published in Government Gazette No
             30393, dated 28 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No
             6/110) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


          e) Government Notice No R.938 published in Government Gazette No
             30356, dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1345) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).

          f) Government Notice No R.939 published in Government Gazette No
             30356, dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             3/621) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

          g) Government Notice No R.955 published in Government Gazette No
             30370, dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/622) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


          h) Government Notice No R.956 published in Government Gazette No
             30370, dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/307) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

          i) Government Notice No R.957 published in Government Gazette No
             30370, dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 8 (No
             8/6) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).

          j) Government Notice No R.958 published in Government Gazette No
             30370, dated 12 October 2007: Amendment issued in terms of
             section 74(3)(a) of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of
             1991).

          k) Government Notice No R.959 published in Government Gazette No
             30370, dated 12 October 2007: Amendment of Rules (DAR/38) in
             terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    106) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


          a) Letter from the Minister of Defence, dated 6 November 2007, to
             the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
             65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
             of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
             Report of the Castle of Good Hope for 2006-2007.


    107) The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee
         on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
         Disabled Persons for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth
             Commission (NYC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2006-2007 [RP 184-2007].

    108) The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee
         on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
         Disabled Persons and the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister in The Presidency, dated 8 November
             2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
             section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
             Annual Report of the National Youth Commission (NYC) for 2006-
             2007.
    109) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Minerals and Energy. The Reports of the Auditor-General are
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
             Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 59-2007].

          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mining
             Qualifications Authority (MQA) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 72-2007].

    110) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Trade and Industry. The Report of the Auditor-General is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
             Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
             Authority (MER-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             71-2007].


    111) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Communications and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
             Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
             Training Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 70-2007].


    112) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Science and Technology and the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Information
             Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector
             Education and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 68-2007].

    113) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Water Affairs and Forestry. The Report of the Auditor-General is
         referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
             Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2006-2007,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 64-2007].

    114) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
             Institution for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 153-
             2007].


          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre
             for the Arts for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 191-
             2007].


          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 175-
             2007].


          (e)     Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust
             for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Heritage Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2006-2007, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2006-2007 [RP 195-2007].

          (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          h) Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 192-
             2007].


          (i)     Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company
             for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    115) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts
         and Culture for consideration and report and to the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
             for the Blind for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    116) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
         Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Weather Service (SAWS) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 114-2007].


    117) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 - Department of
             Defence for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    118) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Service and Administration. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council (ELRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
             [RP 145-2007].


    119) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:

          (a)     Strategic Plan of the Marine Living Resources Fund for
             2007 to 2010.


    120) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration:

          (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Audit
             of Reporting Requirements and Departmental Monitoring and
             Evaluation Systems within National and Provincial Government –
             June 2007 [RP 17-2007].

          b) Third Consolidated Service Monitoring and Evaluation Report:
             March 2006 by the Public Service Commission (PSC) [RP 22-2007].

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Correctional Services

   (a)      Report of the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons for 2006-2007 [RP
82-2007].


National Assembly

2.    The Speaker


   a) Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges’
      Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of
      2001), determining the rate at which salaries are payable to
      Constitutional Court judges and judges annually, with effect from 1
      April 2007, for approval by Parliament.

   b) Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 12(3) of the Magistrates
      Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate at which salaries
      are payable to magistrates annually, with effect from 1 April 2007,
      for approval by Parliament.

   Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development for consideration and report by Wednesday 21 November 2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    REPORT OF THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE, ON EMPLOYMENT OF
   SANDF TO THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letter
    from the President on the employment of the South African National
    Defence Force (SANDF) to the Central African Republic, referred to the
    Committee, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


National Assembly

1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
   Development on the South African Judicial  Education  Institute  Bill  [B
   4─2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 7 November 2007:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the South African Judicial Education Institute  Bill  [B  4─2007]
(National Assembly – sec. 75) referred to the committee  and  classified  by
the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports on the  Bill  with
amendments [B 4A─2007] as follows:


   1. This is the first of a package of Bills aimed at facilitating judicial
      transformation.


   2. The South African Judicial Education Institute  Bill  emerged  from  a
      process of extensive consultation and negotiation with the  judiciary.
      The Committee understands that the Bill has been substantially  agreed
      to by the judiciary.

   3. The Committee feels that the establishment of the South African
      Judicial Education Institute is crucial to the transformation of the
      judiciary and welcomes this Bill.

   4.  The  Committee  believes  that  the  Bill  is  basically  sound.  The
      amendments  effected  are  not  substantial  and  do  not  affect  the
      underlying framework of the  Bill.  For  example,  the  amendments  to
      clause 7 relate to the composition of the Council  of  the  Institute,
      and are necessary in order to provide for a mechanism to designate the
      Council members who are not ex officio members, as well as to increase
      the representation of magistrates on the Council by two members.   The
      new clause 11 results from the rearrangement of clause 5 into separate
      clauses – in effect, the new  clause  is  the  original  clause  5(2).
      However, the Committee would like to draw attention to  the  amendment
      of clause 12 (introduced as clause 11). It  reflects  the  Committee’s
      view that it is not appropriate to appoint a serving judicial  officer
      or a judge discharged from active  service  as  the  Director  of  the
      Institute.  The clause states that the Director  would  be  the  Chief
      Executive Officer of the Institute and, as the head of the  Institute,
      he  or  she  would  bear  the   principal   responsibility   for   the
      administration and management of the Institute.  The  Committee  holds
      the view  that  such  functions  are  distinctly  removed  from  those
      associated  with  the  holding  of  judicial  office.   They  are  not
      compatible with the office of a judicial office bearer and,  should  a
      judicial  office  bearer  be   appointed   to   this   position,   the
      independence, impartiality and dignity of the judiciary is potentially
      at risk. The same would  apply  to  a  judge  discharged  from  active
      service.


   5. The  Committee  stresses  that  all  policy  decisions  regarding  the
      Institute,  and  particularly  the  training   curricula,   would   be
      determined by the Council, of which the majority of members  would  be
      judicial officers.

   6. The Committee understands that the Department has not yet  worked  out
      the  cost  of  implementing  this  Bill.  Obviously,   it   would   be
      unreasonable to expect a precise costing to  have  been  completed  at
      this stage, but we are concerned  that  there  is  not  even  a  broad
      estimate of the cost.

   7. The Director General of the Department of Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development is the Accounting Officer of the Institute. The  Committee
      expects though that when the Institute reports  to  the  Committee  in
      terms  of  clause  15,   the   Director   General,   a   non-executive
      representative of the Council of the  Institute  and  the  Institute’s
      Director will account to the Committee.


   Report to be considered.


2.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
   Development on the Judicial Officers Amendment Bill [B 72─2001] (National
   Assembly – sec 75), dated 15 November 2007:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the subject matter of the Judicial Officers Amendment Bill  [B
   72─2001] (National Assembly – sec. 75), referred to it and classified  by
   the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a  section  75  Bill,  endorses   the
   classification of the Bill and presents redraft of the Bill,  namely  the
   Judicial Service Commission Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2007].


3.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   DEVELOPMENT ON THE WITHHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF MR M F MATHE, AN
   ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT PINETOWN, DATED 14 NOVEMBER 2007:
 
    The Portfolio Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
    having considered the report on  the  withholding  of  remuneration  of
    Magistrate  M  F  Mathe,  tabled  by  the  Minister for   Justice   and
    Constitutional Development  in  terms  of  section  13(4A)(b)  of   the
    Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of    1993), reports as follows:

           1. The Committee noted from the report tabled  by  the  Minister
              for Justice and Constitutional Development that the Minister,
              on 22  August 2005  and  on   the   recommendation   of   the
              Magistrates Commission, provisionally suspended Mr Mathe from
              office in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the  Magistrates  Act,
              1993 and that his provisional  suspension  was  confirmed  by
              Parliament in terms of section  13(3)(c)  of  the  Act on  13
              October 2005.

           2. The Committee noted  that  Mr  Mathe  was,  on  4  May  2007,
              convicted by the Durban Regional Court on a charge  of  theft
              of R11 000,00 in cash.

           3.  The  Committee further noted that the Magistrates Commission
              on  24  May  2007,  determined   to   withhold   Mr   Mathe’s
              remuneration  in  terms  of   section   13(4A)(a)   of    the
              Magistrates Act,1993.
 
           4.  In terms of section 13(4A)(c) of the Magistrates Act,  1993,
              Parliament must, as soon as is reasonably possible,  consider
              the report and pass a resolution as to  whether  or  not  the
              determination concerned is confirmed, either with or  without
              amendment, or set aside.
 
           5. The   Portfolio   Committee   therefore    recommends    that
              the National Assembly resolves to confirm  the  determination
              by  the  Magistrates  Commission  to  withhold   Mr   Mathe's
              remuneration in terms of section 13(4A)(c) of the Magistrates
              Act, 1993.

Report to be considered
 
4.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   DEVELOPMENT ON THE UPLIFTMENT OF THE PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF A
   MAGISTRATE: MR MS MAKAMU, SENIOR MAGISTRATE AT BENONI, DATED 14 NOVEMBER
   2007:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report on the upliftment of the provisional suspension  of  a
Magistrate, Mr MS Makamu, Senior Magistrate at Benoni, reports as follows:


1.    Background

1.1   The Portfolio Committee noted from the report tabled by  the  Minister
      for Justice and  Constitutional  Development  that  the  Minister  for
      Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,   on  23   November   2005,
      provisionally suspended Mr M S Makamu, a Senior Magistrate at  Benoni,
      from office.  It  was  done  in  terms  of  section  13(3)(a)  of  the
      Magistrates Act, 1993, (Act No 90  of  1993)  on  the  advice  of  the
      Magistrates Commission. A  report  to  this  effect  was  subsequently
      tabled in Parliament in terms of section  13(3)(b)  of  the  Act.  The
      National Assembly, on 21  June  2006,  and  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces,  shortly  thereafter,  confirmed  Mr  Makamu’s  provisional
      suspension. Mr  Makamu’s  provisional  suspension  was  based  on  the
      following:
            Mr Makamu was convicted by the Johannesburg  Regional  Court  of
           fraud and, on 21 June 2005, sentenced to a fine  of  R10  000.00
           or,  in  default  of  payment,  to  a  period  of   six   months
           imprisonment, all of which were suspended for a period  of  four
           years on  certain  conditions.  The  conviction  relates  to  an
           incident where he allegedly convinced the administration Officer
           at the Benoni Magistrate’s Court to sign an official  letter  in
           which he stated that he (Mr Makamu) was entitled to an  official
           motor vehicle allowance to the amount of R80 973.00  per  annum,
           well knowing that in truth and in fact he at the  time  did  not
           qualify to receive such an allowance. Mr Makamu  then  presented
           the said letter to Bankfin where he applied  for  an  instalment
           sale agreement in order to purchase a new motor vehicle.


1.2   The Portfolio Committee noted that the Magistrates Commission,  on  31
      March 2006 and in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the  Magistrates  Act,
      1993, determined to withhold Mr Makamu’s  remuneration.  A  report  to
      this effect was tabled in Parliament on 7 April,  2006.  The  National
      Assembly confirmed the Commission’s determination on 21 June 2006  and
      the National Council of Provinces shortly thereafter.


1.3   The Portfolio Committee noted that, after  having  been  provisionally
      suspended from Office, the Magistrates Commission commenced  with  its
      investigation into Mr Makamu’s fitness to hold Office as a Magistrate.
      After conclusion of  the  investigation,  the  Commission  decided  to
      charge Mr Makamu with misconduct and served a written notice  to  this
      effect on him on 25 July 2005. However, the inquiry into  his  fitness
      to hold office was, at his own  request,  postponed  sine  die  on  13
      January 2006, pending the outcome of his appeal against his conviction
      in the Regional Court.

1.4   The Portfolio Committee noted  that,  on  15  June  2007,  the  appeal
      against Mr Makamu’s conviction and  sentence  was  finally  heard  and
      upheld by the  High  Court  in  Johannesburg.  Accordingly,  both  his
      conviction  and  his  sentence  were  set  aside.  According  to   the
      Commission, it after having studied the record of the  proceedings  is
      of the view that it would not, on a balance of probabilities, be  able
      to successfully prove the charge of misconduct which was based on  the
      incident which formed the basis of the criminal prosecution and  which
      led to his provisional suspension, against Mr Makamu.

1.5   The Portfolio Committee also noted that, accordingly,  the  Commission
      has decided not to proceed with its inquiry against Mr  Makamu.  Since
      the misconduct inquiry formed the basis of his provisional suspension,
      his provisional suspension could not be sustained and accordingly, his
      provisional suspension was uplifted with immediate effect.

1.6   The Portfolio Committee also noted that, since the withholding  of  Mr
      Makamu’s remuneration was based on  his  provisional  suspension,  the
      determination to withhold his salary automatically fell  away  at  the
      time when his provisional suspension was uplifted.

1.7   The Portfolio Committee also noted that, since the basis on  which  Mr
      Makamu was provisionally suspended fell away, there was no  reason  to
      uphold  his  provisional  suspension.  Accordingly,  his   provisional
      suspension was uplifted with immediate effect.

   8.  The  Portfolio  Committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  National
      Assembly agrees with the  decision  of  the  Minister  to  uplift  the
      provisional suspension of Mr MS Makamu, with immediate effect.


Report to be considered.

5.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   DEVELOPMENT ON THE REMOVAL FROM OFFICE AND WITHHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF
   MR T V D MATYOLO, AN ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT PORT ELIZABETH, DATED 14
   NOVEMBER 2007:
 
      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the report on the suspension/removal from office  of
      Mr Matyolo and the withholding of his  remuneration,   tabled  by  the
      Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional Development  in  terms  of
      section 13(4)(b) and 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of
      1993), respectively, reports as follows:
 
           1. The Committee noted from the report tabled  by  the  Minister
              for  Justice  and   Constitutional   Development   that   the
              Magistrates Commission on 23 August 2007 and 29 October 2007,
              respectively, resolved to recommend the removal  from  office
              of  Mr  Matyolo  in  terms  of  section  13(4)(a)(i)  of  the
              Magistrates  Act,  1993  and  determined  to   withhold   his
              remuneration in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Act.
 
           2. The  Committee  noted  that  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
              Constitutional Development has, in terms of section  13(4)(a)
              of the Magistrates  Act,  1993,  suspended  Mr  Matyolo  from
              office on 27 September 2007.
 
           3. The  Committee further noted that Mr Matyolo has been  absent
              from office since 5 June 2007  without  leave  or  any  other
              valid reason and that in terms of regulation  34(1)   of  the
              Regulations for Judicial Officers in the Lower Courts he,  in
              the circumstances, is deemed to have absconded and as such he
              made himself guilty of misconduct. All efforts to  trace  him
              were unsuccessful.
 
           4.   In  terms  of  section  13(4)(c)  and  13(4A)(c)   of   the
              Magistrates  Act,  1993,  Parliament  must,  as  soon  as  is
              reasonably possible pass a resolution as to whether or not –

                 (a)   the restoration  of  Mr  Matyolo  to  his  office  is
                     recommended; and
                 (b)    the   determination   to   withhold   Mr   Matyolo’s
                     remuneration  is confirmed,  either  with  or  without
                     amendment, or set aside.
 
           5. The   Portfolio   Committee   therefore    recommends    that
             the National   Assembly resolves –


                 (a)   not to restore Mr Matyolo to his office in  terms  of
                    section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993; and
                 (b)   to  confirm  the  determination  by  the  Magistrates
                    Commission to  withhold  Mr  Matyolo's  remuneration  in
                    terms of section 13(4A)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.



Report to be considered

6.    REPORT OF  THE  PORTFOLIO  COMMITTEE  ON  JUSTICE  AND  CONSTITUTIONAL
   DEVELOPMENT ON THE WITHHOLDING OF REMUNERATION OF MR  I  X  MASIMINI,  AN
   ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT QUEENSTOWN, DATED 14 NOVEMBER 2007:


      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the report on the  withholding  of  remuneration  of
      Magistrate I X  Masimini,  tabled  by  the  Minister for  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development  in  terms  of  section  13(4A)(b)  of  the
      Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of 1993), reports as follows:
 
           1. The Committee noted from the report tabled by the    Minister
              for Justice and Constitutional Development that the Minister,
              on 13 March 2006 and on the recommendation of the Magistrates
              Commission, provisionally suspended Mr Masimini  from  office
              in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.
 
           2. The Committee noted that Mr  Masimini  had,  on  24  November
              2006, been convicted on a charge of assault with  the  intent
              to do grievous bodily harm, that  he  was  also  charged  for
              having made a false/incorrect statement when applying for  an
              appointment to the Regional Court Bench and that he had  been
              found guilty on three counts of misconduct  for  having  used
              foul and injudicious language in court.
 
           3. The  Committee further noted that the Magistrates Commission,
              on 19  April  2007,  determined  to  withhold  Mr  Masimini’s
              remuneration in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of the Magistrates
              Act,1993.
 
           4.  In terms of section 13(4A)(c) of the Magistrates Act,  1993,
              Parliament must, as soon as is reasonably possible,  consider
              the report and pass a resolution as to  whether  or  not  the
              determination concerned is confirmed, either with or  without
              amendment, or set aside.
 
           5. The   Portfolio   Committee   therefore    recommends    that
              the National  Assembly resolves to confirm the  determination
              by the  Magistrates  Commission  to  withhold  Mr  Masimini's
              remuneration in terms of section 13(4A)(c) of the Magistrates
              Act, 1993.

Report to be considered
                          MONDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Housing Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill [B 6B – 2007
         (Reprint)] – Act No 17 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President
         on 12 November 2007).


      2) National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2006] – Act
         No 18 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 12 November
         2007).

      3) Banks Amendment Bill [B 12B – 2007] – Act No 20 of 2007 (assented
         to and signed by President on 12 November 2007).

      4) Prohibition of Mercenary Activities and Regulation of Certain
         Activities in Country of Armed Conflict Bill [B 42B – 2005] – Act
         No 27 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 12 November
         2007).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 15 November 2007 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
         classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Bill [B 48 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on its oversight visit
   to the 2010 FIFA World Cup Host Cities, dated 25 June 2007:

The Portfolio Committee on Transport having visited 2010 FIFA World Cup
Host Cities reports as follows:

   1. Introduction


   1. In the course of the Parliamentary second term, the Transport
      Portfolio Committee in the National Assembly has conducted a
      relatively intensive oversight programme to assess transport
      preparations for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The Committee has interacted
      with the National Department of Transport (DoT), including a full-day
      interaction with departmental staff in the head office in Pretoria.
      The Committee has also conducted a series of oversight visits to host
      cities. At the time of completing this report, seven of the nine host
      cities (Johannesburg, Polokwane, Nelson Mandela, eThekwini,
      Rustenburg, Mangaung and Mbombela) had been visited. Cape Town was
      visited on the 20 June. Thus far, the Committee has been unable to
      establish a date with the City of Tshwane.


   2.  Cabinet has identified public transport as the primary legacy that
      should be derived from our hosting of the World Cup. If the
      opportunity of hosting the 2010 FIFA World Cup is to be used to
      provide a sustainable transport legacy, then planning and the
      assurance of effective funding for public transport systems needs to
      be more or less completed already, and full-scale implementation needs
      to be underway in the coming months, if this is not already the case.

   3. The relatively tight time-lines that we are now facing needs to be
      further appreciated in terms of the FIFA requirement that no major
      infrastructural construction should be underway in the host cities for
      six months prior to the actual event in July 2010. This means that
      there are, effectively, just two-and-a-half years in which to complete
      significant public transport transformation.

   4. In this report the Committee will raise a number of concerns about the
      current state of progress. In the light of attempts in some quarters,
      mostly outside of our country, to suggest that South Africa will not
      be able to host a successful FIFA World Cup, the Committee wishes to
      state up-front that they have no doubt that the capacity to provide
      effective transport for the event exists within our country and that
      we will rise to the occasion. The Committees concern relates less to
      event-oriented transport provision in the narrower sense, and much
      more specifically to the question of ensuring that an effective and
      sustainable public transport legacy will be laid down.

   5. In the light of the tight deadlines, the Committee has decided to
      produce this interim report on our work before the end of the
      Parliamentary second term. The Committee will focus on some key areas
      of concern, making recommendations which it believes needs to be
      addressed by the Executive with a sense of urgency. The committee will
      compile a fuller report providing much more specific details once it
      has completed its round of host city oversight visits and other
      ongoing oversight work.

1. Reinforcing dedicated 2010 capacity in the National Department of
   Transport

   1. In the budget hearings with the DoT on March 20th, 2007, the Committee
      was informed that the DoT had a staff vacancy rate of 41%. The
      Director General assured the Committee that 50% of these vacancies
      “were in the process of being filled”. It is possible that some
      progress has since been made, but that still leaves a very high level
      of vacancy. Whatever the general levels of staff shortage, the
      shortage of senior DoT staff working in a relatively dedicated way on
      2010was very evident to the Committee. It was also raised as a concern
      with the committee by a number of host cities.

   2. At present there is only one senior official, a Chief Director, who is
      working full-time on the 2010 project in the DoT. The official reports
      to an Acting Deputy Director who devotes considerable time to 2010
      matters, but who also has extensive additional responsibilities. Many
      other senior officials in the DoT are also actively involved with 2010
      matters, and the Committee was impressed with the general
      understanding senior members of the DoT brought to the challenges -
      but they all have many other responsibilities and principal points of
      focus.

   3. This situation should be compared to Germany’s World Cup preparations
      where, the delegation was told, the Local Organising Committee had a
      team of 80 full-time transport specialists. A similar sized team of
      transport experts is working full-time on London’s 2012 Olympic
      preparations.

   4. The Committee recommends that the DoT should urgently build up a
      dedicated 2010 transport team.

   5. An important role of such a team should be to support the work of the
      host cities, through:
              • augmenting city capacity where it is needed, which may
                require full-time secondment to host cities;
              • ensuring a more effective flow of national information on
                2010 transport. Several host cities commended the early
                support they had received from the DoT but added that
                “things have gone a bit quiet over the past six months”;
              • assisting host cities to more effectively access national
                transport entities – for instance, Nelson Mandela Bay
                Municipality is uncertain what ACSA’s plans are for the Port
                Elizabeth airport. This is impacting upon their road based
                transport infrastructure planning in terms of connecting the
                airport to local hotels. eThekwini expressed even stronger
                concerns and uncertainties about road access to the planned
                new King Shaka airport at La Mercy.
              • Ensuring that there is effective coordination between
                provinces and host cities.


   3. Challenges in host cities


   1. The level of planning and preparedness varies greatly from host city
      to city. In some of the major cities, including City of Johannesburg
      (CoJ), eThekwini and Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality there are clearly
      competent transport teams in place, most planning is effectively
      completed and implementation of the main 2010 projects and systems is
      poised for roll-out. However, in each of these cities there are
      challenges and frustrations that need to be addressed some of which
      will be noted below. Other cities, Polokwane in particular, appear to
      have made very little progress and there are serious capacity and
      other concerns that will also be noted below.


   2. Johannesburg The Johannesburg 2010 flag-ship public transport project
      is the Rea Vaya Bus Rapid Transit system. Phase one of the project,
      which is scheduled to be operational by 2009 in time for the Africa
      Confederations Cup, will involve 94kms of dedicated bus-lanes and will
      provide an estimated 413,000 passenger trips per day. The first phase
      runs on several key routes including a major south-north line from
      Lenasia through Soweto to Sunninghill, another line begins in
      Alexandra, and there are line around and through the CBD. The routes
      take in the two Johannesburg 2010 stadiums - Soccer City and Ellis
      Park, as well as some of the training stadiums. The capital
      expenditure will be R2,1bn, and the city expects to have secured all
      funding by January 2008.

   3. Costing less than one-tenth of the Gautrain project, and with a first
      phase that will transport about four times more passengers, this is a
      major project. The CoJ is receiving full support for the Rea Vaya
      project from National Treasury and has successfully accessed other
      financial assistance.

   4. The CoJ has, however, identified several potential risks to the Rea
      Vaya project, including:

              • The slow pace at which Environmental Impact Assessment
                approvals are moving;
              • Uncertainty about the provincial Operating Licensing Board
                and the province’s impending conclusion of new bus contracts
                and subsidy policies and whether these will be co-ordinated
                with Rea Vaya planning;
              • The dangers of competing provincial initiatives on similar
                routes that will undermine the financial sustainability of
                Rea Vaya – the example of the recent Monorail proposal was
                cited.

   5. The CoJ also mentioned capacity challenges. In this regard the
      Committee believes that the CoJ should consider building a full-time
      Rea Vaya team. At present leading officials dealing with Rea Vaya are
      not full-time on this project, they all have other transport
      responsibilities. In particular, the Committee believes that, while
      strong engineering, infrastructural and town-planning skills exist
      within the City, much greater attention should be given to the very
      complex area of institutional development, financial models, and BRT
      operational and regulatory features. The CoJ is pioneering one of the
      first integrated public transport systems ever in South Africa. It
      plans to integrate the city-owned Metrobus, the privately owned Putco,
      and the taxi associations currently on the routes, into BRT operating
      consortia. This is a highly commendable approach, but it is an
      extremely complex matter which cannot be left to the last few months
      before the first phase becomes operational. Integrated mass-based,
      public transport systems have not been built in South Africa for 40
      years and more, if at all. Experience and skills, particularly in
      regard to public transport financial, institutional, business-planning
      and the operating and regulatory systems are not readily available.
      Experienced international transport economists and operational
      planners may well have to be brought in, to work closely with South
      African counterparts.


   6. The CoJ is of course involved in numerous other 2010-related transport
      projects including park and ride facilities for access to stadiums,
      coordination with the SA Rail Commuter Corporation on stadia-related
      stations, access to fan parks, and the first phase of an International
      Transit and Shopping Centre for buses and taxis arriving from the
      Southern African region, and even further afield on our continent.

   7. eThekwini – The Committee was also impressed with the senior officials
      in this metro and with the detailed 2010 transport planning processes
      underway. After considerable evaluation, eThekwini has decided not to
      go for a full BRT system as their principal 2010 flagship public
      transport legacy project. Instead they have decided to focus on
      upgrading, extending and revitalising the north-south rail corridor.
      They indicate that they are working closely with the SA Rail Commuter
      Corporation/Metrorail in this regard. Most of the infrastructure
      expenditure will have to be borne by SARCC/Metrorail.

   8. Using existing rail infrastructure obviously has many advantages,
      however a major challenge will be to greatly improve on the very low
      present levels of rail ridership on the corridor – a mere 17,000 out
      of a current 200,000 public transport passenger trips per day (the
      majority of them currently in minibus taxis).
   9. The City’s major contribution to the north-south rail corridor is an
      ambitious plan to transform the Warwick Junction precinct. In terms of
      passenger movements, Warwick Junction is by far the City’s major rail
      station and transport interchange hub with several major taxi ranks.
      It is also a thriving commercial centre for small traders. However,
      the present reality is chaotic – different taxi ranks are located
      irrationally, pedestrians have to cross the extremely busy N3 main
      route into Durban from Gauteng, the area has the highest concentration
      of pedestrian fatalities in the country, and the commercial potential
      of the location is compromised.

   4. The City has completed extensive planning for a major overhaul of the
      Warwick Junction area. The overhaul involves transforming existing
      taxi ranks and regulating them more effectively, so that taxi
      associations servicing townships in the North, West and South of the
      City are respectively located on the appropriate side of the precinct
      (which is not the case at present). The overhaul also involves
      building a fly-over for the Gauteng-Durban road at this point, to
      create a safer pedestrian and public transport environment below.
      Despite planning having been completed for some years, the project has
      failed, for some reason, to secure DoT support, and therefore there
      has not been funding for it. Unless approval is secured before
      September 2007, it will be too late to proceed with the renewal ahead
      of 2010.

   1. The DoT’s reluctance to support the project appears to be based on the
      belief that this is basically a car-friendly, free-way oriented
      project. The proposed fly-over is about pedestrian safety and about
      freeing up ground-level space to public transport. The Committee
      recommends that the DoT should engage, as a matter of urgency, at a
      high level with eThekwini to clarify this matter. The Committee
      further recommends that eThekwini’s Warwick Junction transformation
      plans should be fully supported as a key component of providing a 2010
      transport legacy.
   2. eThekwini has many other important public transport plans related to
      2010 – including an inner-city People Mover bus project, stadium
      related pedestrian infrastructure, public transport priority lanes on
      some east-west corridors, and a proposed extension of the rail line to
      Bridge City in the North.

   3. eThekwini is also engaging the taxi industry with a view to developing
      an active role for existing associations as feeders for the flagship
      north-south rail corridor. While commending the objectives of this
      process, the Committee is concerned that the City does not yet seem to
      have very clear ideas about exactly how taxi association cooperation
      will be secured, and particularly what business and financial models
      and integrated operating systems are envisaged. Once again, the
      committee believe this reflects the relative strengths on the
      engineering and town planning side in our country, and the relative
      lack of expertise in operationalising integrated mass public transport
      networks. The committee recommend that this should be an important
      area of assistance that should be provided by a dedicated DoT 2010
      transport team as envisaged in 2.5 above.

   4. Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality – The NMBM has opted for a BRT system
      as its flagship 2010 public transport legacy project. Route planning
      is more or less complete, and the city has decided to go for low-
      floor, left-door buses on the system, partly because it will not be a
      fully closed BRT system throughout, and will therefore rely on
      kerbside loading in some cases. The city is relatively sure of
      adequate funding for the project. In the view of the Committee, here
      as elsewhere, the principal challenges lie in the operational,
      business, financial and regulatory models. The city is currently in
      negotiations with eight taxi associations operating on the proposed
      BRT route. It envisages breaking the Algoa Bus Company’s current
      single contract for the whole city into five and combining Algoa Bus
      Company and taxi operators into consortia. The proposal is to have a
      negotiated contract for BRT routes.

   5. Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality officials have identified as potential
      risks to their 2010 transport programmes several issues, among them:

        • A lack of in-house capacity. The Committee believes that this
          applies less to infrastructural, engineering and town-planning
          capacity, and rather more to operational, business, financial and
          regulatory capacity for the BRT;
        • Slowness in obtaining environmental impact assessment approvals.
          The city officials recommended that national government considers
          establishing a 2010 fast-track capacity in the Department of
          Environmental Affairs and Tourism – not in order to avoid
          effective environmental impact assessments, but in order to
          ensure that delays on this front do not undermine the whole
          objective of using 2010 to lay down an effective (and
          environmentally enhancing) public transport legacy. The Committee
          recommends that this proposal should be seriously considered.

   6. As mentioned in 2.5 above, Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality also
      expressed concern about a lack of clarity around ACSA’s plans for Port
      Elizabeth airport. This hampers their own ability to plan effectively
      for road transport and infrastructure to cater for the anticipated
      2010 surge in passengers through the airport – an estimated 5000 per
      day compared to the current 1200.


   7. Polokwane – The committee is very concerned with what it found in
      Polokwane. The City does not appear to have any serious 2010 public
      transport planning in place. In fact, it has not even completed its
      regular Integrated Transport Plan, as is required by the National Land
      Transport Transitional Act.

   8. For the present, 2010 transport projects involve widening to four
      lanes the main access roads to the stadium but with little thought
      given to a public transport legacy. The delegation was told by the
      mayor that public transport is a “provincial matter”.

   9. The city is also planning to build a bus and taxi rank near the
      station for cross-border international transport. It is planning a
      second rank for domestic buses and taxis but at some distance from the
      international rank - that is, without any consideration for
      integrating national, domestic and road and rail modes. This second
      rank is being proposed despite the fact that there is a relatively new
      bus and taxi rank but that is unused. The city officials were unable
      to provide satisfactory explanations for any of this, nor were they
      able to provide any sense of current ridership levels on different
      routes. The delegation was referred to “studies that are still
      underway”.

   5. Planning for the road-based connections to the airport at Polokwane
      are also a serious matter of concern. The delegation did not have a
      sense that any serious planning or consultation is happening in this
      regard.

   1. It is true that smaller host cities like Polokwane may well not
      encounter as many inherent transport challenges as cities like
      Tshwane, Johannesburg and Cape Town that already face serious
      congestion problems. However, the Committee believes that the
      situation in Polokwane needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency.
      In particular, the committee recommends that the DoT and the Limpopo
      provincial Department of Transport engage actively with the city.
                          TUESDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 20 November
         2007:


        (a)      Public Service Amendment Bill [B 31B – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).


        (b)      Rental Housing Amendment Bill [B 30B – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).

2.    Bills referred to Mediation Committee

    (1)     Bill, as amended by National Assembly, and rejected by National
        Council of Provinces on 20 November 2007, referred to Mediation
        Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(2)(b):


         (a)      Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19D – 2006 (Reprint)]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


      1) Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 20 November 2007 and returned for consideration of
         Council’s proposed amendments:


          a) Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment
             Bill [B 50B – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed
             amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports,
             14 November 2007, p 2244).


          b) Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill [B 15B – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 15 November
             2007, p 2301).


             The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly
             for a report on the amendments proposed by the Council.


          c) South African Express Bill [B 14B – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings
             and Committee Reports, 07 November 2007, p 2058).


          d) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26B – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
             75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and
             Committee Reports, 07 November 2007, p 2058)


             The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Public Enterprises of the National Assembly for a report on the
             amendments proposed by the Council.


        (e)      Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16B – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 08 November
             2007, p 2064)


        (f)      Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill [B 17B – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 08 November
             2007, p 2064).


             The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Science and Technology of the National Assembly for a report on
             the amendments proposed by the Council.


          g) Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 29 October 2007,
             p 2021).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly for a report on the
             amendments proposed by the Council.
TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 7 November 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
        informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South
        African National Defence Force in Darfu in Sudan:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR A
        SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE
        REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION AND UNITED
        NATIONS


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have authorised
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel to Darfu in Sudan, for a service in fulfilment of the
        international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
        the African Union (AU) and the united Nations (UN), as part of the
        AU/UN Hybrid Operation in Darfu in accordance with the United
        Nations Security Council Resolution 1769.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof
        to the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        signed
        TM MBEKI

        (b)      The President of the Republic submitted the following
             letter dated 9 November 2007 to the Speaker of the National
             Assembly informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force during the 2007/2008
             festive season:


             EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR A
             SERVICE IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE


             This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have
             authorised the employment of the South African National Defence
             Force (SANDF) personnel, for a service in co-operation with the
             South African Police Service in prevention and combating of
             crime and maintenance and preservation of law and order during
             the 2007/2008 festive season 1769.


             This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions
             of section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of
             South Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act,
             2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).


             A total of forty two (42) SANDF members will be employed as
             from mid-November 2007 until 31 January 2008.


             I will communicate this report to members of the National
             Council of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the
             contents hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


             Regards


             signed
             TM MBEKI

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Protocol  on
    Finance and Investment of the Southern African  Development  Community,
    dated 20 November 2007:

       The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having  considered  the  request
       for approval by Parliament of the Protocol on Finance and Investment
       of the Southern African Development Community, recommends  that  the
       House, in terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve  the
       said Protocol.

Request to be considered.

2.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Convention
    between the Republic of South Africa and the  Republic  Mozambique  for
    the avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of  Fiscal  Evasion
    with respect to taxes on income, dated 14 November 2007:

       The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having  considered  the  request
       for approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Republic of
       South Africa and the Republic of Mozambique  for  the  Avoidance  of
       Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
       Taxes on Income, recommends that the House, in terms of section  231
       (2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

Request to be considered.

3.    INTERIM REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON MATTERS RELATED TO EX-
    MINEWORKERS UNION, DATED 20 NOVEMBER 2007:


SUMMARY: This is an interim report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Matters
                     Related to Ex-Mineworkers.

The report seeks to indicate progress that has been made since the
establishment of the committee. It is not intended to be reflective of the
views of the committee on the subject matter as the committee has not had
sufficient time to synthesize the information that has been gathered so
far. Moreover, there are other institutions; entities and agencies such as
TEBA; the Mineworker’s Provident Fund that must still appear before the
committee. The Eastern Cape department of Health could also be included to
share information with the committee in terms of whether or not the Benefit
Medical Examinations (BME) process is yielding any results.

The report attempts to present the main points of the
submissions/presentations made to the committee by those who have already
appeared before it, in order to give a sense of what the issues are - as
articulated by the relevant persons and departments.

1.    Background

The Ad Hoc Committee on Matters Related to Ex-Mineworkers was established
on 11 October 2007, as a result of a resolution adopted by the House, on 19
September 2007, following the People’s Assembly in Mbhizana, from 17 to 19
September 2007.

In terms of that resolution the committee is mandated to investigate
complaints received during interactions at the Peoples Assembly. Initially,
the committee was required to report to Parliament on 31 October 2007 (ATC,
20 October 2007), but this was changed to 22 November 2007 (ATC, 25 October
2007) The complaints in the main centered around a belief by the Ex-
Mineworker’s Union that certain government departments/offices were not
honouring promises that were made relating to employment and social
assistance benefits.

2.    Meetings

In the process of investigating, the committee has held 7 meetings with
stakeholders such as departments; organizations and individuals. These
include the Office of the Speaker ( Adv. Cetywayo); President of the Ex-
Mineworkers Union (Mr E Nomazele); Office of the Premier, Eastern Cape (Mr
P Xotongo); National department of Health; Department of Labour; the
Chamber of Mines and lastly but not least, the National Union Mineworkers
(NUM)

   1. Office of the Speaker

The information received from this office as articulate by Adv. Cetywayo
revealed that the office first got involved in the matter in February 2006,
mainly as a reaction to a letter that was written to the Speakers Office,
threatening a protest on the day of the State of the Nation Address.

The information shared with the committee also revealed that the concern of
the ex-mineworkers was around the diseases contracted by their members and
the fact that the matter, which was raised with the Presidency, had not
been given the attention they expected.

However, at a meeting subsequently held with them the issue seemed to
revolve, as stated above, around the lack of responsiveness since a meeting
held with the office in 2005. The second matter was the issue of lawfulness
of individuals holding two positions such as Councillors who are Teachers.

The last point was that the view of Speaker’s Office was that the
mineworkers be listened to although there would have had to be interaction
with the Presidency before the matter could be taken up by Parliament.
2.2   President of the Ex-Mineworkers Union (Mr E Nomazele)

The presentation made by Mr Nomazele who claims to be the President of the
Ex-mineworkers took the problem back to the 1987 strike. In his view NUM
had ordered mineworkers to go home without being paid. This was one reason
for them to suspect that NUM was had a hand in their woes. He mentioned a
number of steps they took without success. These included taking their
complaints to court, asking for assistance from organizations and high
profile people. He conceded that a small amount of money was paid out to
people by the Eastern Cape government. Yet, he complained that there was a
misunderstanding around beneficiaries and that government must intervene
using the traditional social set up of our families (e.g Omolokazana naba
Ntakwethu etc.)

Mr Nomazele raised the issue of an amount of R54m due to mineworkers but
was in his view stopped by the department of labour. To have them heard by
government they approached the Presidency and staged a sit-in at the Union
Buildings in Pretoria in 2006. He told the committee that, to disperse
them, the Eastern Cape government promised to give them monthly food
vouchers of about R840. That promise was never honoured. The Mbhizana
People’s Parliament session was a good occasion for them to further express
themselves. Mr Nomazele is also claiming that government and the National
union of mineworkers are keeping an amount of R3m which is due to ex-
mineworkers. This he said should be resolved.

2.3   Government

2.3.1 (Office of Premier, Eastern Cape)

Mr P Xotongo represents the Premier’s office in Mthatha and according to
him the matter of the Ex-Mineworkers goes back to the time of Rev. M
Stofile, who was Premier on the Eastern Cape.

He told the committee that the R54m was administered by the National
Department of Health and that there were records of payments to people who
were rightful claimants even though they were not members of the Union.
This, he contended was the reason why the government list of beneficiaries
and that of the Union do not match. He further told the committee that
although money was available, the problem was that people were not
traceable. He emphasized that the money was not being denied except that it
would only be paid to proper claimants (these being those recognized by law
and chamber of mine rules)

On the issue of food vouchers he said that a means test was applied and as
result some people /names were disqualified as they appeared on the
database of the Welfare Department but those whose names did not appear
received the food vouchers. He rebutted the issue of monthly assistance as
contended by Mr Nomazele, although he conceded on being queezed that such a
promise was indeed made.

He also asked for the assistance of Parliament in reviewing the law.

Mr P Nyamfu joined the proceedings at this stage and was given an
opportunity to address the committee. He represents a second group of
mineworkers based in and around King Williams Town. They too at some point
staged a sit-in, in the Premier’s Office.

   2. Department of Health

The department first dealt with the matter of Ex-Mineworkers after 1994
through the office of the Compensation Commissioner for Occupational
Diseases (CCOD) when the R54m million was transferred back to the CCOD. In
the period 1994 to 1996 the department received incomplete records and when
it received complaints a task team was formed consisting of the National &
Provincial Departments of Health; Chamber of Mines; House of Traditional
Leaders; Provincial Labour Office and NUM, to assist in attending to the
problem of mineworkers. This was in August 2002.
In 2003 some information was captured from old files and a list of about 18
500 names was compiled. From this list all those who qualified were paid a
sum of about R2 700 across the board, after approval by the Minister of
Health, to about 11 200 people. This was in March 2003.

From the R54m - R30, 2m was used and, the balance is roughly over R20m.

From July to September the Compensation Commissioner of Occupational
Diseases staff visited different regions of the Eastern Cape in an effort
to trace possible beneficiaries (20m would be used for this)

Union members started to disrupt meetings, chasing away beneficiaries and
destroying application forms, demanding interest on the R54m and exclusion
of mineworkes from the then Ciskei.

By 2004 – Occupational Health Nurses took over the work of the CCOD, after
they were trained, of identifying beneficiaries/claimants. The task team
ceased to exist.

Again in 2005, the CCOD deployed staff after sit-ins were resumed.

The process of identifying eligible beneficiaries and claimants is on-
going.
   3. Department of Labour

The department confirmed the existence of the R54m, adding that it was
available and was being paid to legitimate claimants. This being done by
the department of Health and payments were continuing/done as and when
documentation was presented.

Unemployment Insurance and Compensation for Injuries have been paid to
legitimate claimants and are still being paid when relevant documentation
was presented.

The department pointed out that it was communicated to the Union that
payments can only be done within the confines of the law, further that
payment would always be paid to those beneficiaries who presented the
requisite documentation as proof that they or their dependants sustained
injuries or diseases on duty.

The department assured the committee that the affected departments have
always done all within the law to serve the group and would continue to do
so.

It concluded by saying that government was willing and has put mechanisms
and resources in place to continue servicing ex-mineworkers.

3.    Chamber of Mines

The Chamber of  Mines responded to the issues as raised by the Ex-
mineworkers point by point.

   a. Pension and Death Benefit (Mineworkers Provident Fund)
    - This was only for people in service after 1989
    - Was paid upon death, not on leaving service
    - Covers death on duty + one year after service
          - Funeral benefit: R10 000 (deceased employee) R5000 (spouse)
            R5000 - R2000 (children)

   b. Non Payment of Provident Fund (only for people in service after 1989)


   c. Long Service Awards (Administered by TEBA)

The committee was told that Ex-mineworkers Union had provided the 1970’s
Provident Fund a list of names and employee numbers. And when the fund went
through its records - 9 cases were found. Payments to these were paid.

   d. Occupational Injuries and Diseases


   Injuries -These were paid by Rand Mutual Assurance (RMA) or in some cases
   in terms of COIDA.
   Diseases (MBOD and CCOD) Both fall under Health


   e. R54m


   This was the money paid by the old SA Government to the former Homeland
   governments for payment of compensation for occupational diseases to an
   estimated 11 500 ex-mineworkers. When the areas were incorporated into
   SA, the money had to be repaid. An amount of R54m was accounted for.
   However, records of mineworkers to whom the money applied were lost
   either in the offices of MBOD & CCOD. The Benefit Medical Examinations
   process would assist in getting the beneficiaries.


   The meeting was also informed by the Chamber of Mines about a project for
   ex-mineworkers - to ensure that the required tests for occupational
   diseases are done so that ex-employees who are found to have occupational
   diseases are compensated. A sum of R42m has been set aside for this
   purpose and the project would be launched in various regions. The project
   would be rolled out over 5 years.


   The National Union of Mineworkers and the Department of Health are
   assisting the Camber of Mines in this project.


   The Committee also interacted with Secretary to Parliament, Mr Z Dingani,
   relating to his interaction with the Ex-mineworkers.


4.    National Union of Mineworkers

The National Union of Mineworkers told the committee unequivocally that it
does not handle compensation on behalf of anyone, that they do not act as a
conduit for payments. However, they admitted/accepted that they do assist
mineworkers in terms of the lodging of their claims.

NUM insisted that that their role was to raise the issue of the conditions
under which mineworkers work by for example making recommendations to
employers and/or influencing legislation. They also admitted to playing a
role in the setting up of trusts and once these are then they become
responsible for their own rules, as they are often independent bodies.

The National Union of mineworkers also revealed that in the evolution of
the problem of Ex-mineworkers they were not in the picture in terms of who
the Ex-mineworkers met and saw.

They pointed out that the 1987 strike was not just an industrial strike but
became a political conflict in the Hostels particularly.

As for the R54m, they said that they have no intimate knowledge of this
money adding that TEBA handled the monies of mineworkers.

5.    Findings

The committee has not made any findings at this stage as it views the
investigation as work in progress.

6.    Challenges/Observations

The Committee notes that in terms of an e-mail correspondence between Hon.
GQM Doidge and Mr T M Manele (01/10/2007), who was in his office, the
committee should have been given a researcher, however, this was not
followed through. Due to the complexity of the issue this capacity is
glaringly absent/missing.

7.    Recommendations


   The Committee recommends that, whilst it understands the gravity and
   urgency of the concerns raised the House considers:


   1. Extending the deadline for the committee to report - to 31 March 2008.
   2. Providing adequate research assistance to the committee when it
      resumes its work in 2008.

Report to be considered.


