---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-09-11
---

TUESDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move:

   That the House –

     1) strongly expresses its objection to the high-handed and
        inappropriate arrest by the SA Police Service of the Leader of the
        Official Opposition, Helen Zille, over the weekend, for taking a
        firm stand against drug activity while the SAPS fails to take proper
        action against known drug dealers in the same area; and
     2) is of the opinion that this inconsistency of action brings the
        criminal justice and law-enforcement institutions of this country
        into international disrepute and has irreparably damaged South
        Africa’s reputation.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Adjunkspeaker, graag gee ek hiermee kennis van die volgende
voorstel:

  Dat die Raad ’n debat voer oor die swak sekuriteitsituasie ten opsigte van
  SAL-passasiersbagasie, wat daartoe gelei het dat 9 000 diefstalle uit SAL-
  bagasie die afgelope twee jaar plaasgevind het.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

  That the House debates the  poor  security  situation  in  regard  to  the
  luggage of South African Airways passengers that led to 9  000  thefts  in
  the past two years from SAA luggage.]

          DEATH OF SCHOOLCHILDREN IN CAR ACCIDENT IN PORT ELIZABETH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T D LEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –

  (1) notes with profound sadness the death of at least six children from
       Triomf Primary School and Sanctor Primary School in a car accident in
       the northern areas of Port Elizabeth in the Eastern Cape on Monday,
       10 September 2007;


  (2) further notes that a further 14 children were injured in the accident;


  (3) acknowledges the tragedy of the loss of the young lives that ranged
       between the ages of 7 and 15;


  (4) conveys its condolences to the loved ones of those who died as well as
       the learners and staff of Triomf Primary School and Sanctor Primary
       School and the community of the northern areas of Port Elizabeth; and


  (5) wishes the children who were injured in the accident a speedy
       recovery.


  Agreed to.

             ETHIOPIA CELEBRATING THE DAWN OF THE NEW MILLENNIUM

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr L W GREYLING: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


  (1) notes that the people of Ethiopia are today celebrating the dawn of
       the new millennium;


  (2) notes that this is due to the fact that Ethiopia still follows the
       orthodox Julian calendar which is seven years and eight months behind
       the Gregorian calendar;


  (3) congratulates the government and the people of Ethiopia and wishes
       them well in their celebrations of the new millennium; and


  (4) notes that, as the seat of the African Union resides in Ethiopia, this
       celebration also represents the dawn of a new millennium for the
       entire African continent.


Agreed to.

                 Congratulations to parliamentary rugby team

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House –

     1) notes that –


        a) from 1 to 10 September 2007 some of our Members of Parliament
           and staff took part in the parliamentary Rugby World Cup in
           France; and


        b) our parliamentary rugby team won all three of their games and
           became second best after the New Zealand parliamentary team on
           points difference;

  (2) believes that the participation of our parliamentary team in the event
       has contributed in the effort to deepen the bonds of human
       solidarity; and


  (3) congratulates the parliamentary rugby team on their splendid effort.

[Applause.]

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Are they in the House, Madam Deputy Speaker?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is addressing me? [Laughter.]

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I wanted to know if these
victorious rugby players are in the House. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am still addressing this motion and any excitement
related to it will come after I have concluded this address. [Laughter.] It
is not that I am not one of the people who are excited, by the way.
Obviously, there are no objections to this motion.

I may now listen to the points that you wanted to raise, sir.

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: My most humble apologies, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: I wanted to know if these victorious rugby players
were in the House today or some of them, at least, so that we can see who
they are. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I, together with the Speaker and the
Deputy President, managed to be with these hon members and the staff
members when they were on their way out of the country. They were all
sending messages through SMS to the Deputy Speaker whilst I was in the
country. I was following all their matches and I also understand why New
Zealand got what they did but I am told that our parliamentary team was the
best. I think they need another round of applause. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

     Congratulations AND GOOD WISHES TO NATIONAL CRICKET AND RUGBY TEAMS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T D LEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –

  (1) notes that the ICC World Twenty20 Championship begins today, 11
       September 2007;


  (2) further notes that South Africa will be opening the tournament by
       playing against the West Indies at the Wanderers stadium;


  (3) congratulates the South African team on their eight-wicket victory
       over Australia in a warm-up match on Sunday, 9 September 2007;


  (4) further congratulates the Springboks on their 59-7 victory against
       Samoa in their first Rugby World Cup match on the same day;


  (5) recognises that our national sports teams’ victories unite the
       country, bringing all South Africans together; and


  (6) wishes both our national cricket and rugby teams well in their
       upcoming matches.

Agreed to.

                           CO-OPERATIVE BANKS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before we proceed, we have in the gallery a
group of school learners from Italy and from Parklands College in Cape
Town. We want to welcome them warmly to the National Assembly. [Applause.]
You may rise so that the members can see you. Welcome! [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, I am curious to know why you made
the statement you did about the New Zealand rugby team but I won’t go
there. [Laughter.]
Deputy Speaker, hon members, the Co-operative Banks Bill, 2007, seeks to
create an appropriate regulatory framework for member-based deposit-taking
financial services co-operatives. By creating a sector-specific regulatory
framework, this Bill also seeks to promote and advance the social and
economic welfare of South Africans by enhancing access to banking services
under sound and sustainable co-operative banks.

Co-operative banks will be divided into three tiers, namely primary co-
operative banks, which will comprise the savings as well as savings and
loans co-operative banks, a secondary tier which will be established by two
or more primary co-operative banks; and thirdly, tertiary co-operative
banks, which can be established by two or more secondary co-operative
banks.

This Bill is one of government's initiatives to promote access to financial
services, particularly for the most vulnerable people who are characterised
by low incomes and a lack of access to mainstream financial services. It is
part of a broader strategy for promoting access to financial services in
addition to the financial sector charter and the Mzansi initiative.

In 2004, the financial sector launched the financial sector charter, which
culminated in some innovative initiatives to promote access to financial
services. The most prominent of these initiatives is a "no-frills" basic
bank account, popularly known as the Mzansi bank account. According to the
Banking Association of South Africa, over three million Mzansi accounts
have been opened in the three years following the launch of the financial
sector charter. According to the FinScope 2006 survey, at least 49% of the
adult population in South Africa still does not have access to banking
services. This implies that, last year, 15,27 million members of the adult
population was unbanked.

While noting the major achievements made by the commercial banks in
providing banking services to the previously excluded sections of our
community, it must be pointed out that the problem of access to financial
services is too large to be tackled by commercial banks alone. Community
participation and some government intervention is required if this
initiative is to succeed.

It is important to note that the Co-operative Banks Bill is not proposing a
new concept but seeks to formalise an old international tradition of
institutionalised self-help practices. Co-operative banks have been in
existence for centuries and are very successful in countries such as
Germany, Australia, the United Kingdom, the United States, India, Brazil,
Tanzania, Uganda and a number of others. In countries where they exist,
these co-operative banks have been successful because of deliberate
government policies to support and advance their cause, but also because of
an existing dedicated regulatory framework.

Since 1998, financial services co-operatives, credit unions and village
banks have been operating under an exemption from the mainstream Banks Act.
The implications of the exemption notice and the absence of sector-specific
legislation for these community-owned banking institutions are, firstly, a
lack of protection for the deposits invested in such institutions and,
secondly, an exclusion from the lender-of-last-resort facilities. Under an
exemption regime, and in the absence of formal regulation and protection
afforded in the lender-of-last-resort facilities, the public confidence in
these institutions is hugely compromised.

The Co-operative Banks Bill seeks to correct this suboptimal and temporary
regulatory arrangement by providing for formal regulation and supervision
of co-operative banks, creating a development framework to be implemented
through a Development Agency for Co-operative Banks and providing for the
establishment ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Vhudziki [Calm down], hon members! Please.
Please continue, sir.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: ... of a deposit insurance fund aimed specifically
at protecting the registered co-operative banks.

The Bill was intensely debated in the National Economic Development and
Labour Council and extensive consultations with other relevant stakeholders
were carried out. Comments were received from a wide array of groups and
associations, including the Congress of South African Trade Unions, the
Banking Association of South Africa, the Savings and Credit Co-operative
League of South Africa – represented in the gallery as well - the Business
Parliamentary Office, the University of Pretoria, the Competition
Commission and the South African Reserve Bank, amongst others. Judging from
the substance of the comments received, the Bill was generally well
received.

I would like to thank all the members of the community who took time to
engage with the National Treasury during the consultation periods and all
those who sent through useful comments. I would also like to thank the
Portfolio Committee on Finance and its chair, the hon Nhlanhla Nene, who
will speak after me, for interrogating the Bill and helping to sharpen it.
As members would be aware, a number of very useful amendments were brought
about by the hearings of the portfolio committee.

Deputy Speaker, I hereby request the House to support the Co-operative
Banks Bill, 2007. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M NENE: Madam Speaker and hon members, in his book, Banker to the
Poor, Nobel Peace Prize winner and founder of the Grameen Bank, Prof
Muhammad Yunus writes, and I quote:

  As we proceed through the early days of this new Millennium, it would
  serve us well to strive toward the daring Millennium Developmental Goals
  set by the Millennium Summit of world leaders at the United Nations in
  June 2000. The most daring of these is an entirely achievable one: halving
  poverty by 2015. I am totally convinced from my experience of working with
  poor people that they can get themselves out of poverty if we give them
  the same or similar opportunities as we give to others. The poor
  themselves can create a poverty-free world, all we have to do is to free
  them from the chains that we have put around them.

He continues and says:

  In order to reduce and ultimately eliminate poverty, we must go back to
  the drawing board. Concepts, institutions and analytical frames, the
  conditions that created poverty, cannot end poverty. If we can
  intelligently rework the frame conditions, then poverty will be gone,
  never to come back again. We must widen our concept of employment, ensure
  financial services even to the poorest person, and recognise that every
  single human being is a potential entrepreneur.

He wrote these words in the last chapter of his book that outlines how the
Grameen banks changed the lives of the poor in Bangladesh and have grown to
be a shining example of how the poor can extricate themselves from poverty,
given the opportunities. This visionary championed the establishment of
these community banks with the main objective of ensuring that financial
services reach everybody and that the poor, if given an opportunity, can
indeed rid themselves of poverty.

The ANC government, driven by the same ideals as this luminary, Muhammad
Yunus, and in line with our policy of building sustainable livelihoods in
communities through the establishment of co-operative societies, adds
another building block through this Bill.

The Reconstruction and Development Programme, building on the Freedom
Charter, clearly sets out the pillars upon which sustainable livelihoods
will be built. Having built the economy and democratised the state and
society, and continuing to build the capacity of the state to deliver the
basic needs of the people, the remaining challenge becomes that of bridging
the divide between the two economies, as they currently obtain.

This Bill seeks to advance the social and economic welfare of all South
Africans by enhancing access to banking services under sustainable market
conditions. It also promotes the development of sustainable and responsible
co-operative banks while it establishes an appropriate regulatory framework
and regulatory institutions for co-operative banks that protect members of
co-operative banks.

The concept of co-operative banks addresses a fundamental developmental
imperative, particularly in our young democracy that is recovering from
underdevelopment and deprivation that resulted from the exclusion of our
people from the mainstream economy. As espoused by Prof Yunus, there is no
better way of addressing poverty than to create conditions for the poor to
rid themselves of the scourge of poverty.

Our people in the villages have tried through stokvels and other means to
uplift themselves but have either found themselves being victims of greed
by other investors or exploited by the established financial institutions.
This has been made possible because of the absence of legislation and a
lack of capacity among aspirant bankers.

The Bill before us makes provision for the registration of deposit-taking
financial services co-operatives as co-operative banks, if they meet the
criteria; the establishment of positions of co-operative banks supervisors
to ensure appropriate and effective regulation and supervision of co-
operative banks and to protect members and the public interest, and the
establishment of a development agency for co-operative banks whose tasks
would be to develop and enhance the sustainability of co-operative banks.

This Bill also complements the Co-operatives Act of 2005 which dealt with
the establishment of co-operatives which now, in terms of this Bill, can
form themselves into their own banks - their own banks because there will
be investors, there will be lenders and there will also be shareholders in
these banks.
This Bill further promotes the culture of saving that was also championed
by the ANC government through the establishment of Mzansi products, which
the Minister alluded to, and the statistics thereof that sought to extend
banking services to the previously unbanked.

Sesiphelile isiNgisi. [Ubuwelewele.] Uma sesiphelile, phela nami ayikho
into engizoyenza. Mangikusho ukuthi lo Mthethosivivinywa ungenye yezindlela
uhulumeni oholwa yi-ANC oqinisekisa ngazo ukuthi abantu bakithi
ababekhishwe inyumbazane ngabohulumeni bangaphambilini manje sebengabamba
iqhaza elibonakalayo ekuthuthukiseni izimpilo zabo, ngasohlangothini
lwezomnotho.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa wakha isisekelo okungabunjwa ngaso imifelandawonye
yokongiwa kwemali, maqede labo abangamalungu ale mifelandawonye bakwazi
ukubhalisa njengebhange elingelabo. Ukuze bakwazi ukwenza lokhu, kumele
okungenani babe namalungu anga-200, futhi babe nemali okungenani eyisigidi
samarandi. Kungazwakala sengathi yisamba esikhulu kanti ayinkulu kakhulu
ngoba nabo baningi.

Ziningi ezinye izinkampani ezinkulu namhlanje ezaqala kanje, namuhla
esezadlondlobala zaba yizikhondlakhondla. Ngenxa yomlando ongemuhle wamanye
ala mabhange, lapho abantu bakithi balahlekelwa yizimali zabo khona, lo
mthethosivivinywa umisa imigomo enqala ukuze lokhu kungaphinde kwenzeke.
Owokuqala, owokuba la mabhange abhalise ngokusemthethweni. Lokhu kusho
ukuthi abantu abalondoloza izimali zabo bavikelwe ngumthetho, futhi
nebhange labo lingaphansi kweso elibukhali likahulumeni. Owesibili,
ngukuqinisekisa ukuthi labo abaqokwe njengabaqondisi bangabantu abaqotho
futhi abazothola ukuqeqeshwa emsebenzini wabo wokwelusa amafa abanye.
Kunesakhiwo esizobizwa ngokuthi yi-co-operative banks development agency,
umsebenzi waso okuzoba ukucathulisa la mabhange ukuze asimame, angaze awa.

Umgomo wesithathu ngowokuthi kuzoba nohlelo lomshwalense wabatshali zimali
oluzobizwa ngokuthi yi-deposit insurance. Lona-ke luzoba yinqolobane
ezogada isikhathi lapho kunezinkinga, ukuze abatshali zimali bangasali
bencela izithupha njengoba sike sabona kwenzeka uma amabhange noma
izinkampani ezinkulu ziwa, lapho kulamule khona uhulumeni. Kulesi sikhwama,
ama-co-operative banks azokuthi ephonsa esivivaneni nohulumeni naye abe
ephonsa, size sibe siyasimama-ke lesi sikhwama. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[My English is depleted. [Interjections.] There is nothing that I can do
when it is depleted. Let me mention that this Bill is one of the ways in
which the ANC-led government is ensuring that our people, who were
sidelined by the apartheid government, can now have a significant role in
improving their lives with regard to the economy.

This Bill says that a foundation for the establishment of saving schemes,
and its members, may register as a bank. In order to be able to do this,
they must have at least 200 members and have at least R1 million as
capital. This may sound like a huge amount of money but it is not since
there are many of them.

There are a lot of big companies that started like this which prospered and
are today giant companies. Because of the bad history of such banks where
our people have lost lots of money, this Act sets out major principles so
that this won’t happen again. Firstly, these banks must be officially
registered. This means that people who are saving money are protected by
the law and their bank is under government’s close monitoring. Secondly, it
ensures that those who are appointed to the board of directors are honest
people who will be trained on how to be trustees. There is a structure that
is going to be called the Co-operative Banks Development Agency whose task
will be to help these banks in terms of sustainability.

The third principle is that there should be insurance for the investors
which is going to be called deposit insurance. This will be like a bank for
insurance purposes so that, in case there is a problem, investors will not
be left sucking their fingers as we have seen happen when banks and
companies were liquidated and government had to intervene. In this fund, co-
operative banks will invest and government will also invest until this fund
is stable.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, only the caring ANC government could come up with
such groundbreaking legislation that addresses the plight of the poor. The
committee is satisfied that the Bill will go a long way in building a
social democratic society that all of us will be proud to belong to.

UKhongolose uyaweseka lo Mthethosivivinywa. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] [The
African National Congress supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Ngiyabonga, Somlomo [Thank you, Deputy Speaker.] South
Africa has a long and interesting history with co-operatives, both formal
and informal. Black and white communities in our country have been involved
in co-operatives for many decades and certainly long before the advent of
the democratic era.

It is not necessary to go to Kenya and elsewhere for examples. If one looks
at our agricultural co-operatives that have been a stabilising factor in
the rural areas of South Africa for many decades, that is one example. No
doubt there have been failures as well, but South Africa has many examples
of co-operative endeavours that have turned into brilliant successes.

Our building societies, for example, were owned by their investors and not
by shareholders. Old Mutual and Sanlam were owned by their policy-holders.
It is only in recent times that these financial institutions were
demutualised with the issuing of shares and the consequential unlocking of
value for all of the ordinary South Africans who had invested in those
institutions.
I am hoping that some of the co-operative deposit-taking institutions that
we are providing for today will grow and develop into mighty South African
financial institutions within the next few decades. No one should
underestimate the possibilities for growth of these co-operative banks.
Perhaps there is another Standard Bank, First National Bank or Nedbank
taking root today. Perhaps that is what we are starting with.

The Bill itself helps us to bring some of our people into the market
economy in a globalised world. Access to banking, even at a relatively
unsophisticated level, is critical to the economic upliftment of our
people. Those who do not have access to banking services are simply not
part of a modern economy.

Of course the Bill does not provide for banking services for millions of
the masses, but what it does do is cater for the thousands of co-operative
members who belong to these co-operative financial institutions and it
provides a regulatory framework within which co-operative banks will
register and operate. It also endeavours to ensure that the men and women
who entrust their modest savings to these co-operative banks will be
protected far better in the future than they have been up to now.

Deputy Speaker, I want to confirm that the consultation process was well
and thoroughly conducted and our Portfolio Committee on Finance hearings
were both comprehensive and virtually unanimous in support of the
principles and the aims of the Bill. There might have been some wording
differences here and there with some of our witnesses, but this was in all
respects almost a unanimous effort. I’m glad that Mr Nene has reassured us
that this is firmly in line with ANC policy and that is why it was
introduced. I may say it is firmly in line with DA policy and that is why
we are very happy to support it. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The hon N Singh. This will be the hon member’s
maiden speech.

Mr N SINGH: Phini likaSomlomo, ngiyabonga. Phini likaSomlomo, abahlonishwa,
ngiyaxolisa ukuthi namhlanje inkulumo yami izoba yisiNgisi – ulimi luka-
George. [Thank you, Deputy Speaker and hon members. Deputy Speaker, I am
sorry that today my speech is going to be in English, the language of King
George.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, it is indeed a great honour for me to
deliver my maiden speech in the National Assembly today. I would like to
thank the president of the IFP, the hon Dr Buthelezi, and my party for
giving me this opportunity to represent the voters.

Madam Deputy Speaker, co-operatives are not a new phenomenon in South
Africa, having been used in the past to pool the resources of especially
the agricultural community and farmers. Together with targeted state
support, these co-operatives formed the backbone of many a farming
community in the past and still continue to do so.

The IFP welcomes the introduction of a regulatory framework for co-
operative banks, which has been provided for in the Bill. There are
millions of South Africans that are still unbanked by the commercial sector
and bringing co-operative banks into the regulatory system would provide
such citizens with another avenue to access financial services they need
for development.

We also support the Bill because it will protect the interests of ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members. We can do better than that for a
maiden speech, please.

Mr N SINGH: We also support the Bill because it will protect the interests
of members of co-operatives and should unleash their true potential,
especially for rural development. Protection is particularly important as
some of the communities that will benefit are extremely poor and
underdeveloped and have low levels of financial literacy.

The IFP has long been a champion of self-help and self-reliance, and co-
operatives provide an ideal opportunity for especially rural communities to
pool their resources for development and upliftment. Such communities can
now also gain access to a range of financial services that could be
provided by co-operative banks.

We further welcome the creation of the Co-operative Banks Development
Agency to support co-operative banks. This support will take the form of
training, auditing and general support with compliance within the law. The
agency, we were told in the committee, will be funded by Treasury to the
tune of some R25 million in the first year and will be staffed by about 40
specialists. The development role of the agency is particularly important
for co-operative banks and for those that may lack the necessary skills and
capacity to reach and assist rural communities.

We believe, Madam Speaker, that there is huge potential to be unlocked via
co-operatives and co-operative banks. One international example is the
Grameen Bank, which the hon Nene referred to.

I want to close, hon members, by reminding all of us that, in 1994, the
majority achieved political emancipation but it is clear that economic
emancipation still eludes vast numbers of South Africans. In our opinion,
this Bill has the potential to be a step towards economic emancipation and
development of the second economy. I thank you.

Mr J BICI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members, one of the
elements of the agreement that was signed during the financial sector
summit held in August 2002 was the need to ensure access to basic financial
services. The Minister of Finance later instructed National Treasury to
draft a policy paper on co-operative banks and a co-operative banks Bill.

The current Bill states that the introduction of the Co-operative Banks
Bill seeks to create a development strategy and a regulatory environment
for deposit-taking financial services co-operatives. In addition, it will
ensure the sound and safe management of depositor money by financial
services co-operatives. This will in turn promote access to financial
services for people in rural communities who have no access to formal
banking services.

The Bill seeks, amongst other things, to promote and advance the social and
economic welfare of all South Africans by enhancing access to banking
services under sustainable market conditions. This will enable the
“unbankables” to become “bankables”.

This Bill sets out the prudential requirements for co-operative banks. A co-
operative bank that is unable to meet or maintain these prudential
requirements must immediately report its inability and reasons therefor to
the supervisor.

This Bill finally provides for general provisions, which include offences
and penalties and matters relating to fair administrative action, access to
records, the powers of the Minister of Finance, civil liability of
directors or managing directors, exemptions from the Bill and transitional
provisions. If these aims and objectives are strictly maintained, there can
be no failure.

The UDM therefore supports the Bill. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, this Bill, as has been
pointed out, is intended to create an appropriate regulatory framework for
deposit-taking second-tier and third-tier community banks. Only those
deposit-taking institutions that meet the requirements and, due to size of
investments, start posing a systemic risk will be registered under this
Bill. Those co-operatives that do not meet the requirements, such as
certain stokvels and insurers, would remain deposit-taking institutions
under the existing Co-operatives Act.

Registration will depend upon ability to demonstrate sufficient human,
financial and operational capacity to function competently and all banks
will have to have an audit committee and a supervisory committee.

The development agency that is going to be set up will have an important
role in accrediting and developing such co-operative banks and assisting
them to become self-supporting. The agency will also ensure that they are
able to carry out audit costs for a limited period on a case-by-case basis
as well as funding premiums for deposit insurance on a reducing sliding
scale. I’m sure all depositors will be pleased that there will be that
insurance.

The ACDP supports this Bill as it will undoubtedly provide protection for
members who deposit their funds into such banks. It will also, as has been
pointed out and which we fully support, enhance and promote the social and
economic welfare of citizens by encouraging access to banking services
under sustainable conditions as well as encouraging a culture of saving
which we undoubtedly, as a nation, desperately need.

I thank you, hon Minister, and the ACDP will support this Bill.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is amazing that over half of the
South African population is unbanked. The MF supports the accessibility
that this Bill brings in terms of banking to the people, especially in
respect of rural South Africa that has minimal access to banking
facilities. This initiative indeed will inculcate a culture of
responsibility and provide the poor in our young democracy with great
opportunities to deliver themselves from the shackles of poverty.

The MF, however, is in support of giving the co-operative banks what is
called in Spain a “tax holiday” by exempting them from paying tax for 10
years. We acknowledge that the bank is not set to operate as a normal
banking facility but rather as a means to draw people into saving.

This Bill indeed allows for a breathing space for the co-operative banks to
develop, grow and intensify their aims. However, the MF is in no way
supporting the distortion of our tax base but feels that the removal of the
tax burden shall assist service delivery in this regard.

We strongly support this Bill and what it is bringing to the South African
people. Our nation has not been taught how to save and in a majority
poverty-stricken nation it is difficult to establish a savings method.

The MF will support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Madam Deputy Speaker, as outlined by the chairperson and
speakers before me, in short, this Bill seeks to offer those who do not
have access to finance an opportunity for such access through community,
village or co-operative banks as outlined in this piece of legislation,
unlike with commercial banks where the poor are regarded as high risk and
thus subject to high interest rates and unequal treatment compared to the
rich.

As stated in the Bill, there should be at least 200 members or more and R1
million or more worth of members’ deposits before the bank can be
registered under this Bill. This might appear onerous to small and poor
communities who would like to have a co-operative bank, but key to this
requirement is the viability of the bank itself and, most importantly, the
promotion and advancement of the social and economic welfare of all South
Africans.

Clause 3 ensures that a few individuals cannot come together to form a co-
operative to the exclusion of many people whose lives would be improved by
a co-operative bank. Also key to the establishment of a co-operative bank
are the skills required of those who will be the directors of the bank. As
the Bill states, every member of the co-operative bank who wants to be a
director must have experience, skills and qualifications to operate the
bank and must be a fit and proper person as detailed in clause 9 of the
Bill. When looking at this clause, the committee felt that the requirements
were a bit onerous and might exclude a lot of members of our community.
However, this, on the other hand, ensures that members’ deposits will be
protected and that the banks will be run properly by those individuals on
the executives of the banks.

The argument of clauses 7 and 9 is that the Bill, as I have said, excludes
those entrepreneurs who are not discouraged by the failure of their
businesses at the first attempt, or after many unsuccessful attempts for
that matter. Thus it is a concern that the supervisor has wide-ranging
powers to disqualify such entrepreneurs. For instance, yesterday I visited
two construction projects in my constituency which have been outstanding
since 15 July 2007 due to nonpayment of labour by small contractors.
Allegedly, this was due to the municipal council not effecting payment on
time due to whatever reasons. But who bears the brunt? It is the struggling
individual who is now deemed unfit by the supervisor to run or be on the
board of the co-operative bank just because of association with the failed
project.

I do not condone the involvement of people who might lead to the misuse of
members’ funds. However, care should be taken that we do not exclude people
who are honest in their failures.

Clause 55 ensures that even those co-operative banks that do not qualify,
qualify by involvement of the development agency. Some of the concerns
raised in clause 7 are somewhat covered by clause 55.

Due to the unanimous consensus in the committee, I will yield the rest of
my time to hon member Fubbs to deal with the rest of the issues. Thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, the Co-operative Banks Bill provides a
strengthened legal framework and coverage for lower-paid workers and rural
communities regarding financial management and potential improvement in
financial capacity. Co-operative banking is one step in the right direction
to facilitate competition on behalf of its members.
The benefits accrued as a result of the regulatory system suggested by the
Bill will formalise the sector into one that should meet the developmental
objectives underlining the functions of co-operative financing. Co-
operative banking has the advantage that members have a direct interest in
the management and regulatory provisions of the sector.

The Bill will encourage weaker co-operatives, those with fewer than 200
members, with a financial threshold of below R1 million, to become aware of
the competitive advantages of the new regulatory system. Smaller co-
operatives may also be encouraged to expand their growth since regulating
the industry provides protection against systemic risk as co-operatives
grow in size and responsibility.

The Bill will have a positive impact on co-operatives by improving the
quality of service to their members as well as adopting appropriate
business models to boost their capital growth. The successful
implementation of this Bill will lead to greater demand for co-operative
banks across a wider spectrum of services as long as the lives of people
are positively impacted on and some level of financial security can be
attained through such banks.

We may witness the start of a self-sustaining economic model devised by
people themselves in tackling the issues of poverty and underdevelopment.
It is for this reason that the FD wholeheartedly supports the Co-operative
Banks Bill. I thank you.
Ms J L FUBBS: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members of this House and people of
South Africa, today is a momentous day in the lives of the unbanked
millions of people in our country because today, I believe, we will pass
the Co-operative Banks Bill, which opens the doors to financial access but
also, given that we have an ANC government ruling us here and providing
good governance, because this entrance is sustainable and that a platform
is created to underpin the ANC government’s commitment to the eradication
of poverty and the creation of an enabling environment to create jobs.

Indeed, hon Deputy Speaker, the Co-operative Banks Bill has widened
financial access for the poor. Today, we again see the ANC government
implementing the terms and the pillars of the Freedom Charter ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, there are too many meetings taking
place in this House. If this continues, we will have to ask you by name to
leave the House and continue with your meetings elsewhere. Please continue,
hon Fubbs.

Ms J L FUBBS: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I have pointed out the
Freedom Charter, but today we also see the implementation of one of the
transformational instruments, the RDP. In fulfilment of the letter and
spirit of the Freedom Charter, people - whether employed or unemployed
according to the statistical definition - will enjoy ownership of the
financial fruits of their labour through their membership of co-operative
banks.

Yebo, abasebenzayo nabangasebenzi bazohlomula. [Indeed, the employed and
the unemployed will benefit.]

Yes, indeed, co-operative banks are member-based and deposit-taking
financial services co-operatives which offer a series of banking services.

Deputy Speaker, what I think is important for the people of South Africa,
especially the millions who are unbanked, is that this will also address an
issue that we are all aware of, namely our people drowning in debt to the
omashonisa, what are commonly “loan sharks”  called by liberals.

Currently, there are 27 million adults in our country, of whom more than 13
million do not have basic transactional facilities. Of these 13 million
unbanked South Africans, 11 million are Africans who fall within the bottom
half of the distribution of income, reflecting the continuing realities of
an apartheid legacy. Amongst the unemployed, 83% do not have a bank account
as I stand here before this House, and 60% of those who work in the
informal sector remain unbanked. Now you can see the critical role that the
Co-operative Banks Bill, once it is enacted and passed in this House, will
play in transforming the structural fractures in our society.
As a policy intervention, translated into legislation, the Co-operative
Banks Bill seeks to reduce poverty. I don’t want to talk about reduction;
it’s the eradication of poverty that is the goal. But of course we have
several instruments serving that goal. So this is contributing to the
reduction of poverty within that. It provides working capital for the
purchase of inputs.

How many millions of our people are on the land? Others are saying: “Don’t
give them any land, look what happens when you give them land, they can’t
farm the land.” Well, I’ll tell you: Once you have a co-operative banks
Bill, people will be able, through their own efforts and working capital,
to provide capital alongside government subsidies. [Applause.] It will also
allow for consumption smoothing. By “consumption smoothing” I mean how, in
the business sector, you pick up the phone and say: “Listen here, Harry,
man, you know us at Anglo or whatever, just organise a quick transfer.” The
poor fellow on the farm who has just been given this piece of land, does he
know Harry? Of course he doesn’t know Harry. But he knows the fellow next
door. Yes, he does – it’s Mokoena. He says: “Mokoena, man, let’s to the co-
operative bank and we get this credit.” They get the credit. [Laughter.]

Regarding saving, this Bill will enable people to save and the saving
facilities will be of their own making; people who know them saying: “We
know that we are going to work together and put this to bed.” Cash
surpluses can also create a barrier for the foreseen and unforeseen
expenses of the future.

Deputy Speaker, I am a great admirer of Amartya Sen, the Nobel Prize
economist. But I sometimes think that it is people like me who forget that
people like Julius Nyerere were already speaking about the developmental
state long before Amartya Sen spoke about it. He said: “We have to run
while others walk!” But we run together, that’s why we are going to get
there.

Deputy Speaker, I don’t want to forget a point that I intended making and
that is the importance of people, ordinary people, being given financial
access. [Laughter.] And bear with me as I say the following.

Omama namadodakazi,  obaba  namadodana  bazoba  namabhange  lapho  bezokwazi
ukulondoloza nokuboleka khona, ukuze bakhe inzuzo. [Mothers  and  daughters,
fathers and sons will have banks where they will be able to save and  borrow
so that they can make profit.]

That is very important. What we are saying is that it has become very
critical – it enables our mothers, our daughters, our fathers and our sons
to have access to finance.

Indeed, the ANC supports this Bill because it is going to be a formidable
instrument in the eradication of poverty in the rural areas. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, the hon Fubbs fluffed her line;
she was meant to say what a wonderful Finance Minister I am. I don’t know
why she didn’t do it. [Laughter.]

Firstly, let me express appreciation because, clearly, it’s not even a Bill
of the government, it’s a Bill that is supported by all parties in this
House and that consensus, I think, is a very important foundation for the
co-operative banking movement. I think the movement is much bigger than the
institution and that is what we have to focus on. It has taken us a long
time to ensure that we can provide depositors and owners of these co-
operative banks with the regulatory environment and the depositors’
insurance within the Reserve Bank to ensure that we can raise the trust
that people would have in these institutions. That I think is very
important.

A number of years ago I was one of the people involved with an institution
called the Community Bank that went belly-up. It was like this but it kind
of grew too fast. The one experience that I think we have from that is that
the trust levels were very low. People left sufficient money in there
because they could borrow from it but their salaries and financial
transactions were the big fallbacks. The issue of trust is very important
and this won’t come merely because we pass this legislation.

If you want a movement, you have to build a movement. So I plead with all
members of this House and with all parties, now that we will get this
legislation, hopefully, through the NCOP - the President will accede to it
quite soon - we have to ensure across party lines that we make the co-
operative movement in South Africa happen and that will happen because we
put energy and something of ourselves into this movement and into the
financial institutions that will drive this movement to ensure that we can
indeed provide a better outcome and better security for those most in need
of access to financial services.

Thank you very much for supporting the legislation. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

      SPECIAL ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL (2007/2008 FINANCIAL YEAR)

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I am glad that the
Table sequenced the legislation because I certainly hope that the same
level of consensus will be carried forward.

In terms of section 213 of the Constitution, the withdrawal of money from
the National Revenue Fund as a direct charge must be provided for in an Act
of Parliament. In terms of section 77, read with section 73 of the
Constitution, a Bill that authorises a direct charge is a money Bill that
has to be introduced by the Minister of Finance.

The Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill appropriates additional amounts
of money for the requirements of the Departments of Public Enterprises,
Communications, Agriculture, and Sport and Recreation in South Africa in
respect of the current financial year.

The additional appropriation to Public Enterprises will enable the
department to make transfers to certain state-owned enterprises to address
urgent cash requirements. The proposed adjustment of R2,090 billion to the
budget of the Department of Public Enterprises will be recorded as
transfers to Alexkor R44,7 million, Denel R222 million, and the Pebble Bed
Modular Reactor R1,823 billion.

The Department of Communications will transfer through it, if the Bill is
approved, R500 million to Sentech. The funding will contribute to the
capital requirements associated with establishing a broadband wireless
telecommunications network.

The additional appropriation of R700 million sought for the Department of
Agriculture will be transferred to the Land Bank. The proposed adjustment
is necessary to address liquidity shortages and cash adequacy ratios of the
bank.

In respect of the Department of Sport and Recreation, an additional
appropriation of R1,9 billion will be allocated through the department and
recorded as 2010 Fifa World Cup stadium development conditional grants. The
proposed adjustment is necessary to ensure that stadium construction
programmes are not constrained by cash-flow shortages. It is in fact not
additional money over the period; it is bringing forward next year’s
spending into this year to ensure that the stadiums are completed ahead of
schedule.

This is what the Bill contains and I have pleasure in tabling this Special
Adjustments Appropriation Bill. Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Bill referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
report.

                      NATIONAL GAMBLING AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, colleagues, hon
members of Parliament, I am honoured to table the Second Reading of the
National Gambling Amendment Bill. This amendment provides legislation for
the regulation of interactive gambling. It seeks, amongst other things, to
protect society from the negative effects of gambling; to protect minors
and other vulnerable persons from exposure to gambling; and to prevent
gambling from being a source of crime and a conduit for money laundering.

Having recognised certain shortcomings in our law, this Bill addresses the
socioeconomic implications of an unregulated interactive gambling industry
by establishing an effective and efficient regulatory framework in line
with government’s broad policy framework for the regulation of all forms of
gambling.

A draft Bill was approved by Cabinet in December 2006 and published for
comment on 18 December of that year. Written comments were received from
stakeholders and public consultations took place over an extended period of
time. In summary, the amending Bill deals with player protection, problem
gambling, advertising, money laundering, enforcement and compliance,
licensing and other matters such as taxation, provision of games, and so
on.

Madam Deputy Speaker, allow me to elaborate on each of these aspects.
Firstly, in respect of player protection the Bill provides for everyone
engaged in interactive gambling to be registered with a licensed
interactive gambling provider. Strict verification procedures that are
compliant with the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, Fica, will need to be
complied with. Statutory requirements, such as attaining a sworn statement
from the player that they are 18 years or older, will ensure that minors do
not have access to interactive gambling.

In addition, players must nominate an account held with an authorised
financial institution and this account will be the only account through
which transfers of monies will be carried out. The Bill will make any
gambling activity provided by an unlicensed provider unlawful and will
prohibit South African players from engaging in interactive gambling
activities with unlicensed providers.

Secondly, one of the key problems associated with interactive gambling is
its accessibility and availability around the clock. This Bill therefore
obliges the interactive provider, through licensing conditions and
regulations, to ensure that there is an electronic system for the
monitoring and reporting of registered players. Players will be required to
set limits on accounts. The principle of know-your-customer will apply and
providers will be required to audit playing patterns and behaviour. Players
will be exposed to self-diagnosis systems and notices on websites of
service providers in respect of voluntary player exclusion and treatment of
addictive gambling.

Thirdly, the Bill makes the advertising of interactive gambling unlawful,
irrespective of whether such advertisers are based offshore.

Fourthly, the Bill will be governed by the Financial Intelligence Centre
Act requirements as far as money laundering is concerned. One of the main
provisions on money laundering is that gambling equipment, which includes
the server and other key records of players’ transactions, be located in
South Africa. Also, registration of players, verification of player
identity and only allowing players from selected countries that comply with
the Financial Action Task Force or designated organisations to engage in
interactive gambling licensed in the Republic will apply.

Other control measures include the establishment of player accounts, the
verification of nominated accounts, regulating the method of payment to the
provider such as the electronic methods of payment only and the requirement
that a provider must not convert any funds in a player account into any
other form of value. The interactive provider has an obligation to report
suspicious and illegal activities. The provision of control systems will
therefore be prescribed to ensure compliance.
Interactive gambling is borderless, therefore, the fifth area we deal with
is our view that the enforcement and administration of this Bill should be
discharged at a national level. In support of this principle, the National
Gambling Board will ensure compliance with the National Gambling Act and
conditions of licence. The board will supervise and enforce compliance by
licensees with the Financial Intelligence Centre Act requirements and
conduct inspections in respect of interactive gambling websites and
premises where interactive gambling equipment and software are located. The
board is empowered to revoke or suspend interactive gambling licences for
noncompliance and, as part of co-operative governance, may delegate some of
its enforcement and compliance powers to the provincial licensing
authorities.

In regard to the sixth key issue addressed by the Bill, namely licensing in
general, the Bill provides for the licensing of interactive gambling and
that these licences will be issued as national licences due to the
borderless nature of this activity. The interactive gambling licences
include operator licences and employee licences for key employees,
management staff and directors or shareholders. There is also licensing or
testing of certification requirements for interactive gambling software,
equipment, manufacturers, suppliers and maintenance providers of
interactive gambling equipment.

Finally, the Bill provides for the imposition of taxation which will be
catered for in a separate money Bill. The DTI is currently in consultation
with National Treasury on the procedure for the imposition of such a tax.
It is our view that taxation will be optimised to create a level playing
field and, at the same time, be used to curb any proliferation of gambling.

As we all know, constant developments in technology have a direct impact on
conventional methods of product and service offerings. To allow for
flexibility in the ever-changing environment of information and
communications technology, many of the provisions in this regard will be
provided for in the regulations.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
Industry for its guidance, support and important contributions. The
committee has done a sterling job by further strengthening the provisions
of the Bill, especially in the areas of advertising, tightening provisions
on player registration, money laundering and the establishment of foreign
company presence in South Africa, among other things.

I also extend my gratitude to other government departments, key
stakeholders in the industry, our provincial counterparts and members of
the public for their inputs into these amendments. Their commitment to
ensuring that this amending Bill is appropriate and consistent with
government’s broad policy framework for the regulation of all forms of
gambling has been extremely helpful.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I commend this Bill to the House. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, I would like to start by thanking the Minister
for thanking the committee. We heard earlier this afternoon that the
Minister of Finance expressed appreciation to the Portfolio Committee on
Finance for assisting and helping a Bill to be improved. I honestly do want
to say that I think our committee, the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
Industry, similarly improved the Bill.

By the way, I would like to say that I hope the press take note of these
comments by these two Ministers because we are rather tired of the negative
reporting on the activities of this House and some of us who work so hard
in the committees feel that the press ought to take notice that when a
Minister says a Bill has been improved, it has indeed been improved.
[Applause.]

I would like to add that when the Bill initially came to the committee it
looked very much as though it was a technical measure designed to regulate
a new industry, which was one feature of the draft Bill, and secondly, that
there was a suggestion that the Bill would make money for the fiscus.

Our committee took a slightly different view and, indeed, if I emphasise
the moral aspects of the discussions of the committee, it is because the
committee took a very strong view on gambling.

The committee felt that revenue collection should not be a primary motive
in legislation about gambling at all. Of course, there could be a by-
product for the fiscus but it shouldn’t be the main purpose for which a
Bill on gambling is legislated. It can be a by-product of the activities
but it shouldn’t be the main focus.

Secondly, we believed and we argued very strongly with the department - or
not argued, but presented a case - that gambling is not in itself a
desirable activity and it had to be curbed. It is because of that strong
position that the word “curbed” was introduced into the long title of the
Bill and indeed I would say that the Bill has a slightly different flavour
because of the moral stance of the committee about the need to curb
gambling.

We know, and the evidence is overwhelming, that lots of people suffer
serious consequences from gambling of all kinds and we thought that the
moral issues in our regulation of gambling were very important and so we
find in the long title the phrase that the Bill is designed to “protect
society against the stimulation of the demand for gambling”, “to protect
minors and others” and that “gambling should not be associated with crime
in any way”.

Those moral aspects were introduced in the Bill in various places. For
example, the initial draft allowed for a degree of advertising. The
committee was against that and so all advertising is prohibited in the Bill
as it stands. We do not want to see that the interactive gambling industry
should, in any way, advertise its activities, so that young people should
not be drawn into this kind of stuff because, as we know, lots of young
people have access to computers; they know the Internet better than many
adults and therefore the temptation to go into interactive gambling will be
there.

Fortunately, players must now register, as the Minister has indicated. The
stakes are monitored, excessive indebtedness and addiction are seen to and
there is an elaborate registration system which we went through in great
detail. Gamblers have to identify themselves. They have to state their age
and other personal details and, critically importantly, there are dedicated
bank accounts which have to be used in a particular process of interactive
gambling.

I also want to add that extensive consultation and public hearings were
held because there are many financial interests in South Africa. We are
involved in gambling of all kinds and we also asked the department to
ensure that the list of bodies that they had consulted should also include
civil society organisations, religious bodies and so on because, as I say,
the fundamental question for the committee was not the technical question
of regulation and control but the moral fibre of our society. So we added
several civil society institutions, religious bodies and so on so that,
ultimately, in all the discussions, the moral issues of gambling came to
the fore.

We understand that interactive gambling is an international phenomenon. It
lays itself open to money laundering and the Treasury certainly had a lot
to say on that and certain measures have been built into the legislation,
as the Minister has indicated, including the fact that international
providers have to have a presence in South Africa. Thereby we follow the
procedures and the tradition of the banking sector whereby foreign banks
have to have a local presence and in the same way international providers
have to have a local presence here too.

I want to thank the department. We worked with them very well. The
officials were very sensitive to what we had to say, especially on the
moral issues and so we produced what I think is a better Bill and certainly
it made one feel that all one’s activities in Parliament are worthwhile and
I would ask the media to report exactly that. Thank you.

Dr P J RABIE: Chair, the DA supports this Bill. The object of this piece of
legislation is to capture the socioeconomic implications of an unregulated
interactive gambling industry by establishing an effective regulatory
framework.

Interactive gambling currently provides little or no protection to players.
There is uncontrolled exposure to minors and persons vulnerable to
gambling. The current untenable situation compromises our reputation as a
responsible member of the international gambling industry. Interactive
gambling is generally accepted to mean all forms of remote gambling taking
place via the Internet or other related forms of telecommunication.

The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry had public hearings and
received a number of submissions from a wide number of bodies and
organisations and a number of issues were discussed.

The Bill provides for the registration of players and for player exclusion.
It also provides for the resolution of disputes between players and
interactive providers by the National Gambling Board. This Bill is also
very clear and prohibits the advertising of interactive gambling – which
differs from the National Gambling Act of 2004.

The Bill provides for the Minister to prescribe procedural requirements for
licensing by the board in order to ensure compliance with technical
requirements for equipment, software and premises. During the public
hearings it was mentioned that money laundering can take place through
interactive gambling. This Bill places an obligation on interactive
gambling providers to report any suspicious and illegal activities.
The financial implications of the amending Bill will be paid by the
National Gambling Board and the additional personnel that will be required
to regulate and administer it as follows. The memorandum on the objects of
the National Gambling Amendment Bill states, and I quote: “Certain expenses
will be recouped from the interactive gambling licence revenue”.

Mnr die Voorsitter, interaktiewe dobbel is ’n werklikheid en dit kan ’n
baie belangrike verdiener van buitelandse valuta vir die fiskus word.

Om op te som – hierdie wet sal in wese poog om ’n vorm van dobbelary te
wettig, te reguleer en te orden wat reeds bestaan en waaraan derduisende
Suid-Afrikaners reeds deelneem.

Die internet is ’n medium wat toenemend deur individue oor die wêreld
gebruik word. Wat belangrik is betreffende die wetsontwerp, is dat daar
gepoog word om die verbruiker, en veral minderjariges, te ontmoedig om
interaktief te dobbel. Mnr die Voorsitter, ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, interactive gambling is a reality and it can become a very
important earner of foreign exchange for the fiscus.

In summary, this Bill will indeed attempt to legalise, regulate and order a
form of gambling that already exists and in which thousands of South
Africans are already participating.

The Internet is a medium which is increasingly being used by individuals
around the world. What is important about this Bill is the fact that it
attempts to discourage consumers, especially minors, from gambling
interactively. I thank you.]

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, hon Minister, ladies and gentlemen,
interactive illegal gambling is in South Africa. Nowadays, with great
technological developments and the rapid expansion of the Internet and
other interactive communication options, it is affecting our society to a
great extent.

Whether we do or do not approve or agree with interactive gambling, the
true scenario is that interactive gambling is taking place in South Africa
but it is not regulated at the moment. The current unregulated nature of
interactive gambling allows underage children to access this activity with
ease and there is the scope for the development and expansion of criminal
activities such as money laundering as well as the negative consequences
that it could have for the poor.

The authorities must be aware of and take action against some of the
concerns raised if the Bill is to truly attempt to regulate interactive
gambling. We must remove all criminal and illegal elements and activities
from gambling while at the same time ensuring that the most vulnerable
members of our society are protected and taught about the harsh realities
of gambling.

Of course, Minister, there will be economic benefits to be gained from the
efficient regulation of interactive gambling, such as additional revenue
and job creation. These benefits must not, however, be pursued at all costs
and at the expense of addressing the social ills that interactive gambling
will cause if it is not properly regulated.

We hope the relevant authorities would have the necessary capacity and
expertise to regulate and monitor the Bill as the interactive environment
is very dynamic and constantly changing. The IFP supports the Bill. Thank
you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, hon Minister, the ACDP in general does not
support legislation that facilitates gambling and strongly objected to the
National Gambling Act in 1996 – legislation that was of course supported by
the ANC, the DA and many others.

We again point out that this amending Bill is yet another concerted but in
the end futile effort to shut the stable door when the horse has already
bolted. The ACDP wholeheartedly agrees with the hon Mr Ben Turok’s comments
in the committee that the only reason to legislate on Internet gambling or
interactive gambling, as the Bill calls it, should be to abolish it or to
curb it.

The gambling industry exploits people’s weaknesses and undermines efforts
towards moral regeneration. The detrimental social and economic effects of
gambling and the destruction it brings in the lives of individuals and
families have been increasingly evident since the National Gambling Act
came into being.

While this amendment is an attempt to prevent crime and to protect
vulnerable people and minors from harm and exploitation, loss of revenue to
the national fiscus was also a concern. As the hon Mr Turok pointed out,
this is a moral issue; it is a social evil that we may have to regulate to
curb, but we must not make money out of it.

This amending Bill also deals with advertising, licensing, compliance and
enforcement, problem gambling and money laundering, and follows a
comprehensive international study.

The ACDP will support efforts to contain the effects of gambling only
because the abolition of all forms of gambling in South Africa has not yet
been achieved. Gambling clearly undermines nation-building and is an attack
on our young democracy and the moral fibre of society. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF acknowledges that South Africa has some
of the world’s most effective and well-formulated legislation governing
land-based gambling and we trust that we shall follow with similar
provisions for interactive gambling.

However, the MF brings to the table a number of concerns as many South
Africans have been noted to be addicted to gambling and this has destroyed
many lives. Our great concern is that if we are extending access to
gambling into our homes, even though legislation may provide some control,
how, honestly, can it be managed effectively?

In the United States of America, Internet gamblers are reported to have
more serious gambling problems than those who use slot machines and
lotteries. How different do we expect our situation to be and what has the
department done to safeguard against the abuse of Internet gambling?
Furthermore, children are able to access pornographic websites, even though
these too are controlled by law and by the over-18 age limitation. How are
we to truly secure minors from accessing these sites?

The concern of the Casino Association of South Africa needs to be taken
into consideration as we are not to introduce Internet gambling to the
detriment of our people. We do however respect that the Bill has attempted
to cover and manage a number of problem areas. There is a concern in terms
of money laundering. A trial period needs to be exercised to evaluate the
South African situation and the response to Internet gambling.

The MF will support the National Gambling Amendment Bill. Thank you.

Mnu S J NJIKELANA: Sihlalo obekekileyo, naba phathiswa abahloniphekileyo
malungu ePalamente kunye nani  baseMzantsi, ndiyanibulisa nam namhlanje.
Ndithanda ukucinezela eliya lika Prof Turok ukuthi noko kuhle xa izithuku
thuku zokubila kwethu zisamkeleka noko kubonakale ukuba nathi siyiPalamente
sinegalelo, asikruqi ngasemva nje sinalo igalelo esilenzayo kwimithetho
esiqulunqayo apha. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mr S J NJIKELANA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, members of Parliament and
the people of South Africa, I greet you today. I would like to put emphasis
on what Prof Turok said, namely that it is good when our hard work gets
appreciated because it indicates that, as Parliament, we are not  lagging
behind but are making a contribution in the making of laws here.]

Whilst the gambling legislation has been in operation for a couple of
years, it emerged that interactive gambling had escaped coverage by
regulation. Recent observation by the DTI presented a conclusion that there
is an emerging risk of, inter alia, illegal gambling by minors.

The obvious solution was to close the open flank. The process of amending
this existing Act was to allow inputs by various stakeholders during
preparliamentary processing as well as holding public hearings by the
Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry. This process was a telling
experience, especially when the DTI was accused of not having consulted
with stakeholders in the industry.

To our surprise, when the list of stakeholders was furnished to the
Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, it became clear that the DTI had
done its best and stretched itself as wide as possible during the
consultation process.

Addictive gambling always finds its way to those who make themselves
vulnerable to vices such as gambling. Since interactive gambling is based
primarily no Internet-based gambling, the extent of effective scrutiny and
checks and balances on responsible behaviour is still to be tested.

Furthermore, what if irresponsible parents allow their underage children,
who are prohibited by the law, to engage in interactive gambling? Surely,
the challenge stretches beyond the DTI to the portfolio committee itself,
on behalf of this National Assembly, to do its utmost and ensure that such
wanton activities – and here I underline Prof Turok’s words – are curbed to
the optimum.

As the portfolio committee, our experience and analysis of the public
hearings are as follows: Firstly, in his submission Prof Joe Kelly, who has
assisted in drafting online gambling legislation in various jurisdictions,
claims that “it stands to reason that any new legislation regulating online
gambling should be rigorous and thorough”.

The Justice Alliance of SA, whilst strongly opposed to legalising and thus
condoning and encouraging any form of gambling, had major concerns which,
amongst other things, placed emphasis on the probable impossibility of
being able to “ensure children do not gamble in this manner, particularly
as credit cards become widely used by parents. The real danger is that
children will have their appetites whetted to what can so easily become an
addiction.”

A legislative amendment of this nature may appear routine. However, the
socioeconomic context within which the activity of interactive gambling
exists may have results too ghastly to contemplate if this is not firmly
and tightly managed. Whatever the case may be, the Portfolio Committee on
Trade and Industry has several tasks and challenges when it comes to the
expected oversight work on this additional regulation.

Whilst the usual trend, especially from the ANC’s side, is to ensure
enabling legislation, in this instance the focus was on tightening
regulations to ensure that unintended consequences are avoided as far as
possible. The world is littered with social wrecks caused by irresponsible
behaviour that results in addictive gambling.

I trust that the National Assembly will provide the required support to the
portfolio committee to effectively engage in its new oversight role of a
special type, that of oversight of interactive gambling. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, gambling is a social cancer that must be
destroyed and no number of amendments to the Gambling Act will have the
desired effect. If we want to fight on behalf of poor, we cannot take any
half measures. Interactive gambling, like all other forms of gambling,
including the National Lottery, should be outlawed and not encouraged.

The Bill, as stated in the purpose of the Act, is supposed “to provide a
legal basis for the regulation and control of all licensed gambling
activities”. South Africa has legalised gambling, which has a dire impact
on many individuals and families addicted to gambling, especially the
poorest of the poor. The Bill requires that interactive gambling should be
controlled and regulated for reasons relating to access, loss, crime and
other dangers.

The irony is that gambling is a source of manipulation and control which
entices victims into a deepening pit of addiction. No amount of legislation
can uproot the inherent social dangers of gambling. It may only assist in
deepening the stealth of criminal activity.

Gambling in whatever form ought to be dissuaded and outlawed. We do not
need legislation to regulate or control the industry; we need political
leadership to legislate against the practice as being harmful and dangerous
to individuals, families and social security and safety.

Crimes related to gambling involve human trafficking, drug abuse, sex
slavery, family violence, emotional trauma and so forth. The FD will be in
favour of any legislation that places stringent measures upon persons and
that urges restrictions on access and exposure to gambling. We believe that
the industry is still not regulated strongly enough towards these aims and
although this Bill aims to impose restrictive laws on interactive gambling,
we are of the opinion that it does not go far enough. The FD therefore
cannot support this Bill even though the Bill aims to regulate gambling.

What we call for is the total outlawing of interactive gambling as well as
all forms of gambling. I thank you.

Mr S M RASMENI: Chairperson, Minister and members of the House, the
introduction of the National Gambling Amendment Bill before the Portfolio
Committee on Trade and Industry triggered mainly the question whether
gambling as a principle was a necessary industry in our country.
Development of a country such as ours means multidimensional processes
involving economic growth, better education, reduction of inequality and
eradication of poverty.

When you look at gambling itself, we were unanimous that the gambling
industry brings about social and economic hardships in all developing
countries and can also contribute to political instability through high
levels of unemployment. As a result, parents would spend their money on
gambling, money that is meant for the education of our children and the
maintenance of their livelihood – the future of our country. It could
contribute to high levels of inequality where owners of the industry become
richer and richer at the expense of the poor majority. It leads to
political instability, poverty and unemployment – which lead to more
resentment of the political system and those in power.

During the interaction of the committee during the various stages of debate
on the Bill, it became apparent that transformation had not taken place in
the gambling industry. In land-based gambling activities, which are
casinos, limited pay machines, etc, and even in the current forms of
interactive gambling, which means electronic gambling, there is no
implementation of broad-based black economic empowerment. It is the
committee’s considered view that the gambling companies themselves must
take a leading role in the process of broad-based black economic
empowerment through partnerships with emerging black co-operatives and
small, medium and micro enterprises. Most of these are on the database of
Cipro in the Department of Trade and Industry. They can get all those co-
operatives from Cipro.

The government and Parliament must work closely together to monitor and
ensure that the industry is transformed and complies with the national
objectives of our country. The committee supports the policy framework for
regulating legal gambling in the Bill, especially when the intention is
spelled out in the long title: “To protect society against the stimulation
of the demand for gambling.” We believe that this marks the beginning of a
process to minimise gambling and ultimately phase it out in the future.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I would like to thank all
the members for their participation and I also want to reiterate what I
said at the beginning, just for emphasis, hon Turok, that indeed the work
that was done by the committee strengthened and improved this particular
Bill. I think that it has to be recognised that the issues of emphasis that
emerged in the committee stage of this process do, I think, answer some of
the issues raised by members in the House.

Hon Dudley and hon Green, we do acknowledge the strong views and the strong
feelings about and against gambling. Our stance as government is one that
emphasises regulation of this industry but it is also a stance that
recognises the socioeconomic risks of an unregulated industry. I think that
currently one of the risks is that we do have Internet gambling taking
place in South Africa that is unregulated. We do acknowledge the strong
feelings and views. At the end of this debate, I would like to thank all
members for their participation in the process as well as in this debate.
Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Federation of Democrats dissenting).

The House adjourned at 15:40.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
    (a)    National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill, 2007,
         submitted by the Minister of Trade and Industry. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee
         on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


    (b)    Standards Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
         Research Council (MRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 172-
         2007].

                          MONDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Membership of Assembly (floor-crossing)

    Membership status of the following member has in terms of Schedule 6A
    of the Constitution (floor-crossing) changed as follows:


      • Mr M T Likotsi has left the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC)
        and joined the African People’s Convention (APC) with effect from 6
        September 2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

2.    The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Productivity
         Institute (NPI) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
         Education and Training Authority (LG-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 69-2007].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education and
         Training Authority (Teta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         76-2007].

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     Please note: The following item amends item 3(f) under the entry
     “Tablings” published on page 1692 of the Announcements, Tablings and
     Committee Reports of 6 September 2007:

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
         Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T070910 reprint – insert - PAGES 1698-
1714


                         TUESDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister of Finance

         (a)     Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/08 Financial
              Year) [B 37 – 2007] (National Assembly– proposed money Bill)


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

2.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (a)    Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 30B – 2006] – Act No 6
         of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 3 September 2007).

    (b)    Municipal Fiscal Powers and Functions Bill [B 9B– 2007)] – Act
         No 12 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 3 September
         2007).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


    (a)     Mr A Harding lost his seat in the National Assembly with effect
         from 22 August 2007.

        The vacancy caused by the loss of seat by Mr Harding has been
        filled, with effect from 5 September 2007, by the nomination of Mr
        M H Hoosen.

2.    Membership of Committees


    (1)     The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Portfolio Committees:

        Defence
        Appointed:     Bhengu, Mr F
        Discharged:    Tobias, Ms T V
        Public Works
        Appointed:     Tobias, Ms T V
        Disharged:     Bhengu, Mr F

    (2)     Mr S D Montsitsi has been elected as Chairperson of the
         Constitutional Review Committee with effect from 7 September 2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 142-2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.     Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on   Communications   on   the
   appointment of 12 non-executive members  of  the  SABC  Board,  dated  11
   September 2007:

          The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having  considered  and
          examined the matter of the appointment of 12 non-executive members
          of the  Board  of  the  South  African  Broadcasting  Corporation,
          referred to it for  consideration  and  report  on  5  June  2007,
          reports as follows:


          The  Committee  invited  the  public  to  nominate   persons   for
          consideration and recommendation to the President for  appointment
          on the Board by  means  of  advertisements  in  the  print  media.
          Responses were received from 143 individuals.


          On 15 August 2007 37 candidates were selected to  be  interviewed,
          namely


          Ms N Bulbulia, Ms M Bhengu, Prof MJ Cock,  Mr  BM  Dlamini,  Mr  E
          Funde, Ms A Gilwald, Dr F Ginwala, Mr DK Golding, Ms PM Green,  Dr
          S Gulube, Prof AM Habib, Mr R Howard, Ms Z Jaffer, Mr M Judin,  Mr
          B Khumalo, Ms F Lagadien, Ms L Lloyd, Mr A Mbeki, Adv  NY  Memani-
          Balani, Ms K Mkhonza, Ms M Mohlala, Mr C Msomi, Mr L Mtimde, Ms  C
          Qunta, Dr DM Rajab, Mr P Raleigh, Mr N Rau, Dr WP  Rowland,  Mr  M
          Seleoane, Ms GT Serobe, Mr SH Shezi, Mr OI Shongwe, Ms  RA  Smith,
          Adv P Tlakula, Mr A Trikamjee, Mr M Tshume, Mr BP Vundla.


          Two candidates, namely Ms M Bhengu and Mr E Funde,  withdrew  from
          the process.


          After having interviewed the above candidates in open meetings  in
          Parliament on 14, 15, 21, 22, 28, 29 and 31 August and on 4 and  5
          September  2007  the  Committee  resolved  that  the   House,   in
          accordance with section 13 of  the  Broadcasting  Act,  (No  4  of
          1999), recommends to the President that the  following  candidates
          be appointed as non-executive members on the SABC Board:


          Ms N Bulbulia, Ms A Gilwald, Mr DK Golding, Mr  B  Khumalo,  Ms  F
          Lagadien, Mr A Mbeki, Ms K Mkhonza, Ms C Qunta, Ms GT Serobe,  Adv
          P Tlakula, Mr A Trikamjee and Mr BP Vundla
    Report to be considered.



