---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-03-15
---

THURSDAY, 15 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S J F MARAIS: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move:

  That the House debates Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of ACDP I give notice that I shall
move on the next sitting day of the House:

  That the House –


  (1) expresses its sadness and anger at the murder of another two innocent
       children; 11-year-old Annastacia Wiese of Woodridge, Mitchells Plain,
       who was found in the ceiling of her home, and Naledi Ndabeli, whose
       body was discovered under the bush 800m from where she went missing
       at a neighbour’s house in Brantford, Bloemfontein.

    2) we extend our heartfelt condolences to their parents, family members
       and friends, and pray that the Lord comfort and heal their broken
       hearts;


     3) commends the police and all who worked tirelessly to find Annastacia
        and Naledi;

     4) condemns these brutal, senseless killings; and

     5) calls on the relevant departments to ensure that the perpetrators
        are speedily brought to justice.


Thank you. [Applause.]

            APPOINTMENT OF DR MIGIRO AS DEPUTY SECRETARY-GENERAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That the House -
   (1)      notes that on Friday, 5 January 2007, the United Nations
        Secretary-General, Ban Ki-Moon, announced the appointment of Dr
        Asha-Rose Migiro as UN Deputy Secretary-General with effect from 1
        February 2007;


   (2)      further notes that Dr Migiro became the first African woman, and
        the second woman ever, to hold this position since its inception in
        1997;


   (3)      recognises that Dr Migiro has served as Minister of Foreign
        Affairs and International Co-operation from 2006 to 2007, and
        before that also as Minister for Community Development, Gender and
        Children for five years in the United Republic of Tanzania;


   (4)      further recognises that Dr Migiro was Chairperson of the
        Ministerial Committee of the Organ on Politics, Defence and
        Security Co-operation of the Southern African Development Community
        (SADC), and also President of the United Nations Security Council
        during its open debate on peace, security and development in the
        Great Lakes region;


   (5)      recalls that prior to government service Dr Migiro was a member
        of the Faculty of Law at the University of Dar es Salaam and a
        Senior Lecturer, and headed the Department of Constitutional and
        Administrative Law from 1992 to 1994 and the Department of Civil
        and Criminal Law from 1994 to 1997;


   (6)      believes that, through her distinguished service in diverse
        areas, Dr Migiro has displayed outstanding management ability to
        contribute to the progress of all humanity; and


     7) congratulates Dr Asha-Rose Migiro on her appointment as UN Deputy
        Secretary-General and wishes her success in her assignment.


   Agreed to.

                            SITUATION IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D J SITHOLE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC notes with concern the
current situation in Zimbabwe, including reports of the alleged assault of
opposition leaders while in police custody. We urge all stakeholders in
Zimbabwe to respect and uphold the constitution and the laws of the land to
work to safeguard the rights of all citizens and to continue to seek a
peaceful and inclusive solution.

The ANC trusts that a thorough investigation will be conducted into these
allegations and that any necessary action will be taken in accordance with
the law. The ANC supports the South African government’s initiative to
assist the people and leaders of Zimbabwe to address the challenges facing
the country, in line with the spirit and position of the African Union and
SADC. Thank you. [Applause.]

                PROBLEMS IDENTIFIED IN DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, when the Department of Justice
appeared before Scopa this year to explain certain problems identified by
the Auditor-General with the department’s financial statements, the
hearing, scheduled for 31 January, had to be postponed because Mr Alan
McKenzie, who, five years ago, was seconded to the Department of Justice as
acting CFO to help sort out the department’s finances by Business against
Crime, was shot five times by intruders at his sister’s home in Cape Town
the night before.

Happily, Mr McKenzie has now fully recovered. That he did was a medical
miracle attributed to the swift action of his sister, who is a retired
hospital matron. It’s now become fairly clear that the shooting of Mr
McKenzie was probably a hit and the police are investigating it as such.

As Mr McKenzie relates the incident, two intruders stormed into the room
where he and his family were sitting. The first gunman made straight for Mr
McKenzie, a large man, who proceeded to try and wrestle the gun out of his
assailant’s hand. This proved to be impossible as it was strapped to the
assailant’s hand in typical assassin fashion.

He was shot in the leg, while the second gunman shot him four times in the
back, stomach and chest. The bullets were of the kind normally used for
hits. The gunmen then fled. They ignored other members of the family and
took nothing although the home was filled with valuable objects.

Now that he is back at work, Mr McKenzie is required to wear a bullet-proof
vest when he goes out. One can only speculate as to the motive of the
attempted hit. While South Africa is rapidly getting an international
reputation as the Dodge City of the world, it is a sorry comment on the
state of our society and our standards of governance that a top justice
official who is doing his job without fear or favour should be subject to
criminal victimisation such as that suffered by Mr McKenzie.

The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development and her colleague,
the Minister for Safety and Security, should pull out all the stops to
ensure that these criminals are tracked down and brought to book. Thank
you. [Applause.]

                     JOB CREATION AND PROMOTION OF SMMEs

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof E S CHANG (IFP): Deputy Speaker, job creation and the promotion of
small, medium and micro enterprises, SMMEs, are urgent challenges that we
are faced with in South Africa.

The government does have several institutions in place to assist SMMEs,
including Khula Enterprise Finance Limited, which is mandated to facilitate
loan and equity capital to SMMEs through intermediaries. Although Khula
guarantees interest rates of 2% under prime to the intermediaries, these
intermediaries charge SMMEs anything between 19% and 38% interest. This is
stifling the development of SMMEs and is the main reason why we believe
that Khula should do away with the “middlemen” and provide financing
directly to SMMEs.

Another concern is the lack of risk shown by Khula in their lending
practice. This is evidenced by the fact that they have only 4% bad debt at
the moment, which is far too low. We believe that Khula should be more
aggressive in their lending approach if they want to really promote the
interest of small businesses.

The IFP, therefore, calls on Khula to cut out the agents and lend directly
to SMMEs at low interest rates, and to do so aggressively, even if it means
taking on more risk. SMMEs need all the help that they can get and
immediate implementation of these steps will go a long way towards
achieving this goal. I thank you.

                        OPENING THE DOORS OF LEARNING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B NTULI (ANC): The Leeufontein Primary School is a primary school for
farmworkers’ children. It has no proper ablution facilities, no recreation
facilities, is poorly constructed and has inadequate learning and teaching
facilities. During bad weather teaching and learning at this school come to
a standstill, whereas just a kilometre away there is the Kameelfontein
Primary School, which has good teaching and learning facilities, sufficient
ablution facilities, recreation and adequate teaching facilities. This is a
school for farm owners’ children and property owners’ children in the area
of Leeufontein and Kameelfontein in Roodeplaat.
Thus, as we are in March, human rights month, equality before the law
should prevail. The doors of learning should further be opened for all,
including children of Leeufontein Primary School, by integrating the
learners to enjoy the existing Kameelfontein Primary School facilities.
These disparities between the two schools are not compatible with the
spirit of South Africa in its 13th year of democracy and freedom. These
social ills must be eradicated.

Hence we, in the ANC, urge the governing body of Kameelfontein Primary
School to open their school for admission of Leeufontein Primary School
learners so that the children of the same community could attend the same
school and share the available resources. I thank you. [Applause.]

     LACK OF SABC COVERAGE OF UDM EVENT; GUNNING DOWN OF UDM COUNCILLOR

                            (Member’s Statement)


Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): The UDM President was at an event to welcome more than
200 new members into the UDM fold in Khayelitsha on 3 March 2007. Many more
have since joined and many, many more are still joining.

We, in the UDM, were certainly disappointed by the non-coverage of the
above occasion by the SABC, despite having been formally and timeously
requested to do so. The UDM will not rest until it has received a
satisfactory explanation in this regard.

In the same breath, the UDM has received with shock the news that Mr
Ngombane, a former ANC and independent councillor, who had publicly joined
the UDM Western Cape structures on 24 February, was gunned down on 7 March
2007.

It would be a sad event if his killing were politically motivated because
the country, and certainly the UDM, does not want that. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

                            SITUATION IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Agb Voorsitter, ’n belangrike deel van president
Mbeki se bydrae tot op datum in Afrika was die inisiatiewe wat hy geneem
het om die negatiewe en stereotiepe beeld van korrupte en swak demokrasie
in Afrika in die oë van die wêreld af te breek. Hy het dit gedoen deur die
stigting van die Afrika-unie, deur Nepad en met die instel van instrumente
soos die Afrika-portuuroorsigmeganisme.

Al hierdie goeie werk word op die oomblik deur pres Mugabe tot niet gemaak.
Pres Mugabe se uitlatings en wat tans in Zimbabwe gebeur, is ’n
verleentheid vir Afrika en vir Suid-Afrika, en dit behoort ook ’n
verleentheid te wees vir president Mbeki. Pres Mugabe se optredes asook die
magsmisbruik van sy polisiemag teenoor die opposisie in Zimbabwe versterk
en bevestig al die stereotipes wat oor Afrika en demokrasie in Afrika in
die oë van die wêreld bestaan.

Waar die Oscar-bekroonde rolprent oor Idi Amin, The Last King of Scotland,
nou weer die aandag op Afrika en demokrasie en diktatorskap vestig, kom mnr
Mugabe en sy boelie-agtige polisie en bevestig dat niks in Afrika nog
verander het nie.

Suid-Afrika kan nie bekostig dat president Mbeki in hierdie tye in die
Midde-Ooste betrokke is by oplossings van die Israel-Palestynse krisis,
maar nie ’n woord sê oor Zimbabwe en pres Mugabe se vergrype nie. Hierdie
Zimbabwe-vergrype het niks met grond of met die koloniale tydperk te doen
nie, maar gaan oor demokrasie en die regte van opposisiepartye om normale
politiek in Afrika te kan bedryf. President Mbeki moet sy siening hieroor
nou openbaar maak. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Chairperson, to date an important part of President
Mbeki’s contribution in Africa has been the initiatives that he took to
break down the negative and stereotypical image of corrupt and poor
democracy in Africa in the eyes of the world. He did this by establishing
the African Union, through Nepad, and by establishing instruments such as
the African Peer Review Mechanism.
All this good work is being destroyed at the moment by President Mugabe.
President Mugabe’s utterances and what is currently happening in Zimbabwe
is an embarrassment for Africa and for South Africa, and it should also be
an embarrassment for President Mbeki. President Mugabe’s actions, as well
as the abuse of power by his police force against the opposition in
Zimbabwe, reinforce and confirm all the stereotypes that exist about Africa
and democracy in Africa in the eyes of the world.

Now that the Oscar-awarded film about Idi Amin, The Last King of Scotland,
is once again focusing attention on Africa and democracy and dictatorship,
Mr Mugabe and his bully-like police are now confirming that nothing has
changed in Africa yet.

During times such as these, South Africa cannot afford to have President
Mbeki involved with solutions to the Israel-Palestine crisis in the Middle
East, while he does not utter a word about Zimbabwe and President Mugabe’s
transgressions. These transgressions in Zimbabwe have nothing to do with
land or the colonial era, but deals with democracy and the rights of
opposition parties to practice normal politics in Africa. President Mbeki
must now publicly state his view on this. Thank you.]

              TWO PRIVATE COMPANIES BUILD IMFEZI PRIMARY SCHOOL

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr M P SIBANDE (ANC): Chairperson, the democratic government has the
ultimate responsibility for ensuring that our human resources are developed
to the full. Fundamental to the development of our human resources is the
creation of the environment that is conducive to learning.

The success in the implementation and realisation of the above-stated goals
lies in the partnership between government, the private sector and the
general public.

The ANC applauds the initiative taken by two private companies that have
decided on their own, seeing the needs of the children and community of
Schagen in the Mpumalanga province, to build a school to serve the
community.

I-ANC ihalalisela imizamo leyentiwe nguletinkampani letimbili, iBundu Inn
inikele ngekwakha indzawo yekuphakelela, yaphindze yatinikela kutsi
itawufaka tinsimbi letitawuvimbela kwebiwa kuso sonkhe lesikolwa.
Inkampani, iGolden Merc, ifake sandla ngekwakha emagumbi ekufundzela,
yafulela lihhovisi, yalungisa nesilingi. Ichubekile lenkampani yatinikela
kutsi isetawufaka nemakhabethe kulesikolwa sasepulazini, lesibitwa ngekutsi
yiMfezi Primary School.
Simema bonkhe bantfu kutsi balandzele lesibonelo lesihle. Ngiyabonga.
[Tandla.] (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC applauds the efforts of the two companies, the Bundu Inn, who had
committed itself to building a dining hall and erecting a security fence
around the whole school to prevent the stealing of school property; and the
Golden Merc, for lending a hand in building the classrooms, roofing the
office and fixing the ceiling. This company has also committed itself to
installing built-in cupboards in the whole farm school called the Mfezi
Primary school.

We call on all people to emulate these good deeds. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

                             KHUTSONG SITUATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Chairperson, in 16 days from today the boundaries
of some provinces will have changed, some for the good of the residents,
but others not, and all this is as a result of the disestablishment of
cross-boundary municipalities, which were unnecessary in the first place.

Provincial authorities in Gauteng gleefully made countless visits to parts
that will cease to be in the North West come 31 March 2007. Those in the
North West visit Khutsong, their only new entrants, with great trepidation
as they are not welcome.

The unfortunate situation playing itself out in Khutsong is the result of
the proverbial cutting of one’s nose to spite one’s face. Some people
within the ANC had made it their business to label any part in the North
West as a place of poverty, backwardness and hardship. It is for that
reason that to the people of Khutsong it has come to be known as the
province of little hope.

This is the time for leadership to prevail and to rise to the occasion and
be seen to be attempting to resolve the impasse. There may be substance in
arguing that the problems in the neighbouring Zimbabwe should be left to
those people to resolve, but it does not go down well to read between the
lines that the problems of Khutsong are left to the residents of Khutsong
to resolve. The national government and the North West provincial
government have to do all to quell the situation.

It is unfortunate to have the situation in Khutsong where councillors call
themselves “leadership in exile”, because they have sought refuge elsewhere
and do not live in their homes, let alone their wards.

The people out there say that according to the ruling party they are in the
North West, but according to the community they are still in Gauteng. That
calls for all concerned to work together in the quest for a solution. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                             AFFIRMATIVE ACTION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Chairperson, I have over the past year on numerous
occasions attempted to bring to the government’s attention that affirmative
action is doing South Africa more harm than good. And I want to repeat it
here again.

I have no problem with the replies from various Ministers of the executive
who say affirmative action is a policy of the government and that it is
here to stay until the imbalances of the past have been addressed. John
Kane-Berman in his article in the Business Day of today says:


  Given the manner in which affirmative action is being applied, it is
  likely that imbalances will be with us indefinitely. This is because the
  objective of redressing them has been largely superseded by the ideology
  of racial representivity.

In practice, this means quotas and numerical targets.

Mr Kane-Berman points out that racial representivity and redressing of the
imbalances of the past are not the same thing. He says that representivity
and the elimination of the disadvantaged can come together only if it is
assumed that once the former has been achieved, all imbalances will ipso
facto have been eliminated and all previous disadvantages redressed. This
is something that, he says, is false.

Mr Kane-Berman says that apartheid serves as a scapegoat and the continuing
focus on race allows too many current ills to be traced to apartheid and
previous disadvantage and that in the process the extent to which
disadvantage arises from current policies is ignored. [Time expired.]


               CRISIS INTERVENTION MANAGEMENT IN HOME AFFAIRS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Chairperson, the very fact that the Minister of Home
Affairs had to call on the assistance of a task team to haul her department
out of the mess it is in, is confirmation that the citizens of South Africa
have lost confidence in the Department of Home Affairs.

The Auditor-General’s report perhaps also served as the main catalyst to
resort to crisis management intervention. It was interesting to hear that
the Minister tried to absolve herself from her responsibilities, saying
that she laid the blame for her dysfunctional department at the door of her
senior management and that they had let her down.
The reality, Minister, is that you were a Deputy Minister for three years
and have been a full Minister in your department since 2004. You must
therefore accept the observation made in the report that ``leadership was
lacking’’ includes lack of leadership by the political head of the
department - lack of leadership in this case is you.

The report found that the management of human resources was the weakest
link. It is unconscionable that at least 11 persons were appointed to
senior positions despite not meeting the advertised criteria and that
financial control is virtually nil.

The DA welcomes the findings of the task team, however the soft stance of
the ``corrective measures approach’’ by the Minster is akin to band-aid
therapy and we urge the Minister to take decisive action if she is serious
about changing the image and service delivery of her department.
[Applause.]




                            HOUSING IN SEA POINT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A VAN WYK (ANC): Chairperson, Sea Point in Cape Town reflects much of
the inner city suburbs in many of South Africa’s biggest cities. Many
people work there on a daily basis, travel long distances in order to reach
their workplaces simply because they cannot afford to buy or rent in the
area. Some of them have done so for decades and others for generations.

Sea Point has one aspect that differentiates it from other suburbs in our
biggest cities. A substantial number of properties in Sea Point are owned
by people who use them as holiday accommodation, many of them foreign
citizens. As a result thereof many properties are standing empty for
extended periods during the year.

Sea Point is a prime example of an area that can benefit from the ANC’s
policy of integrated housing. There is a clear need and justification for
affordable housing to many people who work in that area. The absence and
vacancy of much of the accommodation for the greater part of the year
result in Sea Point becoming a target for criminal activity. This is
especially true on the Main Road, which also forms the major business
district.

Developing integrated housing in a suburb such as Sea Point will ensure
that people and families who actually live and work in that area can create
a vibrant community that can care for that area. Provincially, locally, and
even nationally owned land is available, and the ANC government is urged to
look at this land and establish whether it is possible to develop it into
affordable housing for those many Capetonians from all walks of life
working in Sea Point and surrounding areas. [Applause.]

                                  ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP is deeply concerned that
Zimbabwe is fast becoming a repressive state. The recent violence involving
the Zimbabwean police and members of the MDC is indicative of an
administration facing a serious breakdown of law and order compounded by
massive economic deprivation, high unemployment and extreme poverty.

It is generally an unacceptable political rationale, led by South Africa
and others, that the people of Zimbabwe must find a solution to their
problems, but it should be borne in mind that no country or people,
including South Africa, have ever delivered themselves from repression
solely through their own efforts, without any form of external assistance.
For this reason, the IFP believes that the defence of the fundamental
rights of man must prevail over sovereignty and legal documents.

The IFP therefore appeals to President Thabo Mbeki to insist that Zimbabwe
is immediately put permanently on the agenda of SADC, the AU, PAP the EU
and the United Nations. Thank you. [Applause.]

                          MURDERS OF YOUNG CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Chairperson, the recent spate of murders of young
children, including Sheldean Human, Annastacia Wiese, Thato Radebe, Marissa
Naidoo, Michaela Ganchi, Stephen Sibert, the grand-child of Judge Ngoepe,
and many others have shocked our country and all its people.

In many instances these murders were committed by people known to these
innocent children. We, as a society, need to question what has happened to
the morality and values of members in the communities who commit such
atrocious crimes.

The solidarity of our communities is seen in the widespread demonstrations
and outrage against this growing evil in our midst. The importance of
family life and respect for all human life in our society are the
cornerstones of our young democracy, and should be protected at all costs.

Now is the time to stand together as a nation and rid our society of such
brutal and senseless killings of our children. We need to support our
police service to successfully arrest the guilty persons and to allow our
courts to punish those found guilty of such heinous crimes with the harsh
sentences they deserve. I thank you.

                                VIOLENT CRIME
                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A M DREYER (DA): Mnr die Voorsitter, binne ’n week het daar drie
geweldsmisdade naby my gebeur. Op Sondag, 4 Maart, terwyl my 23-jarige seun
Emile buite Stellenbosch fietsry, beroof twee welgeklede jong mans hom en
steek hom met ’n mes. Op Donderdag, 8 Maart, slaan die tuinwerker van die
70-jarige mev Pop Marais van Krugersdorp in my kiesafdeling, Mogale City,
haar met ’n byl oor die kop en laat haar vir dood agter. Op Vrydag, 9
Maart, oorval twee mans van ’n buurland die 53-jarige mev Cheryl Miekle van
Lanseria, ook in my kiesafdeling, en skiet haar dood.

Die tragedie is dat duisende burgers daagliks sulke traumatiese ervarings
beleef. Omdat mense besef hulle kan nie langer op die staat vir beskerming
staatmaak nie, mobiliseer die burgerlike samelewing nou teen misdaad, maar
as die regering nie sy kant ook bring nie, kan die land in anargie verval.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Ms A M DREYER (DA): Mr Chair, within a week three violent crimes took
place close to me. On Sunday, 4 March, while my 23-year-old son Emile was
cycling outside Stellenbosch, he was robbed and stabbed with a knife by two
well-dressed young men. On Thursday, 8 March, the garden worker of the 70-
year-old Mrs Pop Marais from Krugersdorp in my constituency, Mogale City,
hit her over the head with an axe and left her for dead. On Friday, 9
March, two men from a neighbouring country attacked 53-year-old Mrs Cheryl
Miekle of Lanseria, also in my constituency, and shot and killed her.

The tragedy is that thousands of citizens experience traumatic incidents
such as these on a daily basis. Because people realise that they can no
longer rely on the state for protection, civil society is now mobilising
against crime, but if the government does not also do its part, the country
could be reduced to anarchy. [Applause.]

                           WATER SUPPLY IN UMZUMBE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E MBILI (ANC): Chairperson, in keeping with the promise the government
of the ANC made to our people in the statement of 8 January 2007, we
promised that we would intensify the struggle against poverty.

I am delighted to report to this House that Umzumbe Municipality in Kwazulu-
Natal has sourced the funding through the Municipal Infrastructure Grant to
build a massive dam which will provide water to more than 20 000
households. The work has already begun, and I am told that by December, or
Christmas 2007, people in the area will be drinking clean water.

We applaud this ANC-led municipality for understanding our call when we
say: A better life for all. We also say that water is one of the most
important commodities to address that call. We call upon all the
beneficiaries of this project to look after this asset and make sure that
it is not vandalised in order to maximise the benefits to this rural
community of Inyangweni and the surrounding areas. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  VIOLENCE; ZIMBABWE; HOUSING IN SEA POINT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Chairperson,
I would like to respond to four of the statements. With your permission
Chair, three will be dealt with at once because they are on Zimbabwe. The
other one I would like to respond to is about the Sea Point problem
concerning affordable housing.

Firstly, I would like to say that the South African government cannot and
does not condone the use of violence against its citizens or citizens from
any other country. We have worked as government over the past 13 years with
our neighbours on the continent to entrench democracy and respect for human
rights, here at home as well as in Africa, and indeed the rest of the
world.
We will continue to do so until we have achieved our objective of a
peaceful, prosperous and democratic country and continent.
I would like to respond to the hon member who raised the question of
affordable housing in suburbs such as Sea Point. I would like to say how
much I appreciate the creative ways in which different communities approach
the question of sustainable human development. I am personally involved in
a project involving mainly domestic workers in the southern suburbs, where
we are looking at a housing project to accommodate them close to their
places of work.

I think the more communities embrace this new way of living, the sooner
will we have integrated and happy South African communities who see
themselves as South Africans before they see themselves as anything else.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

    AFFIRMATIVE ACTION; VIOLENCE IN KHUTSONG; DISPARITIES IN OUR SCHOOLS;
                   EDUCATION IS EVERYBODY’S RESPONSIBILITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I have four responses.
Firstly, with regard to the issue of affirmative action, it is not correct
selectively to utilise the Constitution. We reflect on its advanced nature,
its sophistication and we take pride in the fact that we have a
Constitution that we, as a country, could be proud of. Yet, we tend to
ignore the imperatives within that Constitution.

Our Constitution is underpinned by the values of equality and human
dignity. Section 9 of the Constitution clearly imposes a duty on the state
to take legislative and other measures to correct the imbalances of the
past, which means that affirmative action is entrenched and embedded in the
Constitution.

What we seek to achieve in our Constitution is not only procedural equality
but also substantive equality. Now, to suggest that affirmative action or
corrective action is not necessarily against the ethos of our Constitution,
certainly smacks of selective hypocrisy. [Interjections.] I can quite
understand the murmurs and interjections from the other side because they
represent a particular, narrow, parochial interest.

With regard to the issue of Khutsong, indeed I do agree that government has
a particular responsibility – all spheres of government, national,
provincial and local – to ensure that we accelerate service delivery in the
area.

However, we should take into account that a lot of the violence and a lot
of the instability that is being created in that particular area has been
through agent provocateurs, who have a particular agenda. The agenda is
that they have not been elected as public representatives in the
municipality.

There are reports of people being forced out of busses – school children –
and being compelled to join the marches. There are reports of people being
assaulted and being coerced into taking part in what is termed a solidarity
march against the local government.

We do not, however, abdicate our responsibility to ensure that there should
be a focused attention in ensuring that Khutsong becomes a better place to
live in.

With regard to the issue of Kameelfontein and Bloemfontein Primary, that in
fact is a microcosm of the picture in our country. If we compare the huge
disparities in our schools and we compare the former model C schools and
township schools, you will see the huge differences in terms of
infrastructure, laboratories, libraries, etc.

What government is doing is ensuring that through its affirmation programme
called Quids Up, it has set aside R10,5 billion to ensure that those
underresourced schools are better resourced.

However, in the context of this particular problem, I think a conversation
has to take place, where schools that are half full or half empty should
become more accommodating to those schools in neighbouring areas that are
overfull, where, certainly, quality education cannot take place. This
cannot take place arbitrarily, but it should be as a result of interaction
between the governing bodies of the two schools to see how they can
accommodate each other without compromising the ethos of the school. There
are successful practices that have occurred in different areas where this
kind of accommodation takes place without infringing on the language policy
or the ethos of the school.

I think the approach should be practical, reasonable and rational. I do
believe there is a will and good faith on the part of the broader community
of all racial groups to ensure that we provide quality education to our
people. I would then urge the governing body of that particular school in
particular take into account the huge disparities of that underresourced
school, the accommodation and the right of access to all learners to
appropriate schooling.

With regard to the last aspect, which is in relation to the responsibility
of education as being the responsibility, not only of the state, but of all
citizens, certainly, education is a task for everybody. It is certainly the
fundamental responsibility of government, but I think private citizens as
well as private entities should play a role.

Last week I had the privilege of attending the opening of a huge,
wonderfully designed, school in Kalkfontein, where there was partnership
between the Department of Education in Gauteng as well as Oracle – an IT
company – and other donors.

If you look at the way the school is resourced, its mission statement and
ethos, one could say that it is a good example of close co-operation
between the private sector and government in ensuring that we provide
quality education through proper infrastructure and resources. Certainly,
we will invite the private sector or citizens to contribute in a smaller or
bigger way to ensure that we provide quality education to all our people.
Thank you so much. [Applause.]

                CRIMINAL VIOLENCE; PROBLEMS IN HOME AFFAIRS;
                             AFFIRMATIVE ACTION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: House Chairperson, I wish to respond
to three matters. The first matter is about crime; the second one about the
hon member who spoke about Home Affairs and the third one is about the
issue of affirmative action.

The hon member from the DA did mention to the House that recently her son
became a victim of crime and indeed was stabbed. I would like to express
the sympathy of the members of the executive and of the whole government to
this member for this unfortunate incident. I don’t think anyone of us in
this House would not be traumatised by the fact that so many people in this
country are indeed being traumatised by criminal violence. We empathise
with them.

What is even more necessary is for us to be correctly focused on dealing
with this problem of criminal violence in the country. I think that it is
indeed correct to note here that a number of citizens in this country are
mobilising to draw the attention of society to this problem of crime.

I would like to say, if one analyses the mobilisation that is going on
right now, whilst the strategic intent of the mobilisation might be correct
in that it wants to draw attention to the escalation of the problem in the
country, that I don’t think the focus is correct.

If we are serious about doing something about crime, it requires the
conjoint efforts of every one of us to act in concert with each other and
to give support to the forces in this country that are charged with the
responsibility for dealing with crime, and that is the SA Police Service.

What we need is for citizens in this country to mobilise to give support to
the SA Police Service in every way possible so that it could actually deal
with the escalation of criminal violence in the country. Taking to the
streets does not necessarily help to resolve addressing the problem of
crime. It might draw attention to it. I think its action is not focused and
what we really need to do is to get down to the ground in our communities,
build the structures in those communities that work in support of the SA
Police Service to deal with fighting off this escalation of violence in the
country.

On the matter of the Department of Home Affairs, the hon member stated that
the people in this country have lost confidence in the department. And she
went on to say that leadership in the department is lacking, and she
particularly criticized the Minister.

I think you need to think very carefully about that statement because you
need to know that it was this very Minister who, herself, requested that
this special investigation be put in place so that we could find the
correct strategy to deal with the many problems that have been identified
by this Minister and her department within Home Affairs.

If we think that the problems that are currently present in the Department
of Home Affairs can be eradicated overnight, then we are seriously
misinformed. What we are dealing with here are problems that have been
accumulating in this department for well over 13 years. The Minister is
accurately seized with the enormity of this responsibility; has
demonstrated effective leadership by putting in motion this specific study
team; and has completely committed herself to ensuring that she would
execute the recommendations of this task team to deal with correcting the
current difficulties within the Department of Home Affairs.

I think the statement that leadership is lacking is totally untrue and
totally incorrect. [Interjections.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: On a point of order, Chairperson: I was quoting directly
from the report. So, for the Minister to say that I was misleading this
House is actually wrong. He should read the report, because those words are
in the report! [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Order! Order! Deputy
Minister, order, please. We were trying to listen to a point of order and
then there was already clapping and heckling.

Deputy Minister, with regard to the issue of the words used, I’m not sure,
we’ll just come back to it. Can you just conclude on your remark and I will
make a ruling.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: I understand the hon member as
having said that when she made the statement “leadership is lacking”, ...
but she drew it from the report. Well, I thought that she was attacking the
Minister for showing a lack of leadership. But now that you in fact accept
that that is not what you were saying, then I must therefore say that your
understanding of the report is incorrect because that statement in the
report ... [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Order, please!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: ... that statement in the report
refers to leadership at the level of officials within the department.

The hon member from the Opposition, in dealing with the affirmative action
matter, made a statement which is absolutely, I think, deplorable. The
member made a statement to say that the policy of affirmative action is
utilising apartheid as a scapegoat. [Interjections.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: On a point of order, Mr Chairman: I wonder if you could
just give us a ruling. I understand that the previous speaker – the
previous Deputy Minister - addressed this matter of affirmative action. We
now have a second Deputy Minister to address that.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson, I withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! On the issue that was raised
earlier by Ms Kalyan around the issue of misleading, the member was not
being unparliamentary because he did not say “deliberately misleading”. He
did not use that word. Therefore, in that context the Deputy Minister was
not out of order. Thank you very much.




       CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL INTERESTS IN MOBILE EQUIPMENT BILL



                           (Second Reading debate)


Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Chairperson, the Convention on International
Interests in Mobile Equipment Bill was adopted – and it happened here in
Cape Town - in 2001 and it was signed at the time by some 53 states
including, obviously, South Africa. The Cape Town Convention, as it has now
become known for short, seeks to provide much greater clarity around legal
and ownership rights in regard to mobile equipment like aircraft engines,
aircraft frames and helicopters. This is, needless to say, very expensive
equipment and, by definition, it is easily moved around the world. Given
the expense of the equipment, parties using it typically enter into
arrangements with financial institutions for the purchase and or lease of
this equipment.

Because of its mobility and because there is a vast range of different
local national legislation, financial institutions have often been very
reluctant to provide finance where they charge very significant premiums to
cover their risks. And this applies particularly to developing countries,
especially those in Africa.
The convention seeks to establish an international register of such
equipment and uniform protocols for dealing with problems like a default on
payment. This is applicable in all states that have signed, ratified and or
acceded to the convention. We believe that the convention will greatly
assist developing countries, in particular, more easily to access finance
for the purchase and or lease of this kind of aircraft mobile equipment.

The Bill that we have in front of us in the House today gives legal effect
to the provisions of the convention and protocol here within South Africa;
it determines which courts in South Africa will have the relevant
jurisdiction, and the Bill designates the SA Civil Aviation Authority as
the entry point through which information required for the registration of
this equipment may be transmitted to the international register.

There are no financial implications for our state as the convention and
protocol are basically private law instruments.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, again the level of
noise is going up. Continuously, presiding officers have to bring it to our
attention that we should preserve the dignity and the decorum of the House
so that we can hear people who are debating all the issues that they are
raising. Thank you very much.

Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Chair. This is a very scintillating piece of
legislation, so I’m surprised by the people, and I’m trying to Bolshevirise
it, so, hush!

In the course of 2006, the Transport Portfolio Committee received a very
full report on the convention and the present Bill was tabled before us, as
a committee, in the course of this first parliamentary session of 2007.
Having finalised our consideration and being unanimous as a committee on
its desirability, the committee recommends to the House that we pass the
Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

                                FINANCE BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Mr N M NENE: Ngiyabonga sihlalo. [Thank you, Chair.] This Finance Bill is
meant to approve unauthorised expenditure as a direct charge against the
National Revenue Fund. Most of the work on this Bill has already been done
by the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, and the reports have come
before this House and they were adopted.

Such unauthorised expenditure is approved subject to the following
conditions. It is approved on condition that effective and appropriate
disciplinary steps against officials who made or permitted unauthorised
expenditure have been dealt with. It is also approved on condition that
funds in excess of appropriation were spent in accordance with the
programme and descriptions of the department on the essential services
which could not be avoided and that implies that we did get value for
money, but also that remedial steps have been taken by the accounting
officer to prevent further occurrence of unauthorized expenditure, and that
funds not spent in accordance with the purpose of the main division or a
Vote are related to the objective of the departmental ones, and also,
finally, that no fraudulent, corrupt activities were committed in
permitting the expenditure.

This has since been dealt with by the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
and brought before this House and the committee has since also approved
this Finance Bill and I therefore present this Finance Bill before this
House for adoption. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Bill read a first time.

                                FINANCE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS - FILLING
                    OF A VACANCY ON THE COUNCIL OF ICASA

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, the question before the
House is the approval of the recommendation for the appointment of Dr M
Socikwa as councillor to fill the vacancy on the council of the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa. Are there any objections to the
recommendations?

Mr C M LOWE: Yes, there is an objection from the DA, Mr Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela) Is it an objection?

Mr C M LOWE: It is an objection. I understand that we are going to make a
declaration.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I will then follow the procedure
here. I now put the question. Those in favour will say, “aye” and those
against will say “no”. I think the ayes have it.

There was no debate.

Question put: That the appointment of Dr M Socikwa as councillor to fill a
vacancy on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority of South
Africa be approved.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, hon members. We will resume.
There has been a request for declarations before a division. Parties have
agreed that there will be declarations first. I am going to be allowing
those declarations. Those parties wishing to participate in the
declarations will indicate that.

Declarations of vote:

Mr P S SWART: Thank you, Chairperson. The DA will not support the
nomination of Dr Marcia Socikwa. She is a competent person, but there is a
conflict of interest, when she is related by marriage and by blood to
persons who respectively run and give legal advice on the
telecommunications activities of Transtel.

Transnet has a 15% share in Newtel, and Newtel and Transnet are in
discussions for Newtel to acquire Transtel.

Currently, Transtel also provides services to Newtel, and in addition,
Transtel holds PTN, Private Telecommunications Network, and value-added
network services by other network licenses, and uses them to participate in
the telecommunications sector.

Firstly, although Dr Socikwa is not directly disqualified by the letter of
the Icasa Act, her relationship to Transtel is, in our view, too close for
comfort. You can imagine a range of licensing amendments and other
procedures where she should have to recuse herself just as Icasa embarks on
the enormous task of implementing the Electronic Communications Act.

Secondly, it remains our view that the portfolio committee should have
taken legal advice on whether it could start a new process to find an
economist, and not on whether the filling of a vacancy left by the
infrastructure economist Andrew Barendse could be performed from the list
agreed upon at the last nomination process.

Ms S C VOS: Thank you, Chairperson. The IFP respects the principle of this
matter, which has been raised by the DA. The IFP, however, supported Dr
Socikwa being short-listed, and we do not question her competence and the
wide range of skills which she will bring to the Independent Communications
Authority of SA in any way whatsoever.

We are in fact confident that she will be mindful of the perils and
perceptions that her family connections hold for her and that she will act
with the honesty and integrity which will be required from her at all
times. Thank you.
Mr G G OLIPHANT: Thank you very much, Chairperson. The DA is full of
surprises, but that is fine. The issue here is that there is no question
about the credentials of Dr Marcia Socikwa to be a councillor in the Icasa.
She has very impressive credentials; she has a PhD in telecommunications
and regulatory matters. We could not find anything wrong with her during
the interviews and even thereafter.

The DA did raise this matter they said was “too close for comfort” because
her brother-in-law had an interest in the ICT sector, and that is the issue
that they had with her appointment. We went to the law and checked the
disqualification provisions of the Icasa Amendment Act. All of us agreed
that the law does not disqualify Dr Marcia Socikwa.

We are not acting on the basis of comfort or anything. So, that was very
clear. In this Parliament, we act on the basis of law. Why do we have these
laws if we are not going to respect them?

Concerning the legal advice that Mr Swart says we did not sort out, we went
to the parliamentary legal advisers to say, “We have a situation of having
to fill the vacancy here. What do we do?’’ They advised us. In the
committee we all agreed. In fact, the DA said that it was sound legal
advice.

To come here and raise other things, I think, is not being very honest with
this Parliament and the process. We urge Parliament to support the
nomination of Dr Marcia Socikwa and we are going to request the DA to
withdraw this need for a division. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Mr Chairperson, could I please address you on a point of
order?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): What is the point of order?
Mr C M LOWE: Mr Chairperson, I seek your guidance. We are seeking to
understand, for the appointment to the Icasa board, does Parliament have to
vote on that appointment or does it not have to vote?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): There was a division called and, in
terms of the Rules, we have to proceed with that division, unless the
division is withdrawn.

But, for now, because there is no withdrawal of such a division, we will
proceed. [Interjections.]

I am also informed that it does not require a special majority. A division
has been called for, but if there is a withdrawal, we will look at that
issue.

Division demanded.
The House divided.

   AYES - 165: Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Benjamin, J; Beukman,
   F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, M J; Bici, J; Biyela, B P ; Bonhomme, T J; Booi,
   M S; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J;
   Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P;
   Dambuza, B N; Diale, L N; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge,
   G Q M; Fihla, N B; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; Gerber, P
   A; Godi, N T; Greyling, C H F; Gxowa, N B; Hogan, B A; Jeffery, J H;
   Johnson, C B; Kalako, M U; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E;
   Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T;
   Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T;
   Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A
   F; Madikiza, G T; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlangu-
   Nkabinde, G L; Mahote, S; Makasi, X C; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N;
   Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Mars, I; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M;
   Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula,
   S M; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mncwango, M A;
   Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng, T R; Mogase, I D; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D;
   Moloto, K A; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R;
   Moss, M I; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N;
   Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A C; Nene, M J
   ; Nene, N M; Ngaleka, E; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngcobo, N W; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya,
   M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla,
   R Z; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nyambi, A J;
   Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Phadagi, M G; Pieterse, R D; Rajbally, S
   ; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Roopnarain, U; Schippers, J;
   Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seadimo, M D; Seaton, S A; Sibande, M P;
   Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau , S N; Sikakane, M R;
   Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Sonto,
   M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E ; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M
   F; Tolo, L J; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van der
   Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C ; Van Wyk, A; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S;
   Wang, Y; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z ; Zulu, N E.


   NOES - 29: Blanché, J P I; Botha, A J; Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M; Cupido,
   H B ; Doman, W P;  Dreyer, A M; Gibson, D H M; Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V;
   King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Lowe, C M; Marais, S J F; Minnie, K J ;
   Nel, A H; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
   Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent,
   E W; Van Dyk, S M; Waters, M; Weber, H.


   ABSTAIN - 1: Greyling, L W.

Question agreed to.

Appointment of Dr M Socikwa as councillor to fill a vacancy on the Council
of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa accordingly
approved.

  DEBATE ON POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL SITUATION IN THE WORLD WITH THE
      OVERALL THEME OF GLOBAL WARMING TEN YEARS AFTER KYOTO (IPU TOPIC)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Chairperson, hon members, I would like, at the
beginning of this important debate - which is a debate that is preparing us
for participation in Indonesia on the Kyoto Protocol - to dedicate my
speech to Dr Ian Player, one of the strongest environmentalists that we
have in the country. He is an environmentalist of note in the world who
turns 80 today: Happy birthday to Dr Ian Player. [Applause.]

I had invited him to be in the House when we debate the Kyoto Protocol,
something that is very close to his heart, but unfortunately his
international duties could not allow for that.

In recent months the climate has changed on the topic of climate change.
The climate has changed on climate change. All those people who were in
denial that there is climate change now understand that there is climate
change. You don’t have to be educated to understand that. You don’t have to
be sophisticated to understand that. When winter comes in summer and summer
in autumn, it tells you that there is something wrong. But all this that I
am saying is caused by man and can be reversed by man or by human beings,
to be gender sensitive. [Interjections.] I didn’t say by a man, I said by
man, which is a human being.

How do we correct that? Last week during the International Women’s Day
celebrations in Spain, the first speaker to address that international
conference was an environmentalist from Africa, a woman, Wangari Mathai.
She set the tone for that international conference, but unless and until we
take the environment seriously, we can have nobody else to blame, but
ourselves. The worry is: What about the generations to come? We know that
we are polluting today, but the consequences are going to be suffered years
later by innocent people who are not the polluters today.

At this point, I just want to congratulate one member of this House who has
a formula that comes from the experts, and who tells us how much you
pollute the air every time you fly between Johannesburg and Cape Town. For
you to offset that carbon you need to plant one tree. He has gone to look
at the cost of the trees at Trees for Africa and every time he flies, he
plants a tree. That member is the hon Lance Greyling. [Applause.]

We hon members who are forever flying, we are the culprits as well. I have
been speaking to Trees for Africa to communicate with each one of you
through your constituencies and assist you in planting trees. Because if we
plant trees, half the problem of the world shall have been attended to. We
are all dedicating our efforts today to say that even if South Africa, in
terms of the Kyoto Protocol, is not listed as a polluter compared to the
big giants like the US, we still have to take care of the environment.

Indeed, the climate has changed on climate change, starting especially with
the Stern report released late last year; the issue of climate change has
suddenly appeared brightly on the political radar, perhaps for the first
time because the impacts were starkly portrayed in economic terms by an
economist Sir Nicholas Stern, being a former Chief Economist at the World
Bank. This has nothing to do with the Network on the World Bank that is
here today.

Following closely, was the release of the Fourth Report from the UN’s
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC, which, in contrast to its
predecessors’ very conservative approach, has taken a bold stand on the
urgency of the need rapidly to take action. Make no mistake, this eminent,
scientific panel of the world’s foremost climate scientists is not given to
alarmism and does not make statements or take facts lightly. Their findings
are based on the very best research results from the world’s best climate
scientists and institutions. But even they have now considered that all
previous estimates of both the extent of global warming, as well as the
rate at which it is happening and will happen, have been grossly
underestimated and we are now entering the exponential part of the curve.

This is in fact a clarion call, a Mayday warning that we are no longer
talking about global warming, but we are talking about global heating. And
I don’t think there is a member who will dispute that. We are no longer
talking about global warming, but global heating.

To date politicians largely, heavily influenced by the pro-carbon lobby,
have been content to look at the best-case scenarios and pay lip service to
any remedial action. That includes us. Worst-case scenarios have been
summarily dismissed as scaremongering by environmental groups. However, if
we look back 17 years to 1990 when the need for a Kyoto-type initiative was
first mooted, it is apparent that almost every box in the worst-case
scenario has now been checked.

Whilst Kyoto was a great first step in the right direction in itself, it
will achieve nothing unless it is used as a template for more serious
agreements and a springboard to them. What does this mean for South Africa?
We are in a classic catch-22 here. An ageing infrastructure which must
contend with massive increasing demands to meet socioeconomic imperatives;
an arguably the cheapest electricity in the world, but also some 87% of our
power comes from coal-fired power stations and we are a per capita amongst
the highest emitters of carbon dioxide and thus contributors to climate
change in the world.

As a developing country, as I said earlier, South Africa is not yet subject
to emission reduction targets, but in the post-Kyoto negotiations these are
a certainty. Together with an emissions penalty of some sort, simply put,
we will very soon see the real costs of our carbon-intensive power
generating heating homes and it is going to become very uncomfortable. For
some it is already uncomfortable, eating heavily into our economic growth
projections, unless we take the opportunity to change.

As a country we have yet to seriously invest in new and renewable energy
technologies and options and some effort has been noted in this direction.
For example, with our climate solar energy in all forms is a clear
frontrunner, in particular, for solar water heating, the biggest energy
user in domestic households; this requires a courageous and aggressive
approach to changing building practices.

If we do not take these opportunities now, which offer massive openings for
international investment, new business, job creation and reduction in
energy costs in the long term, we will have them forced on us by the global
communities. We do not want anything forced on us, because, as South
Africa, much as we were a young democracy when Kyoto was introduced, we did
what was expected of us as a nation and we ratified the Kyoto Protocol.

We tried by all means even to talk to the big giants in the world to ask
them to come to the table. It has been difficult, but Kyoto is now in
operation and it can only be us who assist. And why I am participating in
this debate is because the environment is my love and my home. And I know
very well that, as I urge hon members to join me, I did promise Wangari
Mathai that, she must just watch this space, South Africans are going to
plant more trees. I think that with the committed hon members of this House
that I know, led by Ubaba Gatsha Buthelezi, we will plant trees.

I know very well that we will plant trees and we can be a proud, shining
nation saying to everyone that we care about the environment, not because
we care about ourselves, but we care about generations to come; those
innocent children that will be coming into a messy world because of us. Let
us clean up so that they can come and live in a clean environment. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Are you rising on a point of
order, hon member?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Yes, Madam Chairperson. The Deputy Speaker may not have
meant anything bad, but I would earnestly request that she doesn’t use the
name she used to refer to the leader of the IFP. Owing to historical
circumstances, I would request that she withdraws that name.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chairperson, I would withdraw that name, but the
sentiment is something that will be carried because I know that he cares
for the environment. I have had a discussion with him about three months
ago in Mombasa on the same topic and that is why I accord him the respect
that he deserves. But I take the point. [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Madam House Chair, hon members, climate change poses a large
and unfamiliar challenge to the world. The UK chief scientific advisor,
David King, has said that climate change is the most severe problem that we
are facing today, more serious even than the threat of terrorism.

At their July 2005 meeting in Gleneagles, Scotland, G8 leaders issued a
statement acknowledging that climate change is a serious and long-term
challenge that has the potential to affect every part of the globe. And
former US President Bill Clinton has warned that the climate change is the
only problem that has the power to end the march of civilization as we know
it.

Hon members, while we as legislators face many problems that require
serious and urgent attention in South Africa, most notably poverty,
HIV/Aids and crime, it is time that we wake up to our country’s
contribution to climate change and the likely effects that it will have on
our country and our continent over the coming century.

The most recent report Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, published
on 2 February 2007, concludes that it is now 90% certain that human
activities in 1750 have warmed our planet. There are, however, still
sceptics that doubt the science behind this report. There are critics that
claim that climate change proponents are anti-growth. But opponents must
now tell us, if it is not the reasons in the IPCC report that climate
changes are human-induced what is causing it? As Senator Kerry told the
meeting of legislators from the G8+5 in Washington last month:


  If we are wrong about climate change, what is the worst that can happen?
  We will have better technology, improved energy security, reduced
  certification of the oceans and cleaner air. What is the worse that can
  happen if the sceptics are wrong?

Hon members, the precautionary principle must prevail, or to use the creed
of doctors, we should do no harm.

Concern is growing that our communities in ecosystems will have little time
to adjust to the changing conditions. Economic losses due to extreme
weather events are already being experienced and are likely to increase in
the future. The World Health Organisation estimates that climate change is
already responsible for 150 000 deaths annually. It is the developing world
that is expected to endure the worst effects of climate change. Indeed,
much of the work of this House in developing legislation that seeks to
eradicate poverty is likely to be eroded by the effects of climate change
if we do not act.

As legislators, none of us has the luxury of standing by. Indifference by
this House will only accentuate the problem. There is a growing consensus
among legislators around the world - the Deputy Speaker has alluded to this
- particularly in the G8 countries. In our window of opportunity, which is
a short one, we will need to act. If the likes of Senator Kerry and Senator
Boxer, both Democrats, are to be believed then even the US legislators are
moving, albeit slowly, to respond to climate change. We as South African
legislators must not be caught unawares though. As the Kyoto Protocol
approaches 2012, the year in which it will expire in its current form,
countries like India, China, Mexico, Brazil and South Africa will be
expected to sign up for commitments, whatever they may be.

Hon members, we will need to embrace this challenge. According to the Stern
report of October 2006, the cost of inaction will be greater than the cost
of action. However, both the developed and the developing world will need
to come to the table under the right conditions. As the legislators at the
G8+5 climate dialogue noted last month:
  ... action on climate change needs to take into account the differing
  circumstances of the developed, developing and poor economies,
  recognising the need for economic growth and access to energy to
  alleviate poverty.


Action must be taken by countries in line with their capabilities and
historic responsibilities.

It is now time to start plotting the way forward. The Kyoto Protocol
leading up to 2012 will need to be renegotiated. The market approach must
remain a key component although we must accept its limitations. This time
around we cannot just rely on emissions trading. We will need to go
further. Eileen Claussen of the Pew Centre on Global Climate Change
recommends five principles on which a future climate framework must be
negotiated. Firstly, it must be agreed that we need to find long-term
ambitious goals. Secondly, developed countries must take the lead. Thirdly,
there can be no solution, due to the global nature of the problem, without
the participation of developing countries. Fourthly, incentives need to be
established for the developing world, and lastly, and arguably most
importantly, there needs to be a fully functioning carbon market that
includes a price for carbon.

It is likely that the upcoming G8 presidency, under Chancellor Merkel, will
attempt to seek a long-term goal to stabilise greenhouse gas concentrations
in the atmosphere. This goal will probably be somewhere between 450 and 550
parts per million of CO2. Following that, the plan on how to reach this
goal will need to be thrashed out.

Hon members, there are a number of issues that we, in South Africa, will
need to address urgently if we are to make our contribution to preventing a
climate disaster. It will require new investments, both in the public and
private sectors, and in some cases we as legislators will need to create
the legislative framework and the incentives to act.

It is likely that coal will remain the dominant source of energy in South
Africa for decades to come. But its contribution to electricity generation,
currently around 90%, has to be reduced. It is an indictment on this
country that renewable energy contributes a negligible proportion on our
energy mix. Eskom has yet to move beyond a few renewable energy
demonstration models. Poor energy planning over the past decade has meant
that under an impending energy crunch in this country, Eskom has once again
resorted to taking coal power stations out of mothballs and is likely to
continue building new coal stations. In this state of affairs, renewable
energy is constantly put on the back burner. This situation simply has to
change.

If energy from coal is to remain on our agenda for the foreseeable future,
then it would be necessary for us to induce producers into using best
practice technology that will provide for cleaner coal. Carbon capture and
storage need to be high on the agenda. The IPCC estimated that in 2005
carbon capture and storage can contribute between 15% and 55% of the
cumulative mitigation effort worldwide until 2010.

A home-grown company, Anglo American plc, is in fact a world leader in this
field. However, it is developing this technology in Australia and not in
South Africa. Why? Because Australia has done more to produce a carbon
capture and storage regulatory regime. Therefore, South Africa will need to
move to provide the funding for a national storage map and will need to
introduce the necessary legislation and incentives to attract the likes of
Anglo American into the South African market.

Perhaps the area of intervention that South Africa can respond to most
quickly is energy efficiency, the most cost-effective way to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. The International Energy Agency estimates that
worldwide energy efficiency improvements alone can reduce the world’s
energy demand in 2050 by an amount equivalent to almost half of today’s
energy consumption. We, as legislators, need to look at initiatives like
strict standards for standby time for appliances and fuel efficiency in the
transport sector in order to realise efficiency gains.

Mandatory energy efficiency labelling of all machines and appliances must
be fast-tracked.

Lastly, with regarding to promoting energy efficiency as well as energy
conservation, there is a need for a massive public education programme in
this country. Households, individuals and businesses need to have an
understanding of what their respective carbon footprints are in order to
even begin the process of reducing these footprints.

There is much work ahead. With sensible legislation and regulations we can
use the response to climate change to encourage new investments and to
create new markets. But let us always be mindful of the narrow window of
opportunity in which we need to act.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I certainly support the initiative of offsetting our
emissions from flying and I will support you on that.

Climate change is not just an environmental issue; it is an international
security issue, a jobs issue and an issue important to our children and
grandchildren. It’s time to take it seriously. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I will convey your
sentiments to the Deputy Speaker.

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Chair, colleagues, the world, including the economic,
political and social situation, is constantly changing and will continue to
change at an even faster pace in years to come. It is our ability to adapt
to these changing circumstances that will determine how successful we are.

In the ten years since the signing of the Kyoto Protocol, much has changed
with regard to these situations around the world. Globalisation seems to
have made the world a much smaller place; competition for resources and
customers has intensified and is no longer confined to the boundaries of a
particular country.

Climate change and global warming are realities that affect us directly and
we are starting to experience their effects at first hand. Unusual or
erratic weather conditions, flooding and extreme heat are just some of the
warning signs that we must heed. If we continue our current development
trends with little or no consideration for the environment and without a
significant reduction in greenhouse emissions, then we will eventually
suffer the consequences.

The Kyoto Protocol, which aims at curbing the air pollution that is blamed
for global warming, came into effect seven years after it was agreed. It
required countries to cut emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases. Although some industrial countries are making progress in decreasing
the emissions of their greenhouse gases, many are not, and the progress
that has been made has been slow. Some countries fear that by implementing
strict targets for pollution and gas emissions they will be sacrificing
profits and slowing down economic development. It is also very unfortunate
that some industrialized nations, particularly the USA, are not committed
to the Kyoto Protocol.

Although the industrialized nations are primarily responsible for the
carbon dioxide build-up in the atmosphere, developing countries also have a
role to play in managing the situation. By actively trying to curb our
greenhouse gas emissions as well as educating and informing the public
about climate change and global warming, we can make a difference.

Madam Chair, although we can be proud of the progress and the many
economic, political and social developments that have been made globally
over the past ten years, it is unfortunate that we have not achieved a
similar rate of progress with regard to finding lasting and globally
accepted plans and solutions to fight global warming and climate change.

Economic and political developments are very important, but they should not
be achieved in isolation with little or no regard for the environment. We
are running out of time in our quest to address our environmental problems.
We need to start taking these problems more seriously and paying more
attention to them if we want to make a meaningful difference. Our efforts
in addressing environmental issues have been slow since the Kyoto Protocol
was signed ten years ago. We need to speed up this progress.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Chair and hon members, the scientific evidence for
global warming and its effects continue to mount. It is an unfortunate fact
that outside of the scientific community, in the mainstream media and in
politics especially, there are still those who want to present global
warming as just one theory, or even completely dismissing it. This sort of
thinking is driven by the short-term and narrow-minded obsession with the
pursuit of consumption of resources and energy.

What the world attempted at Kyoto is to acknowledge the long-term
consequences of emissions and thus pursue a path of sustainable
development. Unfortunately, from the outset, Kyoto was dogged by the
disappointment that the biggest polluter, the United States, would not
submit to the global long-term view, and chose instead its narrow self-
interest.

The emissions debate has further been set back by the preposterousness of
trading emissions. On paper, the idea seemed good, but in practice it does
not discourage emissions pollution, and only ensures that the pollution
ghettos will eventually develop as the rich and developed ``export’’ their
pollution. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr L ZITA: Chairperson, comrades and colleagues, two hundred years since
the advent of the Industrial Revolution, the biosphere and the human
civilisation that has evolved from it is at an abyss. Whilst industrial
civilisation has brought about unimaginable human advances and comforts, it
is clear that these have been begotten at a price that threatens the very
existence of life on our planet.

It is instructive, if not ironic, that on the 10th anniversary of the
signing of the Kyoto Protocol, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change the authoritative world scientific body on the study of climate
change drew two fundamental conclusions in its February report this year.
It said that:


  Warming of the climate system is unequivocal as is now evident from
  observations of increases in global average air ...


Furthermore, the report goes on to say:


  Eleven of the last twelve years - 1995 to 2006 - rank among the 12
  warmest years in the instrumental record of global surface temperature.

In a section subtitled ``Understanding and attributing climate change’’,
the report notes that:

  Most of the observed increases in global average temperatures since the
  mid-twentieth century are very likely due to the observed increase in
  anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations.


In other words, it is human-made.

The Stern Review of the esteemed economist Sir Nicholas Stern, released in
October last year, counsels that doing nothing about climate change could
cost us about 5% to 20% of global gross domestic product. Already the heat
wave in 2003 in Europe, which killed 35 000 people, resulted in US$15
billion losses in European agriculture.

Climate change is a term that is used to describe the warming and cooling
of the climate. It is a process that can take place naturally, like the
cooling that took place in the Ice Age. Global warming is a particular
variant of climate change, which refers to the increase in the average
temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere and oceans, which have been noticed
in past decades.

As a result of global warming, there are distinguishable environmental
consequences. These include the melting of glaciers, the increasing
frequency of floods, a rise in sea levels, increasing occurrence of
droughts, scarcity of water, the loss of biodiversity, which takes the form
of forest diebacks, and the extinction of some plant and animal species as
well as the regularity and severity of weather events such as heat waves
and hurricanes.

In an absorbing presentation on the economics of climate change, Sir
Nicholas Stern, two days ago here in Cape Town, made the point that as
early as 200 years ago, the French mathematician, Fourier, noticed that
human activities were having an impact on the environment, which impact was
the overall increase of the temperature levels.

Despite these early observations, there have been a number of dismissals of
the scientific nature of the claim that there is global warming. The impact
of this denial has been to undermine appropriate responses to this
challenge.

Since 1987, in Montreal, there have been a number of international
agreements and mechanisms which the global community has entered into as
part of its response to the challenge of climate change. The Montreal
Protocol focused on the detection and management of ozone-depleting
substances. In 1989, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change was
established, whose brief is the scientific assessment of climate change, as
well as elaborating the best responses to the problem.

In 1992, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change was
established as the international framework to agree on strategies to
stabilise the emission of greenhouse gases.

The Kyoto Protocol was signed in 1997 and came into effect on 16 February
2005. Its import is in the fact that it is a legally binding international
agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change. The
second fundamental dimension of the Kyoto Protocol is the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities in the reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions. At the heart of this principle is an attempt to address the
fact that not only are the developed countries the most polluting
countries, but they are also the ones that have mainly been responsible for
global warming. It is therefore these countries that must mostly reduce
their gas emissions.

Secondly, the principle seeks to address the fact that developing countries
will have to emit greenhouse gases as part of their developing challenge,
and therefore, the reduction that the developed countries make should be of
such a nature as to give space for the developing countries to develop,
within a broad framework of overall reduction of global warming.

Central to the management of global warming has been a global effort to
find solutions to the rise in temperatures. We have the strategies that
seek to address the fact that this phenomenon is already with us, and is
already threatening life systems and livelihoods. How then should the
nations of the world adapt to it? How do you address the fact that, as a
result of global warming, fish stocks are leaving Saldanha and going to
Chile; that hurricanes are destroying cities, and floods are impoverishing
Third World villagers who are least able to defend and protect themselves.

The difficult problem of adaptation is that it is essentially a Third World
issue and therefore does not have the same profile as the mitigation
issues.

Despite this, we welcome and support the establishment of the Least
Developed Countries Fund as well as the Special Climate Change Fund, both
of which are under the United Nations Framework on Climate Change.

Another initiative worthy of support is one that is based on taxing the
volumes of transactions derived from the clean development mechanism, which
presages the evolution of a global tax, and dovetails well with the call
for a 2% adaptation levy on all flexible mechanisms under the Kyoto
Protocol.

Adaptation is the prevention and reduction of activities that induce
climate change, referred to as the mitigation interventions, and is about
the use of clean technologies. The first point to be made in this regard is
that some of these technologies already exist, and the challenge is their
access and diffusion to the world at large.

The Global Legislatures for a Balanced Environment, Globe, technology
working group, whose thesis we discussed in Washington last month,
identified the challenge of mitigation in the following ways:


  We propose to focus on five main areas:


      First, what scope already exists for deploying available clean
      technologies globally?


      Second, barriers to investing in low carbon and carbon-free
      technologies in developed and developing countries with examples on
      how these might be overcome.


      Third, policies, emission trends and technology needs of developing
      economies and economies in transition, and how these relate to
      decision-making processes in the economic models, including synergies
      and trade-offs between climate change and other priorities such as job
      creation and industrial development.


      Fourth, how to combine regulatory approaches that can push and market
      approaches that can `pull’ technology solutions in the most effective
      ways, able to bring about the range and extent of change needed to
      develop and deploy clean and more efficient technologies.


      Fifth, how the transfer of efficient low-carbon technologies can be
      promoted, and what roles international institutions should play in
      this process, with a special focus on how private-public partnerships
      might act as catalysts in demonstrating scope here.

In essence, the challenge is to ensure access to and comprehensive
dissemination of clean technologies across the world, and to ensure that
these technologies can talk to both the challenge of industrial development
without the risk of maximising global warming.

The challenge of managing climate change is not just a technological and
economic one; it is also political. Whilst many of the world’s leading
economies are signatories to the UNFCC, important players such as the
United States of America and Australia are not significant to the Kyoto
Protocol. Therefore, they have recused themselves from the legally binding
commitments of addressing this challenge.

The US is the leading polluter of the world. There can be no solution to
this problem without her playing a central role. It is in this regard that
recent acknowledgement of the challenge of global warming in the state of
the union address by President Bush is to be welcomed.

The Kyoto Protocol comes to an end in 2012. At this stage, there has not
been an appropriate forum and the goodwill to launch negotiations on a post-
Kyoto agreement. One of the knots to be undone is the fact that some of the
developing countries are increasingly emitting higher levels of greenhouse
gases, and are now being pressurised to reduce their emissions. This is the
case with China, India and ourselves. This goes against the principle of
common but differentiated responsibility.

The second challenge would be to bring the US into the post-Kyoto
framework. Thirdly, the global community will have to address the competing
claims by polluting developed countries, which refuse to commit themselves
to clean development as long as developing countries are still emitting.
Together, we will have to find a solution to these challenges.

In the light of these challenges, it is difficult to find fault with the
stance of our government. As this Parliament, we need to be united in
supporting the government in its endeavour to take action on adaptation, in
its promotion of clean development mechanisms in Africa and its fight for
new thinking on technological transfer as well as the pursuit of a more
effective global regime after 2012.

I think I should take this opportunity to inform the House that the
environment and tourism committee is planning this year to take a trip to
Australia to look at the carbon capture and storage facilities of Anglo-
American, which is the leading company that is looking at clean
development, and moving to ``a cleaner image’’.

As the ANC, we would like to express our appreciation to the
Interparliamentary Union for drawing our attention to this issue, so that
we, as the nation in assembly, can profile what is one of the urgent
challenges that we face – the sustainable reproduction of life on our
planet. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, I would like to dedicate this speech today to
my six-year-old nephew, Matteo Greyling, and everyone of his generation who
will have to deal with the effects of our decisions and actions on this
important issue.

Climate change is one of the greatest symbols of inequality in the world,
because it is the actions, both past and present, of affluent countries and
people that are having a catastrophic impact on the lives of the poor and
future generations. We have to secure a post-Kyoto international agreement
that would include the mission targets for the world’s worst polluters. We
only have a few years to breach the current international divide on this
issue, if we are to prevent destabilising climate change.

The ID supports some of the progressive work that South Africa has done on
the international level to achieve this objective. Back home, however, we
can and must do far more to live up to our own responsibility as the 14th
biggest emitter of greenhouse gases. Let’s stop the rhetoric and talk about
real action.

Yesterday the minerals and energy committee, across parties, expressed its
collective dismay that the renewable energy sector receives a paltry sum of
money, and that we do not have a bold vision for this growing global
market. We can lead the world in renewable energy, particularly solar, but
it requires government to truly put its money where its mouth is.

Why is Germany building a factory to produce our cutting edge solar panel
technology? Why are we not giving substantial tax breaks and subsidies for
renewable technology? And why, as Minister Erwin stated yesterday, are we
continuing to subsidise the energy costs of hugely energy-intensive
companies in South Africa? Why have we stalled the integrated energy
planning process and allowed Eskom to simply build five new coal-fired
power stations without any thought about how that will push up our
emissions? This is old “business as usual” thinking, and what we need is
innovative solutions and the belief that we can lead the world in a more
sustainable future.

Finally, I believe that we, as MPs, must take personal action, and I
congratulate the Deputy Speaker for taking up my plea to make Parliament
carbon-neutral by planting trees. As MPs we should also buy trees and do
energy audits on our houses to see how we can reduce our own carbon
emissions. I have done that and am starting to implement some of those
recommendations. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, in a recent article Forian Dlamini stated that
climate change holds a more serious threat to peace and stability in Africa
than political conflicts since the advent of independence. The ACDP agrees
that recurring floods in Mozambique and drought in most Southern African
states are visible signs of climate change and undoubtedly present a
serious threat to peace and stability.

South Africa is very vulnerable to global warming and its consequences,
such as rising sea levels, droughts, loss of biodiversity, high incidence
of malaria and other tropical diseases, and increased water scarcity.

Regrettably, we are also one of the world’s most energy-intensive
economies, with very high greenhouse gas emissions. We must be good
stewards of our environment, for the sake of our future generations. What
we need is tangible commitment to action now, not later. As citizens we
need to choose products and services that are energy-efficient and
encourage business and government to do the same.

Whilst I haven’t planted trees as yet, I trust that Madam Deputy Speaker
appreciates the colour of my tie as a sign of support for her concern and
for hon Greyling’s initiative. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon Swart. Let me see your
tie. [Laughter.]

Mrs J CHALMERS: Madam Chair, Comrades and colleagues, an amazing film
entitled An Inconvenient Truth has been circling the globe. Narrated by Al
Gore, it sets out in vivid terms the crisis our planet is facing as global
warming escalates on an unprecedented scale. I wish, Madam Chair, that we
could show the film here in Parliament for all our members to become better
informed on this critical situation.

The most inconvenient truth about global warming is that we cannot stop it.
Mitigate it, yes; adapt to its consequences, yes, but clearly global
warming is already baked into the earth’s future.

It has, in fact, been around a long time, and environmentalists and
lawmakers have spent years shouting at one another about whether the grim
forecasts are true. But in the past five years or so the debate has quietly
ended. Global warming, even the sceptics now agree, is the real deal, and
human activity has been courting it.

We thought, however, that time was on our side and that we would have at
least decades to sort it out. Clearly, this is no longer the case. Once
things start to go wrong, change can happen surprisingly quickly. What few
people reckoned on was that global climate systems are booby-trapped, with
tipping points and feedback loops.

The slow creep of environmental decay can suddenly give way to self-
perpetuating collapse. If you pump enough carbon dioxide into the sky, that
last part per million of greenhouse gas behaves like the 100˚C that turns a
pot of hot water into boiling water and steam. Carbon dioxide is a tiny,
but very important, component of our earth’s atmosphere. It helps warm the
earth to the levels we are used to, but too much of it - and maybe the
result of our use of fossil fuels and other C02 emissions - does a huge
damage as it prevents sunlight from escaping form our atmosphere.

And what happens then? Put bluntly, the temperature of the earth rises. The
intergovernmental panel on climate change predicts that by 2100
temperatures will have risen by between 1,1˚ and 6,4˚, and as a result sea
levels will rise by 18cm to 59cm. And now, in 2007, this is well on the way
to happening.

In particular, damage is being caused to our polar caps, the reason being
that the white surface of the polar ice is so bright that it reflects back
90% of sunlight into space. But, as the ice melts and shrinks and water
takes its place, it absorbs the sunlight and becomes warmer, melting more
and more of the coastal polar ice.

In Greenland the rate at which ice has been steadily melting and dripping
into the sea has changed, and now whole glaciers are being dumped into the
ocean. By some estimates the entire Greenland ice sheet, if melted, would
be enough to raise global sea levels by seven metres, swallowing up large
parts of coastal Florida and most of Bangladesh.

The Antarctic holds enough ice to raise sea levels more than 65 metres.
Well, I don’t need to expand on what that would do to our South African
coastline.

So, Madam Chair, how is the heating up of our planet affecting, disrupting
and destroying the biological world we inhabit, and the creatures we depend
on for survival?

The naturalist and explorer John Muir once said that when one tugs at a
single thing in nature, one finds that it is attached to the rest of the
world. Never a truer word was spoken.

In South Africa we are extremely fortunate because the huge challenge of
escalating global warming has resulted in an even greater concentration of
scientific work. An intellectual focus is being dedicated to studying what
is happening.
I am indebted to Leonie Joubert for her extremely informative books scoured
for some of the facts in my speech. All over the world biodiversity is
being affected on a daily basis by changes in our climate. In South Africa,
as conditions warm up, species are expected to move higher or eastward.

Our warming and drying is expected to sweep in from the north-west. Those
of you in the Northern Cape and the Western Cape have reason to be
especially worried.

The largest slice of bio or plant species will occur in the western,
central and northern parts of the country. Concern is already being voiced
about the survival of some of our fynbos species in the Western Cape.

Most of today’s plants and animals have evolved under global temperatures
of about 3˚C to 5˚C cooler than the period in which we currently live. And
now conditions are changing faster than most species will be able to adapt.

Changes are happening all around us all the time. As humans, we don’t see
slow change, so we come to think of the present as normal. But a comparison
with the distant past, 20 years or more, will show just how much places
have changed. And many of these species shifts have been documented
internationally. In the UK 51 species of butterfly have moved to higher
altitudes or northwards.
Fishermen in the UK are encountering strange fish in their nets as the sea
currents shift and warm up. The Worldwide Fund for Nature reports that a
1˚C rise in temperature has pushed certain fish species, such as haddock
and cod, 200 miles to 400 miles north.

In Antarctica penguin species are declining in the North, yet thriving in
the South. And in the Arctic the sea ice is melting, depriving polar bears
of their hunting ground, and without it they starve or drown.

Plants are moving, and this is amazing. Our pine plants are urging uphill,
crowding out rare species near mountain suburbs. And our Southern African
quiver trees are dying in the North and thriving in the South.

Way down in the southern oceans we possess two small volcanic islands. The
larger, Marion Island, has always been a weather sentinel for this country.
The other messages of global warming are coming through loud and clear.
Scientist Dr Steven Chung first visited Marion Island in 1983, and I quote:
“When I first went there it had a glacier, South Africa’s only glacier. Now
we no longer have a glacier.”

Africa’s most famous snow-capped peak, Mount Kilimanjaro, will soon have no
more ice, no more snow. This icon, bold as the continent on which it rests,
will have disappeared. All over the world ice caps and glaciers are melting
and disappearing. The annual sorely needed run-off of water from these
formerly huge reserves of life-giving water is diminishing, and the knock-
on effects of this are being recorded and noted with great anxiety. Here in
South Africa the predicted warming and drying will cause the desert to move
South. We, human beings, are part of the greatest system of biodiversity.
And how will this affect us?

Changes will occur in land cover, and our biodiversity will come under
increased pressure. Inevitably, this will have a knock-on effect on our
food security.

And here I would really like to make a plea to our Department of
Agriculture to consider very seriously before switching large tracts of
food-producing land over to the production of biofuels. I think
particularly here of the use of maize.

We can ill afford to shrink our production of one of the most basic food
items that is heavily relied on by so many, particularly in our rural
communities. In addition, it should be remembered that a large amount of
energy is required to produce biofuels, and they are certainly not carbon-
neutral.

I would hope that more research could go into the production of biogas,
which I understand is a far more environmentally friendly process. Global
warming is starting to take its toll on human health. So many studies have
now linked higher ozone levels to the death rate from heart and lung
ailments that cities are now issuing smog alerts to warn those at risk to
stay indoors.

Droughts will occur, but also, as unstable weather patterns increase, there
will be an increase in flooding, bringing with it more waterborne diseases
as well as the spread of insects that thrive in waterlogged lands, such as
mosquitoes.

South Africa’s tourism industry contributes as much as 10% to our GDP, a
figure that is increasing all the time. Many foreign tourists visit our
country to view and marvel at our extraordinary range of wildlife, so well
managed by our national parks and on private game farms. We rely heavily on
our unique natural resource base to attract tourism.

The likely scenario of a climbing temperature will be increasing drought,
drier soils, more fires and, inevitably, a loss of habitat and
biodiversity. As our Bushveld slowly but surely turns into arid grasslands,
one wonders what this would mean for our Big Five as their habitat changes.
So, what now?

The world is starting to wake up to the fact that environmental collapse is
happening in so many places at once. A total of 141 nations have now
ratified the Kyoto Protocol, but it is extraordinary that the United
States, which is home to less than 5% of the world’s population, produces
25% of CO2 emissions, remains intransigent, with Australia refusing to
sign.

Finally, Madam Chair, South Africa has, of course, come on board and is a
signatory to the Kyoto Protocol. And whilst the picture I have painted in
my speech sets out how serious our situation is, the critical challenge now
is how we deal with it proactively. Questions need to be asked.

Is our energy strategy the correct one? Are we doing enough in the field of
renewable energy? Surely every new house should have solar water heaters
and a water tank. Are biofuels the way to go?

And how can we begin to contain the large numbers of vehicles on our roads?
How can we improve our public transport system and by so doing reduce those
numbers?

So many questions are being asked, and it is going to take an extraordinary
amount of research, commitment and energy from each and every one of us to
come up with answers that can slow down this fearful crisis facing our
planet.

We should bear in mind what one journalist said. If life in its current
form were to die out, this planet would recover, but we would probably have
written ourselves out of the script. Thank
you. [Applause.]
Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, by drafting the Kyoto
Protocol the international community was expressing near universal
unanimity about the self-evident threat of global warming to humanity.
Kyoto was a call for action by all concerned to avert the negative and near
catastrophic consequences of global warming.

Whilst global warming will affect all humanity adversely, it is the poor
and exploited countries of the south that will suffer the most. Whilst
international awareness has been raised about it, concerted action by the
biggest polluters has been absent or very slow in coming. This is because
measures to combat this threat do not make immediate profit sense to big
business and their governments. Ten years after Kyoto there is still much
that needs to be done.

We need to reaffirm our commitment to the protocol. Popular education and
mobilisation should be the fulcrum of our strategic and tactical line.
Whilst acknowledging and encouraging measures adopted by the European Union
and Britain recently, we nonetheless still need to insist that more can be
done and be done faster and sooner. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, global warming and the changes to weather
patterns have raised concerns globally, but not enough awareness has been
motivated over the harsh reality, the consequences and preventive measures
that can be endorsed to slow down global warming and preserve our planet.
The next President to President Bush of the USA, Al Gore, has initiated an
effective programme to endorse government into the reality of global
warming.

A documentary by Al Gore called An Inconvenient Truth, has been playing at
the Cinema Nouveau, and to those who have watched this documentary, it is a
serious eye-opener and a very scary reality where all our nations are
headed if global warming is not slowed down. It would be to no avail if we
are striving for liberation, democracy, equality, growth and social
development or any other priority on our agenda if in reality we are not
driving our planet to avert disaster.

The limitations placed on nations on the emissions by greenhouse gas by
Kyoto Protocol are not enough to address the situation. Pollutants and fast
developing industries’ gas dominates our atmosphere. We need to agenda our
reality as a nation with regards to global warming and endorse protocol
that needs to be adjudicated in every sector of governance and daily lives.

We need to enforce strong legislation that shall govern the emission of
poisonous and harmful gases into our atmosphere. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I M CACHALIA: Chairperson and hon members of the National Assembly,
global climate change, often referred to as global warming, possibly poses
a greatest challenge facing mankind this century. It emanates from the
build-up of human emissions of heat-trapping gases in the earth’s
atmosphere, intensifying the greenhouse effect, thus engendering changes in
our climate.

This increase in volume of CO2, methane and other greenhouse gases released
by burning fossil fuels, land clearing for agriculture, logging and other
human activities are the primary sources of the human-induced component of
global warming.

The climate change issue has been growing in seriousness since the middle
of the twentieth century and consequently became the focus of international
strategies to minimise greenhouse gas emissions in order to prevent warming
of the earth’s surface.

The Kyoto Protocol, which is the instrument of the United Nations framework
on climate change, becomes operational for the first commitment period 2008
– 2012.

Global warming poses a serious threat to sustainable development in
developing countries and could well undermine global poverty alleviation
efforts and have serious implications for food security, clean water,
energy supply, environmental health and human settlements.

Global warming does not occur by default. Human activity creates the
problem and every bit of coal, oil and gas that we burn adds to the load of
gases in the atmosphere trapping heat and smothering people and the natural
world alike. I raised the issue of climate change in this department’s
Budget Vote in 2006 and therefore am greatly encouraged that the
programming committee has slotted in this debate during this session of
Parliament.

International best practice strategies aimed at preventing or the abatement
of climate change incorporate action on both mitigation and adaptation
strategies. Mitigation refers to reducing greenhouse gas emissions or
removing them from the atmosphere and embracing energy efficiency, so that
less fuel is used. It embraces sources of energy that emit no greenhouse
gases such as renewable energy.

Mitigation initiatives globally would incorporate the following practices:
Implementing sustainable development; adopting cleaner energy technologies;
promoting and implementing renewable energy technologies; and promoting and
implementing energy-efficient practices. The concrete examples of
mitigation initiatives include CDM or the Clean Development Mechanism and
carbon emission trading.

The National Climate Change Response Strategy developed by the Department
of Environmental Affairs and Tourism puts forward a number of mitigation
strategies for South Africa. These initiatives form an integral part of
sustainable development and cleaner technology usage such as the Vehicle
Emissions Strategy, aimed at reducing emissions from motor vehicles.
The mitigation option project is investigating possible mitigation options
that could be implemented, viz, renewable energy sources and energy sources
such as nuclear energy.

Successful climate change abatement strategies would use a mix of
mitigation and adaptation, as adaptation will become increasingly more
difficult and costly, the less mitigation appears on the radar screen.
Mitigation measures should remain in focus, receive priority as source-
diverse impacts such as loss of rare species and melting of glaciers cannot
be reversed. Moreover, mitigation goes to the root of the problem of
climate change, viz, emissions from human activities precipitating changes
in our climate.

Even if all the greenhouse gas emissions were stopped today, the greenhouse
gases that are already in the atmosphere would be enough to cause climate
change. Further, CO2 emissions are likely to rise in the coming decades.
The changes in the climate are already happening. The world must therefore
be prepared to adapt to the effects of global warming.

Some adaptation strategies would include better flood defences or
relocation mechanisms that can be used to deal with rising sea levels;
avoiding more vulnerable areas for building houses; agricultural production
can adapt to the decreasing availability of water through better water
management; urban areas could adapt increasingly to severe storms by
increasing rainwater storage through the use of domestic water butts, paved
gardens, etc, and increasing capacity of storm water systems so that
overflows do not contaminate rivers.

Measures should be enforced to ensure food security in the face of less
reliable agricultural yields, particularly in areas where drought take
centre stage.

Our Minister, Marthinus van Schalkwyk, stated in 2005:

   If South Africa did not immediately adapt to the effects of climate
   change, it would cost the country 1.5% of the GDP by 2050, roughly
   equivalent to the total foreign investment in South Africa at present.


I dare say that there are much more serious consequences for South Africa
and the African continent than the rest of the world. Whilst adaptation
would appear to be the most useful and least economically disruptive
response to climate change variability, this would probably be a very short-
sighted approach.

Focusing on adaptation to local impacts of change is not a responsible
position for any country to adopt. Moreover, it should be borne in mind
that mitigation strategies have additional, extremely valuable, benefits
that are often overlooked. These include improvements in local
environmental quality, public health and wellbeing and the stimulation of
the local economy. Last Friday 27 members of the EU meeting in Brussels
signed an agreement which commits EU to, firstly, 20% reduction in carbon
emissions from 1990 levels by 2020, and secondly to generate one fifth of
its energy needs from renewables.

Greenpeace hailed the initiative as the biggest such decision since the
adoption of the Kyoto Protocol. German Chancellor Angela Merkel said at the
same meeting: “There is still time to reduce global warming and by so doing
avoid a human calamity.”

I hope the United States, Australia, Japan and India are listening and
taking note. So far the government has committed a very small amount of its
resources to renewable energy for the next decade.

To quote Andre Fourie and Kuzene Dlamini of the National Business
Initiative:

   South Africa and Africa have played a marginal role in this debate. Yet
   climate change poses a serious threat to peace and stability in Africa
   more than political conflicts have done since the advent of independence.




   The recurring floods in Mozambique and the drought in most Southern
   African countries are some of the visible signs of the effect of climate
   change on the ground. Urgent action is therefore needed now and not
   later.


   It is increasingly becoming a key strategic imperative that businesses,
   government, civil society and academia collaborate in shaping the global
   debate on climate change rather than only following or responding, as we
   often do, to a debate whose parameters are increasingly being set
   elsewhere.

It is clear that a balanced approach in dealing with climate change is
imperative. This implies that both mitigation and adaptation are necessary
strategies to deal with this phenomenon. It is incumbent upon all of us to
leave no stone unturned in our quest to stem the tide of the dangers that
are looming large on our horizon and to take steps to protect this
generation and all future generations to come from the catastrophic
consequences to humanity if we fail to respond urgently and aggressively to
the effects of global warming and climate change. I thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

   DEBATE ON HUMAN RIGHTS DAY: PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTENSIFYING THE
                          STRUGGLE AGAINST POVERTY

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, hon members, colleagues, on Wednesday, 21
March 2007, our country will be commemorating the 47th anniversary of the
1960 Sharpeville massacre, in which over 60 unarmed and defenceless people
were shot and killed by the apartheid South African police and 180 were
wounded.

There were also reports of killings in similar style in Uitenhage and Langa
by police who acted in defence of the apartheid state. The root cause of
the peaceful demonstrations by our people was the systematic introduction
of pass laws against the black majority by the white minority regime; the
system that dictated where the large black majority would live, work and
die.

These laws have their origins in the Cape colony in 1760, when the movement
of slaves between urban and rural areas were regulated. Slaves had to carry
passes from their masters. The system was subsequently extended to the
whole country and further entrenched in 1945 under the Native Consolidation
Act.

In 1952 the abolition of the Passes Act made it compulsory for every male
African to carry a reference book. As if that was not enough, in 1960 the
apartheid government introduced the Native Amendment Act, which extended
the pass laws to African women, our mothers ... “wathintha abafazi
wathintha imbokodo uzokufa”. [You strike a woman, you strike a rock; you
will die.]

Thanks to the ANC government and the people of South Africa, the United
Nations and our friends across the globe. Today South Africa is free,
democratic and prosperous. We all carry one single South African identity
document. We have a Constitution with a Bill of Rights that guarantees all
citizens the right to equality before the law, human dignity, freedom of
expression, the right to peaceful assembly, demonstration, picket and
petition, freedom of association, freedom of movement and residence.

As we celebrate this day each year, we must remember the great suffering
and loss of lives that accompanied the struggle for human rights. We must
therefore redouble our efforts to ensure that people in South Africa will
never again be denied these rights. Oliver Tambo laid down his life for
these rights, Chris Hani was killed for these rights, Dorothy Nyembe died
for these rights, Sam Tambani was killed for these rights and the list is
endless.

Many more were killed, maimed, exiled and imprisoned in the struggle to
achieve human rights in this country. We pay tribute to all those heroes
and heroines who gave all in the struggle to win freedom and democracy.

Comrades and colleagues, we have made impressive progress since 1994 to
ensure access to clean water, housing, education and a clean and safe
environment for millions of our people.

The challenges ahead still remain on this difficult path of freedom and
democracy. We have to redouble our efforts to deal with the big five
challenges afflicting our South African society today. They are poverty,
unemployment, crime, HIV and Aids and the demon of racism that hounds us
from time to time.

Never again should we ever have another Nelson Chisale murder on a farm. No
other white farmer should be brutally killed in their homes or on their
farms. Trade Union rights are indeed human rights. On the farms and private
domestic homes, shops, factories and mines, we must rededicate 21 March
2007 to improve our relationships in society especially for the poor and
vulnerable workers.

Let us push back the tide of violence against women and children in our
homes, families, neighbourhood, constituencies and places of work. As we
intensify our struggle for human rights, we must strengthen the Chapter
Nine institutions established to promote democracy and the culture of human
rights in our country and elsewhere in the world.

We must welcome the collaboration between our institutions like Cultural
Religious and Linguistic Communities Rights Commission, the Independent
Electoral Commission, the Commission on Gender Equality, South African
Human Rights Commission and the United Nation Office of the High
Commissioner on Human Rights to ensure that the Africa Human Rights Day
commemoration is observed each year on the 21st of October.

The 21st of October 2007 marks the 21st anniversary of the African Charter
on Human and People’s Rights adopted there by the Organisation of African
Unity in 1981 and came into effect on the 21st of October 1986. We have an
opportunity within the framework of the African Union and the United
Nations to create a better Africa and a better world.

Our brothers and sisters in Swaziland, Zimbabwe, Palestine and Iraq also
deserve to enjoy full democracy and human rights in line with our
principles of ubuntu and human solidarity. The ANC is historically, and
still remains, an internationalist revolutionary movement.

To quote Fidel Castro: “Being internationalist is paying our debt to
humanity”. In November 1994 Fidel Castro went on to say:

  We have shown solidarity with the world. It’s not our task now to talk
  about this solidarity. As far as our solidarity is concerned, we should do
  the most and talk the least. For us solidarity and internationalism are a
  matter of principle and a sacred one at that.

Let us – that is us as South African citizens and the ANC in particular –
allow the armchair critics to do what they do best and we must continue the
work tirelessly to achieve a better Africa and a better world. We have an
opportunity as we speak now to do that. The SACP calls upon the country and
its leaders to focus on the plight of the poor in the coming period.

In particular, the reds demand the removal of all South Africans from the
credit bureau as a once-off amnesty. [Applause.] You are allowed to do
that. Millions of our citizens are denied the access to participate
meaningfully in the economic life of our country because of this black
listing. Viva amabovu! [Viva SACP!]

The central task ahead of the ANC and its cadreship in 2007 and beyond is
the alleviation of poverty and its ultimate eradication. The ANC’s January
statement enjoin us to work tirelessly with our alliance partner and
progressive forces to fight poverty, unemployment, crime, HIV and Aids,
racism and sexism in the same manner as we fought against apartheid.

Let us all accept this challenge and soldier on. Hon members will be going
to their various constituencies in the next few days to participate in
human rights activities. And also, in April, when we will be in recess, we
will celebrate our freedom and May Day. So, I wish you well in all of these
activities. Go there and spread the message of hope for our country. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Mr A C STEYN: Chairperson and hon members, when the basic services that the
government is obligated to provide are not delivered to the poor, it is not
just their government policy failure or a waste of taxpayers’ money; it is
an infringement of their fundamental human rights.

It is so because the Constitution requires the state to promote and fulfil
the rights in Chapter 2 thereof, our Bill of Rights. The socioeconomic
rights are a special category of rights. They are not full rights, like
your political rights or your right to free speech, but rights of access.
The state has a duty to realise them progressively. They are justifiable,
but they cannot be enforced in the same way that other rights may be
enforced.

It is for that reason that the Constitution places a special duty on the SA
Human Rights Commission to monitor and assess the progressive realisation
of socioeconomic rights.

It is as a result of that task that the SA Human Rights Commission, after
concluding its sixth report on economic and social rights, now intends to
advise government, especially in the provincial sphere, that its delivery
failures constitute an infringement of fundamental rights.

The Constitution requires that the SA Human Rights Commission must ask the
relevant government departments, in both the national and provincial
spheres, what they have done to realise the rights to housing, health,
food, water, social security, education and the environment each year.
The response from government departments, however, has been problematic. At
the time of the conclusion of the fifth economic and social rights report,
the SAHRC reviewed the low response rate from certain organs of state, the
poor quality, and questioned the reliability of certain information. It
even went so far as to suggest that perhaps its interaction with
departments should be abandoned altogether in favour of fieldwork
monitoring.

However, the Constitution says it must ask departments for information, and
rightly so. The SAHRC attributes the poor response to lack of capacity,
amongst other things. It says that there are no mechanisms and there is
little commitment in place within the organs of state together to classify
and store information.

The SA Human Rights Commission will now assist the departments to develop
appropriate systems to capture and manage information that the SAHRC itself
will ultimately request from them. Is it any wonder, therefore, that
delivery does not take place when the departments responsible are not
keeping track themselves?

Delivery in the sphere of socioeconomic rights should take place primarily
at the provincial level, where Parliament sends the vast bulk of taxpayers’
money every year when we vote for the Budget and the division of state
revenue.

The SA Human Rights Commission has now decided to bring the unsatisfactory
situation to the direct attention of the Premiers, and to advise them that,
judged on human rights standards, non-delivery is unacceptable.

In addition to this, it intends to engage directly with the provincial
legislatures. This, I believe, is an excellent approach, for it is a fact
that our provincial legislatures do not legislate that much, but they do
specialise in oversight. This they do very well, judged on the record of
the official opposition MPLs at least.

It is a regrettable fact that the National Assembly does not appear to do
justice to the SA Human Rights Commission’s work in general, and its
socioeconomic reports in particular.

The SA Human Rights Commission appears before a number of portfolio
committees, which ought to profit greatly from its socioeconomic work, but
these appearances are said to be haphazard and unco-ordinated from its
point of view, while the National Assembly as a whole does not appear to
engage the commission’s reports at all.

We have at our disposal the work not only of the SA Human Rights
Commission, but also that of other Chapter 9 institutions like the Auditor-
General. The DA now annually analyses the audits of provincial departments
provided by the Auditor-General, and draws public attention to trends and
patterns.
Alarmingly, the latest analysis of the nine departments of health, show the
large-scale mismanagement of tendering and procurement procedures. In
disturbingly many cases, this appeared to swing bids in favour of
departmental employees or their associates. In our analysis, there is a
crisis of deteriorating financial probity and corruption which, in addition
to the poor management we highlighted last year, was causing many
provincial hospitals to fail to provide a decent, acceptable service.

All this happens while the SA Human Rights Commission reminds us that the
population dependent on public health services is currently estimated at
80% of all South Africans, and growing, and that we would be well advised -
economically and in every other respect - to honour our national and
international obligations on the right to health.

We must ensure equal access to quality health services and “we”, hon
members, means us too. If socioeconomic delivery is not taking place, that
is a failure, not only of the ANC-led government - as we are so often
reminded - but also of the institutions which are supposed to hold
government to account. That, hon members, is us. I thank you. [Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Mr Chairperson, twelve years since South Africa achieved
democracy, the harsh laws that denied so many the right to basic human
rights have gone, but many more challenges remain for us today.

The realisation of strong human rights principles, the fight against
poverty, including the fight for a safer South Africa, is a fight that we
must wage with diligence and vigour, and one that we cannot afford to
simply continue fighting half-heartedly.

South Africa has one of the few constitutions in the world that include
economic and social rights in its Bill of Rights. Some of these rights are:
the right to housing, the right to basic health care, the right to adequate
food and the right to education.

Human rights are those basic and fundamental rights to which every person,
for the simple reason of being human, is entitled. Yet, so many people in
South Africa are denied these basic rights due to extreme poverty. People
who don’t have access to the labour market and little or no basic access to
services and resources today, nearly 13 years since the dawn of democracy,
remain severely disempowered.

A recent report by the United States Department of State Human Rights
reported that the magnitude of crime in South Africa should be considered a
human rights violation. Among the crimes it notes as human rights
violation, are over 23 500 children raped and over 1 000 children murdered.
The report states that the number of violations can be laid at government’s
door because it fails to provide a safe and secure climate.

The SA Human Rights Commission will celebrate Human Rights Day 2007 by
embarking on a week-long Human Rights Week campaign, which we all applaud.
On its website, the SA Human Rights Commission states:


  This year, the commission has identified the destructive effects of crime
  on South African society as needing immediate and urgent attention. Due to
  its cross-cutting nature, the impact of crime is felt across all
  socioeconomic fields, jeopardising the universal benefits of the Bill of
  Rights.

Most importantly, it says: “The achievement of equality, eradication of
poverty and the deepening of democracy cannot be realised in the context of
the high crime rate.”

Today, in remembrance and honour of those who lost their lives during the
Sharpeville uprising, we must renew all efforts to promote human rights and
intensify the struggle against poverty. What we see in Zimbabwe today is
what we saw in Sharpeville in 1960. Such inhuman violations must never set
foot on African soil again. Otherwise, we will be judged as spectators when
our neighbour’s house is on fire. I thank you, Sir. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon members, promoting human rights and
fighting poverty are both very important objectives. Therefore, it is quite
ridiculous to suggest that these important matters can be constructively
discussed in 60 seconds. What, indeed, is the purpose of the debate and of
the parliamentary theme “Let’s deepen the debate”?

There is really no point in cramming a few platitudes into one minute and
then calling that a proper engagement with the topic. The ANC knows its own
views. Why should it get vast portions of each so-called debate in order to
listen to itself and to repeat itself? The point of the debate is obviously
to hear alternative views, but these can never be properly expressed, or
seriously considered, if they are crammed into brief sound bytes.

Indeed, it is insulting to the many people that live in poverty who also
happen to represent a sizable portion of our constituency, to pretend that
anything useful can be said or changed about their plight or upliftment in
the space of one minute. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, let me see how I do with my sound byte. Our
commitment to human rights is enshrined in our Constitution but for many of
the poor and marginalised this commitment rings hollow. This commitment
rings hollow for the thousands of fishing families along our coast who have
been left destitute without any form of livelihood being provided for by
the government.

It rings hollow for the millions of rural people who still do not enjoy the
basic services of water, sanitation and electricity. It rings hollow for
the one in ten children who needlessly die before their 5th birth day as a
result of disease or poverty. It rings hollow for the millions of people
who still live in shacks without the hope of housing being provided.

The ID believes that we need to commit ourselves to the social democratic
vision contained in our Constitution and commit substantial resources to
bridging the divides between what is in the Constitution and the daily
reality that so many South Africans are subjected to. We need to extend the
Child Support Grant to 18 years of age, implement a large-scale rural
development programme, start building sustainable livelihoods and speak out
forcefully against human rights abuse in the world, and then we can truly
celebrate Human Rights Day in this country. [Time expired.]

Mme M L MATSEMELA: Modulasetilo, maloko a a tlotlegang a Palamente, bangwe
bao ba leng teng kwa ntlo phatlhalatseng ya rona. Ke lebogela go bua mo
nakong e ya meriti e seng ka nako ya mampa a kolobe, gonne moAforika ga a
nke a di atlhatlha sentle ga e le ka nako ya mampa. Fa ke bua jaana ke
batla ke tlisa mo phatlhalatseng gore fa e ka bo e se ka chatara ya batho,
eo e kileng ya tlhomamisiwa ka ngwaga wa 1955 kwa Kliptown, re ka bo re sa
fitlhelela diphitlhelelo dingwe go akaretsa le ditshwanelo tsa botho.

Ditshwanelo tse, ke tse di ungwetseng mongwe le mongwe. Ga ya ka ya nna
motse re feta wa balala, wa baruakgomo re tsena nao jaaka mo nakong e e
fetileng. Go ya ka karolo ya bobedi ya Molaotheo wa Aforika Borwa, batho
botlhe ba na le tekatekano. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Ms M L MATSEMELA: Chairperson, hon members, as well as those in our public
gallery, it is a pleasure to deliver my speech in the afternoon, but not at
midday because an African cannot apply his mind well during lunch. Let me
bring your attention to the fact that if it was not because of the Freedom
Charter, which was adopted in 1995 at Kliptown, we wouldn’t have achieved
some of the things we have, which include human rights.

These rights benefited everybody, unlike in the past where they were only
enjoyed by certain people, and excluded others. According to Chapter 2 of
the Constitution of South Africa everyone is equal before the law.]

Speaking on the occasion of the 95th Anniversary of our movement, the ANC,
at Emalahleni in Mpumalanga this year, President Mbeki, quoting the
resolutions of the 2005 National General Council, had the following to say:
   The central challenge our movement faces in the second decade of freedom
   is to defeat poverty and substantially reduce the level of unemployment.
   This means that the ANC government must develop a coherent development
   strategy, identifying where we need to move to and what strategic leaps
   we need to get there.

Undoubtedly, today’s topic could never have been more relevant. Further,
the ANC’s draft Strategy and Tactics, which is being work-shopped with all
our constitutional structures on an ongoing basis, says:


   The National Democratic Revolution, NDR, seeks to ensure that every South
   African, especially the poor, experiences an improving quality of life.
   It seeks to bring the best traditions of a developmental state,
   represented by an efficient state that guides national economic
   development and mobilises domestic and foreign capital to achieve this
   goal.

This perspective is indicative of the ANC’s long-term commitment to the
resolution of the scourge of poverty, unemployment and other social ills
guided by people-driven and people-centred principles.

To fight poverty, the ANC-led government is guided by numerous policies and
a sound fiscal regime that not only provides for well over 11 million
citizens through social grants, 7 million of whom are children supported by
a Budget of R62,4 billion, but continues to employ all the wisdom in the
world in order to ensure the human rights of all South Africans, especially
socioeconomic rights.

This means that grants constitute more than two thirds of the R89 billion
budget of social development. Government has already started, through
National Treasury, to establish a poverty line that will be used as a
measure of the incidence of poverty so that we do not use inappropriate
instruments in determining poverty in our society.

Furthermore, more efforts are being made to oil the wheels of economic
growth so that there can be development and redistribution at an
accelerated pace. Women and children bear the brunt of poverty in our
society and it is important closely to monitor the implementation of
socioeconomic rights such as water, sanitation, education, health, housing,
social security and food.

While our Constitution says these must be realised progressively, there can
be no doubt that government does not seek to hide behind this proviso.
Instead, the more the fiscus expands, the more the benefit to the
population, especially those that are underprivileged. An example is the
nonpayment of tax by all those who earn R3 583 per month, thus giving back
R8,4 billion back to the taxpayer.

I am not unmindful of those who have no means of income at all, the
majority of whom are women. It is for this reason that I wish to join in
with all those in our country who have called for the sustenance of the
Extended Public Works Programme and the transfer of skills. The poor must
be empowered to take care of their own lives. Nothing is as emancipating as
the ability to throw off the yoke of poverty and ignorance.

No doubt that we will take forward our struggle against poverty only if we
understand that human rights are indivisible and interrelated.

Incidentally, the Nobel Laureate for Economics, Amartya Sen, defines
poverty as: “The lack of certain capabilities, the core of which would
include education, food security, water, social security, health and
shelter.”


We must continue the fight against poverty across all spheres of
government, in all the departments and other organs of state. Necessarily
the women of our country, who constitute over 50% of the population, must
be at the head of this struggle. We believe that women’s rights are human
rights.

Ke ka moo, ke ratang gore bomma, a re se e tlogeleng go e tshwara ka fa
bogaleng, gonne mosadi ke mooka o nyaa le mariga. [I would therefore like
to encourage women not to stop intervening, as we usually do, to save the
situation.]
In conclusion, six days before the celebration the Human Rights Day, we
call on all South Africans to mobilise themselves into a strong battalion
that will persistently and consistently push back the frontiers of poverty
in order to ensure sustained development of humanity. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the critical question is whether the state is
succeeding in its constitutional obligations towards the progressive
realisation of socioeconomic rights, particularly in the fight against
poverty.

The ACDP believes that the greatest challenge in delivering services to the
poor lays not so much with government policies, but in the implementation
of such policies. This was confirmed by the 2002 Taylor report, which
stated that: “The barriers to access, especially in regard to the poor,
remains administrative and institutional.”

The ACDP appreciates that some 12 million citizens now receive social
grants and that a comprehensive social welfare pension system is proposed.
Presently there are sufficient funds for housing, education and health, yet
hugely inadequate capacity to actually deliver services due to corruption,
patronage and a shortage of skills.

Home Affairs is a good example as it plays a central role in enabling
access to public services. Its services fall far short of basic, acceptable
standards. Unless urgent corrective steps are instituted in this and other
departments and municipalities, the low level of public service delivery
will frustrate the state’s attempts to meet its constitutional obligations
in the fight to alleviate poverty in our country. Thank you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, in this 37th anniversary of Sharpeville/Langa
Day, the PAC is disgusted that the political parties gathered here are shy
to mention that the PAC spearheaded that campaign on that particular day.

The 21st of March 1960 was a day when the PAC of Azania launched the Anti-
Pass Campaign in terms of which African people were to leave their passes
at home and surrender themselves for arrest at the nearest police station.
The slogan for the campaign was, “No bail, no defence, no fine”.

Lest we forget, on that fateful day – 21 March 1960 - Robert Mangaliso
Sobukwe and the PAC leaders surrendered themselves to the police for
refusing to carry passes. Despite that, Sobukwe had written to the Police
Commissioner that the campaign was non-violent, Mr Blanché.

The police responded with brutality, killing 68 people in Sharpeville and
28 people in Langa, here in Cape Town. Lest we forget, the spilling of the
blood of those innocent sons and daughter of Africa, the Sharpeville/Langa
Massacre was a turning point of our liberation struggle in this country.
The blood of those sons and daughters of the soil and the blood of many
martyrs of our liberation struggle will never be left unnoticed.

During this Human Rights Day, the PAC of Azania is calling for the release
of all members of Apla - Azanian People’s Liberation Army - political
prisoners.

It will be a great act of human rights by the President, hon Thabo Mbeki,
and the ANC-led government to release members of Apla and all other freedom
fighters incarcerated in the prisons of South Africa. The PAC has been
making this call and we are still repeating this call today. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. As a democracy governed by
constitutional supremacy, which enshrines human rights and is central to
our governance and existence through the Bill of Rights, a duty is
incumbent on the government and every citizen to celebrate, enjoy and
frolic in the rights that our freedom and liberation has given us.

The MF however finds a realisation of importance each and every individual
has to play in this development. Liberation and growth is fundamental to
meeting our goals. As democracy, we remember our horrid past of apartheid,
as we look at the war-infested countries and human atrocities around the
globe, hoping that they too shall have peace, freedom and respect for human
life.

We pray that they too shall live in a nation of rainbow colours, cultures,
religions, sex, shapes and sizes. We, however, wonder how many South
Africans in reality are aware of the rights that we have in South Africa.
The levels of crime, which many attribute to poverty, show a clear
disrespect for human life.

Over the past few days news has been dominated by reports of murder of
little girls, not to mention the growth in statistics of human trafficking.

Liberties are said to allow people to enjoy their lives and to maintain a
harmonious state, but the reality is that we have evil people in society
who find it right to rob us of this.

I cannot imagine what goes through a victim’s mind in those last few
breaths. But it is worse when I think of what must constitute the mind of a
perpetrator when committing the crime. The sheer ability to take a life
makes me feel so ill. And the punishment that these families have to endure
for the rest of their lives makes the sentence we legislate seems a day in
the park for the criminals. We have to tackle our crime situation in South
Africa. We are a government of the people by the people, and the people
have spoken. They do not want crime; they want us to act.

The MF calls for the recognition of the call of the nation an immediate
action to stamp out crime; enforce punishment equivalent to the pain and
suffering of the victims and the loved ones. Human rights are, and should
be, a counterfoil in every sector of our daily lives. But discipline of an
unruly person who jeopardise our democracy is unacceptable. Our
Constitution certainly cannot shield our doom. The MF celebrates human
rights and condemns all forms of atrocity. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD believes that quiet diplomacy on human
rights violations provokes other social ills such as poverty and
instability. Because of the human rights violations in Zimbabwe the poor of
that society are crossing over to our border despite the possibility of
repatriation. There are hundreds of children in their early teens who are
running away to South Africa looking for food, employment and a decent
home. Poverty is a violation of human rights.

In the dark days of apartheid we did not welcome quiet diplomacy to bring
apartheid to its knees. Zimbabwe, once the bread basket of Africa, has now
become the pariah state because of its violations of human rights. However,
their fighting back for justice and to have food on their table should be
our fight as well.

Our fight against oppression has not been achieved through quiet diplomacy,
but through the sacrificial will of the people, with the help of
international support and to labour for a society built on universal human
rights.

The same universal human rights apply to the Zimbabwean people. That
includes their politicians. Those rights cannot be applied selectively to
only those in power who want to keep the little they now have in the hands
of the few. The redistribution of human rights and economic resources is
what we called for.

In conclusion, we are calling for human rights for all the citizens of
Africa now. Thank you.

Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson and hon members, more than 53 years ago, South
Africans from all walks of life resolved in Kliptown that the people shall
share in the country’s wealth. This resolution was aimed at dealing
decisively with the question of poverty, inequality and extreme
underdevelopment in some parts of our country, and it becomes more relevant
when you address such issues, particularly in rural areas, and its
communities.

Soon we will celebrate the Human Rights Day. In our celebrations it will be
important to promote human rights as tools to intensify the struggle
against poverty, particularly as it affects our rural poor masses, of whom
the majority live in conditions and an environment of abject poverty.

Human rights should be used as tools to rescue our people from the burden
of poverty they experience in rural areas due to underdevelopment. Lest we
forget, our country is ravaged with stark inequality and poverty by design
and those who bear the brunt, unfortunately, is the large majority of black
South Africans. Most of them live in rural areas, which in the past were
referred to as Bantustans or homelands, designed by the arch architect of
apartheid, former Prime Minister, Dr H F Verwoerd, who, in his own words
said:


   We are giving the Bantu, as our wards, every opportunity in their areas
   to move along the road of development by which they can progress in
   accordance with their ability.

These words were said within a context of only having blacks as hewers of
wood and drawers of water, as well as in terms of the Group Areas Act. In
this new democracy, which many people fought for, and even died for, with
others maimed, it is clearly stated in the Constitution that the people
will have equal human rights - in terms of Chapter 2 of the Constitution.
The challenge we have in our action is whether indeed black people in
particular realise these rights in their quest for a better life for all.
For, according to Jill Natrass, in a book Up Against the Fence:

   The growing special dislocation between capital that was being invested
   in the economy and the settlement patterns of the population meant that
   the capital stock became increasingly a source of wealth for those people
   who were fortunate enough to have access to it and conversely a source of
   poverty for those who were excluded.


That is my emphasis.


   At the same time, the continued of the black group from the political
   process rendered them politically unable to force thorough a reallocation
   either of additional education resources to increase their access to
   higher paid jobs in the modern sector of factors, inputs specifically
   designed to upgrade the black rural areas.

I cannot agree more. This is a known fact, but we seem to forget what we
have gone through and what we have been subjected to. Of paramount
importance is that this challenge should not be limited to government only
but to all South Africans, particularly the affluent, economically
resourced, section of our society.
Abazalwa benama account emabhange abeke izimali ezinkulu  bathi  zitshaliwe.
Namanje badla baze bakhohlwe ukuthi kukhona abalambileyo. [I mean those  who
were born with huge wads of cash  in  bank  accounts  claim  that  they  are
invested. And they spend this money and even forget that  there  are  hungry
people out there.]

The business community, banks and internationals have a role to play in  the
creation of a caring society.

Yini indaba kungabibikho amabhange ezindaweni  zasemakhaya  kanti  amabhange
ahlale eqhosha  ngenzuzo enkulukazi njalo njalo?  Yini  kungabibikho  zitolo
emakhaya kanti izitolo ezikhona zihlale  ziqhayisa   ngenzuzo  enkulu  njalo
ekupheleni konyaka? Abanye babantu abathola umhlomulo bahleli  nathi  lapha.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Why, for instance, are there no banks in rural  areas,  because  the  banks
are always declaring huge returns? Why are there no shops in rural areas  as
they always declare huge returns at the  end  of  each  year?  Some  of  the
people who benefit from all this are with us here.]

Our Constitution dictates, in Chapter 2 of the Bill of Rights that  everyone
should have equal rights. It  becomes  imperative  to  spell  out  some  few
rights that would assist us in the creation of a caring  society:  Equality;
human dignity – everyone has inherent dignity and the right  to  have  their
dignity respected and protected; the right to life; the right  to  property;
freedom of movement; the right to housing –  no  one  may  be  evicted  from
their home or have their home demolished without an order of the court  made
after considering all the relevant facts.

Sibona  abantu  bekhishwa  ezindlini  izinkantolo  kodwa  ubone  ukuthi  cha
awuhlonishwa lo Somqulu Wamalungelo abantu  esinawo, ngoba vele abantu  laba
esikhathini  esiphambili  ababekade   bengamakhosi,   bekugwebela   ukuhamba
emgwaqweni. Kufanele siyibheke le nto  ukuthi  singakwenza  kanjani  ukubeka
amakhosi sicabange ukuthi azosilungisela nathi sithole  amantshontsho  ngoba
nawo  afuna  ukudla  la  mantshontsho  futhi  ningakaqali  nina  ukudla   la
mantshontsho. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We see people evicted from their houses through court orders  and  that  is
evident that our Bill of Rights is not respected because these are the  very
people who were the bosses  even  during  the  previous  dispensation.  They
would even punish you just for walking on the road. We have to address  this
thing and be very careful when we give them  certain  positions  because  we
cannot expect them to do what we want them to do when they  have  their  own
agendas.]

All these rights are an attempt to intensify the struggle  against  poverty.
This is the key objective of the ANC government – working together to  fight
poverty for a better life for all.
Against this background, in the past we have seen a violent suppression  and
a violation of basic human rights that led to forced removals  in  terms  of
the Group Areas Act, forced cheap labour and job  reservation  in  terms  of
the Job Reservation Act; inferior  segregated  education  in  terms  of  the
Bantu Education Act; creation of certain areas  as  reserves  where  surplus
labour and undesirable people were dumped and hidden in terrible  conditions
of poverty, areas where there has been  no  economic  development  plan,  no
infrastructure of any kind in terms of the Influx Control Act - these  areas
were commonly  known  as  homelands  or  Bantustans  or,  some,  independent
national states.

An unhealthy unsustainable situation was created. Our  people,  particularly
black people, led by the people’s organisation, the ANC,  struggled  against
this injustice to an extent, together with their  leaders,  that  they  were
prepared to sacrifice their lives. Therefore, the  Bill  of  Rights  in  our
Constitution should be used as a tool  to  intensify  our  struggle  against
poverty, particularly in rural areas.

Our task, as South  Africans,  is  to  ensure  that  everyone  has  inherent
dignity and the right to have their dignity respected  and  protected.  This
can only be achieved if we ensure, amongst a whole range  of  other  rights,
that no one may be subjected to slavery, servitude or forced labour.

All of us need to work together in the spirit of Batho Pele to  correct  the
injustices of the past, particularly business and social service  providers.
The academics should  also  have  a  change  of  mindset  and  work  towards
contributing in the fight against  poverty  by  ensuring  that  basic  human
rights are observed.

Uhulumeni emzamweni yakhe uyazama ukulungisela abantu ukuthi  bathole  konke
okufanele bakuthole kodwa siyazi ukuthi amandla kahulumeni  awekho  kangako.
Siyacela kongxiwankulu laba abanezimali  ezisemaceleni  nezinye  ezikwamanye
amazwe basondele ukuzosiza ukuthi silwe nobuphofu.

Sesizibekile   izakhiwo   zomasipala   ukwenzela   ukuthi   abantu   bakwazi
ukubambisana nathi ngoba  ngaphandle  kokusebenzisana  nabo,  ngeke  sikwazi
ukwenza lo msebenzi  ngendlela  efanelekile.  Siyacela  laba  bantu  babambe
iqhaza entuthukweni  yabo.  Siyilungisile  nemithetho  ukwenzela  ukusebenza
ngokubambisana  ikakhulukazi  ezindaweni  zasemakhaya,  phakathi  kwamakhosi
nomasipala.

Siyanxusa  nasezisebenzini   zikahulumeni   ukuthi   ake   ziyeke   ukungabi
nanhlonipho,  nokungabi  nazwelo,  nokuphatha  kabi   abantu   bethu.   Into
abayifundiswa yilowaya baba engimbize ngegama ukuthi yangena egazini  ukuthi
baphathe kabi abantu bethu. Benza leziya zinto ezazenziwa ukhomishana.

Abanye bayakhuluma lapha bathi uhulumeni ayikho  into  ayenzile.  Bakhohliwe
ukuthi  iminyaka  engamakhulu  amathathu  besiphansi  kwengcindezelo  enzima
kodwa kufanele bafundiswe ukuze babone ngoba banamehlo nje  ababoni  kunjalo
nje bahleli lapha eKapa ezindlini ezinkulu eziphindwe kathathu.

Abake baphume baye ngaphandle baye kobona  ukuthi  kwenzekani  ukuze  basize
nabo. Shona emakhaya, uzobona ukuthi ugesi sesiwufakile, amanzi  ahlanzekile
sesiwafakile.   Lona   umgamu   esesiwuhambile,   imigwaqo    siyayilungisa,
imitholampilo  siyakhile,  izikole  sizakhile  ngayo  le  mali  encane  enye
eniyifihlayo ukuze singakwazi nokuthatha intela kuyo.

Kubalulekile ukuthi  abafowethu  mhlawumbe  beze  lapha  kuKhongolose  ngoba
ababoni ngale  ndlela  esibona  ngayo  ukuze  sikwazi  ukuthi  sihambe  nabo
bakwazi ukubona. Kodwa-ke futhi abafuni  ukubona  ngoba  bayazi  ukuthi  uma
bengabona ngapha namehlo  azovuleka  babone  nabo  ukuthi  le  nto  abayenza
ayilungile. Lokhu kungaholela ekutheni bagcine sebebona kufanele  bahlephule
kulokhu abakuthatha ngendluzula, babele abanye abantu.
Ngiyavumelana nobaba  uZulu,  ukuthi  mhlawumbe  intuthuko  ihamba  kancane,
kodwa  baba  siyayenza  imizamo  ukuthi  intuthuko   iqhubeke.   Siyacela-ke
ikakhulukazi lapho KwaZulu-Natali  ukuthi  amakhosi  nohulumeni  wasemakhaya
ophethe babambisane nathi ukulungisa le ngxaki.

Abanye bathi uhulumeni akaphumeleli. Angeke-ke size siziphendule lezi  zinto
ezishiwo yilaba bantu  ngoba   abanye  babo  bama  ezindaweni  zokushumayela
emasontweni  beshumayeza   abantu   abalambile,   abahluphekayo,   abaziniki
nesikhathi sokuthi babasize babone ukuthi  bayazithola  nezinhlelo  ezibekwe
uhulumeni.

Siyayizwa  i-PAC.  Sisebenzile  nayo  kakhulu  futhi  ngizwile  ukuthi   ike
yaphendulwa leyo nto lapha. Kwakulungiselwa ukuthi simashe  sonke  ngendlela
efanele kodwa nina nabona ukuthi manisheshe  niyokwenza  lokho.  Siyakubonga
ngoba lokho kwasiza, kodwa  kuseyiwona  lowo  mzabalazo  wokuthi  asiqhubeke
siye phambili. Bekuyoba  kuhle  uma  beningabuyela  ekhaya  ukuze  mhlawumbe
sithole amandla adlula lawa esinawo.

Ubaba uGreyling we-ID ukhala  ngabantu  abaziphilisa  ngokubamba  izinhlanzi
nangezinye izinto. Sithi-ke thina : abanobuchwepheshe nolwazi  mabasize.  I-
ACDP ikhala ngombiko kaTaylor. Iyakhohlwa ukuthi le khomishana yabekwa  yilo
hulumeni ukuze isisize ukuthi  sibheke  kabanzi  ukuthi  kujule  kangakanani
ukuhlupheka kwabantu bethu.

Ibekelwe ukuthi sibe  nendlela  esemqoka  necacile  kithina  ukusiza  abantu
ngayo.  Uyasho  ukuthi  izinga  lokuletha   izidingo   liphansi.   Mhlawumbe
uqinisile, kodwa kuhle akhumbule ukuthi ukuthatha  kwethu  umbuso,  sathatha
yonke  le  mfucuza  eyayisicindezela,  savumelana  nani   sicabanga   ukuthi
nineqiniso nizosisiza ukulwa nale mpi kanti ningamaxoki,  ningama  menemene,
nizoyinyathela le nqola ingayi phambili.

Ngicela into  eyodwa:  Sideleleni  sizenzele  into  yethu  futhi  sizimisele
ukuthi sizoyenza siphumelele  noma  ikanjani.  Ngiyabonga.  (Translation  of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The government, in it’s efforts, is trying all it can to  provide  services
to the people but we, of course, understand that  the  government  does  not
have enough resources. We appeal  to  the  capitalists  who  invested  their
monies in other countries to join us and help to fight poverty.

We have created municipal  structures  so  that  people  can  work  with  us
because without co-operating with them, we will not be able to do  this  job
properly. We urge people to take part in their  development.  We  have  also
amended certain pieces of legislation to ease partnerships, particularly  in
rural areas, between the traditional leaders and municipalities.

We also urge public servants  to  stop  being  disrespectful,  arrogant  and
discourteous towards the public. This thing of ill-treating our  people  was
instilled in them by that gentleman whose name I mentioned earlier on.  They
are doing those things that were done by the Commissioner. Some people  here
claim that the government is doing nothing. They have since  forgotten  that
we were under oppression for 300 years, but we  must  educate  them  because
they have eyes, yet they do not see, and they stay  here  in  Cape  Town  in
huge houses that are three times bigger than some.

These people must go out there to the  people  and  see  what  is  happening
there so that they can also help. We have at least installed electricity  in
remote villages, and we have given people clean water. That is the  progress
we have made thus far, we are maintaining roads, we have built clinics,  and
we are building schools with the limited money  that  we  have  because  the
rest of the money you have hidden somewhere so that it cannot be taxed.

It is important for our brothers to join the ANC because they  do  not  seem
to see things the same way we do and we will walk with  them  so  that  they
too can see. Furthermore, they don’t want to see because they know  that  if
they can see this side, their eyes will be opened and they  will  understand
that what they did was not good. This can make them see that what they  took
by force should be brought forward so that it could  be  shared  with  other
people.

I echo the  sentiments  of  Mr  Zulu  that  the  progress,  as  far  as  the
development is concerned, is slow, but, maybe, sir, we  are  making  efforts
so that the development could move a little faster. We appeal,  particularly
there  in  KwaZulu-Natal,  that  the  traditional  leaders  and  the   local
government would work with us in addressing this problem.
Some are saying the government does not succeed. We cannot comment on  these
things simply because some of the people  who  say  these  things  stand  in
pulpits in churches and preach to hungry people and  the  poor.  They  don’t
even have the time to help and see to it that  they  get  programmes  to  be
introduced by the government.

We understand the PAC and we have worked with  them  before.  I  have  heard
that this point was responded to in this House. We  were  all  preparing  to
have a lawful march, but you decided to do it before us. We appreciate  that
because it helped, but the struggle continues and we are going  forward.  It
would be good though if you returned home so that we can  be  more  powerful
than we are now.

Mr Greyling of the ID is lamenting  the  conditions  of  the  fishermen  and
other things. What  we  are  saying  is  that  those  who  have  skills  and
knowledge should assist. The ACDP is unhappy  with  the  Taylor  report.  It
forgets that this commission was appointed by this government to  assist  in
evaluating the seriousness of poverty amongst our people.

The commission is in place for us so that we can have a clear  programme  to
help the people. It states that the  level  of  service  delivery  is  poor.
Maybe it is correct, but remember that when we took  over,  this  government
inherited all the bad that was used to oppress us, and  we  even  agreed  on
certain things with you because we assumed that you  are  honest,  that  you
will help us in fighting this war, but you are  hypocrites,  impostors,  you
stand in the way of progress.

I am pleading for one thing from you: Just simply allow us  to  do  our  own
thing and we are positive that we will do it successfully  no  matter  what.
[Thank you.]]

Debate concluded.

           DEBATE ON FIFTIETH CELEBRATION OF INDEPENDENCE OF GHANA

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I feel honoured to participate, and,
in fact, to open this debate on Ghana’s 50th independence anniversary,
particularly because Ghana was my first country of exile in the late 1950s.

When Dr Nkrumah, who was born in 1912, which is the same year as the birth
of the ANC, returned from abroad to the then Gold Coast colony to take up
the responsibility as Secretary-General of an organisation called the
United Gold Coast Convention, UGCC, promoted by political giants such as Dr
J B Danquah, he brought with him not only his youthful vibrancy but also a
considerable wealth of political understanding, experience and leadership –
capabilities that proved decisive in propelling the then Gold Coast
struggle to achieve independence as Ghana. The UGCC was later to become the
CPP – the Convention People’s Party – under Dr Nkrumah.
Having stayed in America for ten years and about two to three years in
England, partly studying to expand his knowledge, Dr Nkrumah had developed
great interest in, and had interacted broadly with ideas of African Pan-
Africanism as espoused by Afro-American leaders of political thought on
Africa. These included such leaders as Marcus Garvey and Dr W E B du Bois.
These and other ideas were propagated with great vigour by the CPP, leading
to Ghana’s attainment of independence at 12 midnight on 6 May 1957.

Madam Deputy Speaker, Ghana’s independence ushered in a new epoch on the
continent which was to restore the dignity of the African people, and
firmly cut ties with a miserable past, characterised by centuries of
slavery, persecution, exploitation, racial discrimination and negative
perceptions, all advocated and practiced by colonial masters.

From the start Dr Nkrumah put Ghana positively on the world map as a
country of full promise as he stood steadfastly for the overthrowing of
colonialism and all its offshoots, not only in Ghana but elsewhere in the
world and especially in Africa.

Because of the values Dr Nkrumah believed in and stood for, namely unity
and solidarity, almost immediately after independence Ghana organised and
hosted the All Africa Conference, the first conference of the then
independent states attended by countries such as Egypt and Ethiopia.
Delegates from liberation movements in Africa participated, including the
ANC, which was led by the late ANC President O R Tambo; the PAC was there,
KANU of Kenya, liberation movements from the then Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe,
and Tanganyika, now Tanzania. The impact of African Pan-Africanism as
propagated at that conference became clearly visible in policies
subsequently pursued by such African leaders as Mwalimu Julius Nyerere of
Tanzania and Dr Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia and is actually visible in our own
country’s foreign policy today.

Carrying out its obligations and fulfilling its promises to the people of
Ghana, Dr Nkrumah’s government quickly set out to remedy disparities
entrenched by centuries of colonial rule. The challenge then was to fight
poverty and underdevelopment. Dr Nkrumah had a clear vision as to where he
wanted to take Ghana. He always proclaimed that the government wanted to
see every Ghanaian liberated, even in the remotest areas of the country.

Thus the government wasted no time putting in place programmes that would
not only give political or cultural independence but also economic
independence. Putting up infrastructureF, such as roads, schools, including
tertiary institutions that did not exist before, was made a priority. For
example, in colonial days roads connecting the main cities in Ghana were
very narrow, a mere strip of tar enabling only one car at a time to pass.
Should there be an oncoming car, one of the cars had to give way to allow
the other one to pass. Such was the state of road infrastructure passed on
to Ghanaians by the British. But by 1960, only three years after
independence, the government had succeeded in constructing a network of
roads befitting any country proud of its independence.

School buildings of high quality started springing up, ensuring that every
village in the rural area did not just have a primary school, but a high
school as well. All high schools were of the same standard; it did not
matter where they were located. I remember when we visited one of our
friends who was teaching in a new school out in the bush and suddenly we
came across this new high school with all the necessary infrastructure,
including science laboratories, fully equipped libraries, though at that
time there was still only one class, the Form 1 class. But since the school
was to develop and go up to the sixth form, everything was already in
place. And that is how Nkrumah built the schools, and such was the
foresight and emphasis placed on education as the basis for development in
Ghana.

In colonial times, there was only one university for the whole of English-
speaking West Africa. That was Fouragh Bay located in Sierra Leone. But by
1959/1960 the Lagon University, the first in Ghana, had already been built.
It was up and running and operating fully. A modern comprehensive technikon
– also a first in Ghana – had been constructed and was located in Kumasi in
central Ghana. New vocational training schools, putting emphasis on
agricultural production and the fishing industry, were located in various
villages throughout the country. This was an elaborate development
programme aimed at absorbing the youth who did not make it to institutions
of higher learning. In other words, it was also a way of preventing crime
by ensuring that the youth were actually occupied, doing something.

Ghana’s trade with overseas countries had been limited due to the lack of a
deep harbour that could accommodate large ships. But, again, by 1960 the
Tema Harbour at Accra was already functional, enabling easier
transportation of Ghana’s main export and foreign exchange-earning products
such as cocoa, timber and gold.

To create more jobs and eradicate poverty, the Volta Dam Project was
conceived. This was to be established for the large-scale exploitation and
development of aluminium and the hydro-electric power in the Volta River.
Through this ambitious project the government hoped that the whole area
covering the Accra plains would fall under irrigation to boost agricultural
production and that the country would be covered by an electric grid that
would foster the development of large-scale industry to a great degree. The
consequence of all these economic activities that were planned, as was
envisaged, would be an increase in the national revenue. So, you can see a
lot of thinking has gone into this planning.

But as we all know this project, in particular the Volta Dam project, was
not to see the light of the day, not with the United Kingdom and Canada, as
co-financiers developing cold feet and abandoning the Ghana government.
However, the final nail to ensure that the project did not succeed was put
in by an American-sponsored coup which deposed Dr Nkrumah in 1966, thus
putting Ghana way back, where it had started.

As we celebrate the 50th independence anniversary of Ghana, it is
imperative that we emphasise and appreciate Ghana’s leadership and efforts
to liberate both its people and those of Africa as a whole. Ghana’s
independence contributed much to sub-Saharan Africa’s political struggle
for freedom.

Some of these contributions can be summed up as follows: Firstly, Ghana led
the way to prove in a concrete manner that colonies in Africa could attain
independent statehood. Secondly, Ghana provided valuable stimulation on Pan-
African ideas and goals, with Ghana under Dr Nkrumah being the propelling
engine of those ideas. Thirdly, it reaffirmed the dignity of the African,
giving a boost to his self-confidence and identity. Fourthly, Ghana’s
independence aroused African political consciousness more wildly and
vigorously, with intense inspiration to the struggles for the attainment of
freedom and statehood. Fifthly, Ghana’s independence gave an impetus to
ideas, concepts and efforts to promote African unity and solidarity.
Sixthly, Ghana’s independence prepared the way to the founding of the
Organisation for African Unity, the OAU, which gave rise to today’s African
Union.

Today’s Ghana, under the leadership of President John Kufuor continues to
reclaim its leadership position and its leadership role in Africa. For
example, Ghana was the first country to submit itself to the African Peer
Review Mechanism, the APRM. They sometimes regard themselves as always the
first. I think I agree. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Hon Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Members of Parliament,
Ghana is this pioneering country, championing not only her independence,
but blazing the lonely trail, so to say, for the emancipation of other
African countries that were to follow, for the realisation of the total
liberation of the continent of Africa is indeed an historic event never to
be rewritten in a different way.

Ghana, formerly known as the Gold Coast, has, like many of us on this
African continent, a long and painful litany of colonial history and
blatant if not brutal political economic oppression, let alone the
degradation of a people by those who are powerful.

In the entire human history, there cannot be any people who would take
kindly to their conquest and subjugation, even if they are less ready to
retaliate against their victors or enslavers.

The vision and mere yearning for one’s freedom is the basic ingredient of a
people to claim back their freedom, dignity and humanity seized by stealth
or might of conquerors.
Colonialism ignored the foregoing reality of human history or arrogantly
thought that their happy captives were incapable of such aspirations as
those that beat in the hearts of all and any freedom-loving people and this
is a note that we should take when we wield power.

The first spark of conquers for freedom, in my view, was lit in the 1806
Ashanti-Fante War, which led the Fante to abandon their allegiance to the
Ashanti in favour of the British; thus the element of colonial divide and
rule was brought into play. This of course set in a motion of a long series
of wars, in which the Ashanti tried to ward off or minimise European power
in their region.

From 1826 to the 1900s, the British fought a series of wars and campaigns
against the Ashanti region. By the mid-1940s to the mid-1950s, all the
regions in and around the Gold Coast were consolidated, heralding in the
1956 UN plebiscite that they, these territories, become part of Ghana when
the Gold Coast achieved independence, the wind of change.

The new constitution of April 29, 1954 established a Cabinet of African
Ministers drawn from all African legislatures chosen by direct election.
This is when Kwame Nkrumah’s Convention People’s Party, the CCP, won the
majority of seats in the new legislative assembly.

Two years later, Prime Minister Nkrumah’s Gold Coast government issued a
White Paper categorically proposing for the then Gold Coast’s independence.
The British government agreed to this proposal. By March 6, 1957, Ghana
became independent to inspire a strong flame and desire for freedom on the
entire continent. Nkrumah was now hailed as Osagyefo, the victorious
leader. Even we, then up and coming and young lovers of freedom and
democracy down south, saw Ghana as a star of hope, a clarion call to break
the chains of bondage.

This era, like eras of the dawn of freedom, had its good and bad sides.
There was a quest to achieve and develop Ghana into a modern, semi-
industrialised unitary state. This quest in itself set in motion the seeds
of tension and dissent, not that dissent should be treasonable in
democracy. The Convention People’s Party’s control was challenged and
criticised. The outcome of these challenges was the provision of detention
without trial for five years and later for 10 years. It all sounds very
familiar. Apartheid, the Zanu PF regime in Zimbabwe, Darfur, etc, the abuse
of power, politely put, the arrogance of power.

In 1961 a new constitution was adopted transforming the parliamentary
system to a republican form of government headed by the powerful President,
Dr Kwame Nkrumah.

Like suppression or oppression always breeding resentment and strife, the
Ghanaian army and police toppled Nkrumah’s regime as, it is said assisted
by the CIA. Nkrumah was accused of flagrant abuse of individual rights and
liberties, corruption, dictatorial practices, coupled with the
deteriorating economy. Sounds very familiar again and very close to us. How
and why on earth was the star of hope to fade this way? This fateful day of
24 February 1966 was indeed a blot on the inspiring star of Africa. The
rest is history, as they say.

Ghana and Africa as a whole, including the freedom-loving people of the
world, have every legitimate right to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the
independence of Ghana, if for anything but to rekindle that celestial star
of Africa, to rise and shine once more, to pave the way forward to African
unity and the overall renewal now manifesting itself as the African
Renaissance, with its trust in Nepad and related endeavours, to embrace the
entire continent and to take its rightful place among nations of the world.

Those who cannot learn from their own mistakes, selfishly or arrogantly are
inviting peril. We congratulate, however, the pioneering spirit of Ghana
and the people of Ghana and wish them well.

Last, but not least, an emerging democracy such as ours, South Africa,
should avoid the retrogressive tendencies and pitfalls that the star of
Africa, Ghana fell into. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the freedom and
independence of Ghana in 1957 inspired the leaders and people of Africa in
the noblest ways any African historian can bring to mind.

The Conference of Independent African States called by Kwame Nkrumah had
begun to deliberate on the political and the economic future of a free and
independent African continent. The conference focused on the contribution
of Africa to world peace, the total eradication of colonialism and racism,
co-operation with the United Nations, the promotion of good relations among
free and sovereign nations, the promotion of continental peace and
security, and the promotion of the political, cultural and economic
wellbeing of all the people of Africa.

These were some of the salient principles that later influenced the
establishment of the geo-political African entities, first the Organisation
of African Unity, the OAU, and today the African Union, the AU, and its
economic arm, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, Nepad.

It was the same spirit that motivated the Nigerian leader Nnamdi Azikiwe to
illuminate on the renascent Africa, which must embody the fundamental basis
of the philosophy of the new African, characterised by, inter alia,
spiritual balance, social regeneration, economic determinism, mental
emancipation, and political resurgence.

It is this philosophical base that, among other positive factors, motivated
President Thabo Mbeki to re-introduce in this Parliament the debate on the
African Renaissance. Regrettably, the debate could neither be deepened nor
sustained in this House, including civil society. There were those who
perceived that as a clarion call for the rise of black nationalism, while
others feared an endless criticism of the historic failures of foreign
ideologies. This attitude is delaying the true psychic, cultural and
economic emancipation of the black majority in this country. Without this
transformation, and unlike the people of Ghana and other independent
African states, the black man in South Africa is in danger of forever
remaining a dispensable participant in a process of modern-day enslavement
of himself and his children.

President Mbeki summed it up well when he said: “We rarely speak about
change or the absence of change in our minds.” Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, Ghana’s independence
50 years ago marked the first important step for Africa to throw off the
shackles of colonialism. In that sense, it was a triumphant occasion that
still, 50 years on, should fill all of the people of the continent with
joy. It marked the beginning of Africans again being in control of their
own destiny. At the same time, we must remember that Ghana’s initial
freedom soon presented many challenges and problems. The military coups
that followed, the charges of corruption, the accusations of ethnic
preferential treatment in service delivery and the distribution of national
resources became setbacks.

As the years of independence progressed in Ghana, many other African states
emerged from colonialism and followed a similar path of hope, and
disappointment, and renewed hope, but the nations of the continent have
refused to bow down and accept the afro-pessimist view of the so-called
inevitability of African suffering and underdevelopment. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: President Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana once said:

   Africa is a paradox, which illustrates and highlights neo-colonialism.
   Her earth is rich, yet the products that come from above and below the
   soil continue to enrich not Africans predominantly, but groups and
   individuals who operate to Africa’s impoverishment.

As we celebrate 50 years of Africa’s first independence, let us commit
ourselves to ensuring that all Africans are liberated from neo-colonialism,
war, poverty and authoritarian regimes so that the ordinary people of this
continent gain control of their own destinies and immense natural
resources.

Let us also remember the millions of African brothers and sisters who have
needlessly died as a result of resource wars on this continent. Let us give
a moment of silence to those innocent who died and continue to die in
African countries like the Congo, Sudan, Zimbabwe, Rwanda and Burundi. I
thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, the ACDP would like to express its heartfelt
congratulations to the people of Ghana with their country’s celebration of
50 years of independence. Ghana, being one of the first African countries
to obtain independence from colonial rule on the continent, at this stage
of the African continent’s history, is regarded as one of the most stable
countries in the West African region. This is despite the independence
history of military interventions from time to time. The country has been
well-governed by a multiparty democracy since the early 1990s.

Madam Speaker, the economy of Ghana is fairly stable, being the second-
largest producer of cocoa in the world, together with the export of gold.
It has boosted the growth of the economy in Ghana, an average of 4% per
annum, with 5,8% obtained in 2005. The economic growth is further boosted
by strong developments in the agriculture and construction sectors. The
ACDP wishes the nation of Ghana God’s richest blessings. Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the uniqueness of Ghana’s
independence is that it was the product of Pan-Africanism, which triumphed
at the fifth Pan-African Congress in Manchester in 1945. That congress took
this resilient African political philosophy home to Africa. Pan-Africanism
passed the revolutionary test, and gave classical colonialism in Africa a
knockout.

Ghana, through Dr Kwame Nkrumah, spearheaded the freedom movement of
Africa. He had, on 6 March 1957, declared that Ghana’s independence was
nothing unless it was linked up to the total liberation of Africa. Nkrumah
firmly held that political power is meaningless without economic power. He
said: “In planning national development, the constant fundamental principle
is the need for economic independence.”

When the imperialists and their agents overthrew Nkrumah on 24 February
1966, he had established 68 sprawling state-owned factories producing every
need of the Ghanaian people. There was free education, and medical
services, which made Ghana the pride of a liberated African country. The
treacherous coup against Ghana was aimed at destroying true African
independence and economic liberation. The traitors and their masters who
overthrew Nkrumah have serious lessons for us: Never again must Africans
sell their interests and future for peanuts in order to serve the interests
of the former colonial masters. Izwe lethu! [Our land!] [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. We indeed applaud and share
in the ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, we have a choice of using plan B or going
home and coming back tomorrow. We have 17 minutes left of the debate, and I
am only going to ask you to please stop laughing at plan B. It is aimed at
releasing you to go home.

Business suspended at 17:37 and resumed at 17:39.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, we indeed applaud and share in the
celebration of the 50th anniversary of the independence of Ghana. Ghana,
which is certainly one of the most stable democracies in Africa, has come a
long way, and like South Africa, however, faces similar challenges such as
poverty, unemployment, skills shortages, to name a few.

The realisation that our local supply of qualified persons is shipping off
for opportunities in Europe and elsewhere is a harsh reality. We need to
ask ourselves why. Why is the continent of Europe or other states a more
attractive investment for our graduates? Our growth and development is
dependent on our graduates, our skilled artisans and our people. The
potential for Africa’s greatest needs to be realised is invested in our
people so that we may reap the benefits and grow a nation, so that we too
can have the destiny of a bright future.

As a democracy, we too were victims of colonialism. We celebrate the
freedom and liberty of our people, and congratulate Ghana on this success.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: In congratulating Ghana on its 50 years of independence, the
FD believes we must also extract lessons from their walk of freedom over
these years.

Ghana’s independence in 1957 ushered in a new wave of change sweeping over
sub-Saharan Africa. Being the first country to gain freedom from colonial
rule, there was much interest in following the way its new government,
under the leadership of Kwame Nkrumah, would perform. For instance, at the
time of its independence, Ghana was producing 10% of the world’s gold.

The road ahead, based on successful transformation to an independent state,
appeared to bring a dawn of new hope to the Ghanaians who were led by their
own kind. The leadership and intellectual qualities of Kwame Nkrumah were
well suited for the challenges facing an independent Ghana.

It is sad to say that, after 50 years of independence, Ghanaians have very
little to celebrate. We believe that the will to succeed at governing the
country was uppermost in the minds of the leadership when they took
possession of the land in 1957. However, what Nkrumah and his government
were not able to do was to know how to rule over a pluralistic and
independent-minded citizenry.

The eventual legacy of the rule of Nkrumah was one of dictatorship,
imprisonment of opponents and creating a one-party state. The country’s
leaders over the subsequent years adopted this leadership style. If Ghana
wishes to rid itself of this governing style, they will have to undertake a
commission of inquiry into the root causes of their present troubles and
deal with legacies left by bad leadership. Even though a country may have
huge economic and social obstacles to overcome, we cannot agree with the
words expressed in the news article by Gamal Nkrumah, the son of Kwame
Nkrumah, who said: “Although we have a viable multi-party democracy in
Ghana today, the problem in Africa is that democracy does not feed the
people.”

Democracy is the better of the creative energies of humanity to work for
the good of all. We must ensure that we have the right mechanisms in place
to ensure a just and equitable society. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Madam Deputy
Speaker, hon members, it gives me great pleasure to participate in this
debate on the occasion of the celebration of the 50th anniversary of
independency in Ghana. It further gives me great pleasure to share this
platform with people such as the hon MaNjobe, who had the exhilarating
experience of living in Ghana during those exciting times straight after
independence.

It was after all this event on 6 March 1957, that changed the face of
Africa, and which was a start of the process of reclaiming Africa’s
birthright and the dignity of the African people. Under the leadership of
Dr Nkrumah, this heralded the beginning of the process of African
independence in the modern era and this example served to stimulate the
process towards ending colonialism across the continent. It was, of course,
the beginning of the wave of independence, which swept the continent during
the 60s and culminated in our own freedom 13 years ago.

Ghana’s independence gave us much hope 50 years ago. And that country
continues to give us hope on our new quest for economic emancipation for
our economic independence.

In spite of its many post-independence trials and tribulations, modern-day
Ghana has managed to straddle the two worlds of underdevelopment and
development with much maturity and leadership. In the process, Ghana has
become the embodiment of the vision of the African Renaissance. All of us
on the continent have learnt many lessons from Ghana. One could say that
Ghana has been a vanguard nation in 1957 and now. As one of the first
nations on the continent to gain independence, Ghana has led the way as a
stable country under democratic rule, and now also serves as an anchor of
economic growth and development.

Endowed with great resources, Ghana was historically known, as you all
know, as the Gold Coast or “Golden Ghana”, partly for its storehouses of
gold and partly because it was considered by its neighbours to be shining
as bright as gold itself. Such was the attraction of gold that Ghana was of
course a hive of economic activity drawing many foreign nations to our
continental shores as successive colonial powers sought to secure a place
in the booming trade in gold.

While political solidarity has kept us together as a continent through the
tough years of apartheid and colonialism, we recognise that economic
development is our current challenge. Political solidarity alone is not
enough, but must be supported by strong economic co-operation.

With Ghana we enjoy excellent economic relations and it is a major trading
partner of ours; in recent years trade growing tremendously between our two
countries. There are, for example, about 35 South African multinational
companies and smaller scale companies registered in Ghana. Since 1994, a
capital injection of more than US$36 million from South African companies
has been invested in Ghana. Also, there are an increasing number of other
countries investing in Ghana because it enjoys one of the most
sophisticated economies on the continent.

Consider this example from an article published in The Washington Post by
Carol Pineau, entitled The Africa You Never See, in which she states:


   In the waiting area of a large office complex in Accra, it is standing
   room only as citizens with bundles of cash line up to buy shares of a
   mutual fund that has yielded an average of 60% annually over the last
   seven years. They are entrusting their hard-earned cash to a local
   company called Databank, which invests in stock markets in Ghana,
   Nigeria, Botswana and Kenya that consistently rank amongst the world’s
   top growth markets.


These are the things we do not read about in the newspapers. It is also
little known, for example, that the Ghana Stock Exchange regularly tops the
list of the world’s highest-performing markets.

So, South Africa and Ghana continue to have strong ties both politically
and economically. Our political relations will be given further impetus
this year when in July we launch the Joint Co-operation Commission. Also,
on the multilateral level, His Excellency, President Kufuor, chairs the
African Union, and the July AU Summit will be held under his chairmanship
in the Ghanaian capital of Accra.

Ghana also plays a key role in the Economic Community of West African
States, Ecowas, mediating the various crises that have affected the
volatile region from Sierra Leone to Cote d’Ivoire.

And under President Kufuor’s leadership, Ghana was also the first country -
as has been mentioned here before - to undergo the African Peer Review
process, with a very positive result.

Both our countries share a common vision for the continent and the world.
We both work towards the eradication of conflict on our continent and the
peaceful resolution of disputes.

We are now in the early years of this new wave of independence in which we
are actively striving to rid our continent of all the negative stereotypes
associated with it, such as war, famine and disease, through developing our
economies, investing in our infrastructure and people, and working with our
partners on the African continent and beyond to build prosperous societies.

Ghana is today a stable democracy - a country admired by its neighbours in
West Africa and in the international community. As a country that has
contributed so much to the liberation of our continent from colonialism’s
bonds, Ghana plays a crucial role in contributing to the vision of a better
Africa and a better world.

Towards this end, Ghana’s foreign policy objectives continue to be directed
towards the promotion of a just and equitable international economic and
social order. These are ideals for which we stand and which we, too,
promote.

As a young nation in democracy, we have learned from Ghana. She has
produced a high calibre of leaders whose contribution to the vision of
African Unity has left a lasting legacy. Today, as we strive to consolidate
African unity, we remember the contribution that Kwame Nkrumah made.

As we celebrate the unstoppable trend towards democratisation, we remember
that one of Ghana’s greatest sons, Kofi Annan, has been instrumental
through his extraordinary personal and professional efforts in elevating
the African agenda to global forums.

As we celebrate the milestone African Union decision to strive for gender
parity within all structures of organisation, we must not forget the legacy
bestowed upon us by the Ashanti who place women as the final arbiter in all
decisions in the Ashanti community.

Both our countries’ people cherish and celebrate their diversity, so both
our people are ready to rekindle the filial ties and kinship that had been
suppressed by the artificial restrictions imposed by the apartheid regime.

We are hugely encouraged by the increasing people to people contacts from
our respective countries. We also look forward to participating in Ghana in
2008 in the Africa Cup of Nations, and also to hosting the Black Stars at
the Fifa World Cup here in 2010. Speaking of learning, we hope that we will
learn a lot from the Black Stars in 2008 as our own team prepares for 2010.

We are indeed proud to associate ourselves with the cultural and sporting
achievements of Ghana; their display of skill and finesse during the Soccer
World Cup in Germany indeed filled many of us with pride and made us proud
to be Africans.

Ghana has given us all hope - in 1957 and during this half centenary
celebration in 2007. At the colourful and happy ceremony in Ghana’s capital
last week, President Kufuor said:


   This is a celebration not only for Ghana but also for the whole of
   Africa. The date 6 March 1957 changed the outlook of Africa.


   There is no doubt that Africa and many of its nations are making
   progress. I urge our young people to resolve to stay at home, use their
   energy and enthusiasm to serve Africa.


   This resonates with us as we pursue our own political and economic
   objectives. We continued to be inspired by the successes of Ghana and the
   things they have taught us.

I wish to extend my heartfelt congratulations to the people and government
of Ghana on 50 years of freedom. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:53.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2005.

   (b)      Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2005.

   (c)      Government Notice No R.186 published in Government Gazette No
      29681 dated 1 March 2007: Amendment of Regulations in terms of the
      Long-term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 52 of 1998).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report on the confirmation of the provisional suspension of
           Magistrate K Suliman, a magistrate from Durban, in terms of
           section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
           1993).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


      a) Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
         ended June 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
         on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2006.



