---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 May 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-05-17
---

THURSDAY, 17 MAY 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

Mrs N B GXOWA: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


     1) notes that President Thabo Mbeki was honoured as a Knight of the
        Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem by
        the order’s Grand Prior, the Duke of Gloucester, in an investiture
        ceremony held at St George’s Cathedral in Cape Town on Thursday, 10
        May 2007;


     2) further notes –

       (a) that those chosen as Knights “devote [themselves], so far as
             [they are] able, to the objects and purposes of the Order,
             more especially the care of the sick and the injured, to
             conduct [themselves] as a true Knight and a person of honour”;


       (b) that this devotion resonates with our government’s commitment to
             fight for a better life for all our people which has been
             President Mbeki’s lifelong vocation;


       (c) the President’s remarks on the occasion of his investiture as
             Knight of the Order of St John when, amongst other things, he
             said: “As human beings, we should strive collectively to
             rescue from extinction the noble acts of selflessness,
             volunteerism, sacrifice and sharing, exalted human qualities
             that have been treasured throughout the collective past of all
             humanity”; and


       (d) that on that occasion, we could not but be moved when, in
             addition to what we have already quoted, he said: “Indeed, the
             loftiness of these values, which, in the context of South
             Africa inspired our vision of moral regeneration, should not
             be allowed to choke in the arid culture of individualism,
             selfishness and greed that blights the soul of modern living”;


 (3)  believes that the selection of President Thabo Mbeki for this high
       honour is a fitting tribute to the central role he has played in the
       betterment of the lives of the people of South Africa, Africa and
       the world and the Cross (whose four arms signify prudence,
       temperance, justice and fortitude) that President Mbeki received as
       part of the honour is yet another appropriate symbolic
       representation of this tried and tested commitment to better
       people’s lives; and


 (4)  therefore resolves to –

       (a) congratulate the President on receiving this prestigious honour
             and to convey its best wishes for continuous success in his
             efforts; and


       (b) recommit ourselves to the pursuit and attainment of a better
             life for the people of South Africa, Africa and the world.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

                    DELEGATION FROM SEDIBENG MUNICIPALITY

                               (Announcement)
The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to recognise the presence in the gallery
of a delegation from Sedibeng Municipality, which is led by Executive Mayor
Mlungisi Hlongwane. Amongst the delegation are survivors of the Sharpeville
massacre and the Delmas trial. You are welcome, honourable members of our
society. [Applause.]

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

                     Protests regarding service delivery

1.    Ms L M Mashiane (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:


    In light of the recent protests regarding service delivery, what is the
    Government doing to ensure that organs of state are more effective in
    responding to the needs of poor communities?   N583E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, if I may: ordinarily, when
the British Crown awards these knighthoods and things like that to
foreigners, you are actually not supposed to use the title. So, I am trying
to discourage people from saying “Sir Thabo”. [Laughter.]

Thank you very much indeed to the members of the House for this motion that
you have just approved.
I would like to join Madam Speaker in saying that I am very happy indeed to
see the people from Sedibeng and welcome them to this House. The Deputy
President has just told me that her son has brought his own delegation
here. [Laughter.] [Applause.] They are students from the University of Cape
Town. They are also welcome. [Applause.]

With regard to this question concerning service delivery, I do hope that
hon members will indeed revisit reports that the executive provides to this
House from time to time, which address this issue of the challenges that
are facing our municipalities, because I am quite certain that those
reports would indicate that, despite the fact that indeed we have many
problems, progress is being made to address these challenges of service
delivery.

I am sure we are also aware that the protests to which the hon member is
referring are at times the result of the issues of relationships and
dynamics within local structures of political parties, particularly those
that are in office, and between these parties and the structures of civil
society. Added to this is the problem of competition for local resources.

These are critical matters that cannot be ignored when dealing with the
issues raised by the hon member. We are, however, confident that where the
protests are driven in large measure by the dynamics we have mentioned, the
leadership of relevant bodies will address whatever might be the relevant
issues.

We all know that the challenges facing especially some of our
municipalities indeed are very huge and progress in providing good services
to the people is at times not what it should be. Fundamentally, all of us
need to understand the huge amount of work that must be done to eradicate
the legacy of centuries of colonialism and apartheid.

None of us should pretend that it will be easy to address this challenge.
It is important that all of us should tell the people the truth in this
regard, that it will take time to realise the goal of a better life for
all.

Some of the problems with regard to service delivery arise because of
reasons such as lack of the necessary management and technical capacity,
critical vacant posts that are not filled for long periods of time,
negligence and maladministration, insufficient engagements between
councillors and their communities, and in some instances acts of
corruption. But I must say that not all municipalities experience these
problems.

There are various measures that government has taken to ensure that organs
of state respond effectively and efficiently to the needs of communities.
Last year the extended Cabinet lekgotla endorsed a five-year local
government strategic agenda, whose central objective is to ensure that by
the end of the second term of the democratic local government structures in
2011, at the latest, the local sphere of government is provided with the
institutional capacity and the necessary resources to discharge its
constitutional mandate.

In this regard, government has asked the relevant government departments at
provincial and national levels to develop measures and implementation plans
so as to ensure hands-on support for the municipalities.

Clearly, it is important for the National Assembly, the NCOP and the
provincial legislatures to play their oversight roles to ensure that these
measures and plans are implemented.

With regard to capacity challenges, including the matter of managerial and
technical skills, there are a number of special initiatives that government
is implementing. These include Siyenza Manje and Project Consolidate.
Through Project Consolidate, a total of 281 experts have been deployed to
the 85 Project Consolidate municipalities by the end of 2006. The
deployment of these professionals to the identified municipalities has
resulted in notable improvements in provision of services, in areas of
planning, as well as financial and project management.

Government is also working to ensure that there is compliance and
implementation of municipal performance regulations. In this regard, there
are programmes in place to make certain that all municipal managers sign
their performance agreements.

Progress has also been made with regard to filling critical vacant posts in
the various municipalities. I have run out of time, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: You will get more time, hon President. I will now take hon
Rabinowitz. Hon Mashiane, of course, must be first. I am sorry. Hon Tsenoli
will speak on behalf of hon Mashiane.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Madam Speaker, I thank Comrade President for the response
he has already given. I assume that he will proceed to do so.

But I just want us to understand that in addition to the issues you have
raised so far, there is a concern with the reportage of these protests, but
also with the role of our own internal capacities across the board to deal
with conflict effectively.

To what extent do you think this indeed is one of the challenges we have to
deal with?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, yes, part of the reason I was
saying that I do hope hon members would indeed have a look at what
government regularly or occasionally reports to the House about these
issues, was to ensure that we have a better, more objective understanding
of the challenges that we face and don’t get the impression, because
something erupts somewhere, that this generally affects all municipalities.
So, any reporting that would suggest that there is that general crisis
facing the entire municipal system in the country would obviously be
incorrect.

I suppose with regard to the matter of the capacity to resolve conflicts
that this would vary from area to area, in part depending on the issue
about which there is conflict. But, indeed, I agree that it would be
important that at all of these local levels where you find the
manifestation of this, whether it is political parties or government
structures, that they need to elaborate the mechanisms to resolve
conflicts.

Very fundamental to that is this matter that I have mentioned, of the need
for constant contact between municipalities and the communities that they
represent, because in many instances you get this kind of conflict because
there is a break in the connection between municipalities and the people.
So, people might very well act on the basis of wrong information because
there is not sufficient contact with the municipalities, or the
municipalities may act wrongly because they haven’t a sufficient sense of
what the feelings of the people are about any particular issue.

But, I am saying fundamental to that matter of the resolution of these
conflicts is the need for the closest possible connection between the
municipalities and the communities, the municipalities and the ward
committees and their regular interaction. I am sure that this would help a
great deal with regard to addressing those conflict issues. Thanks, Madam
Speaker.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, clearly government
has the will to improve service delivery, but it still remains a problem in
spite of all the efforts that have been undertaken, suggesting that the
problems lie elsewhere and are a combination of lack of efficiency, lack of
accountability and lack of capacity.

The IFP has always claimed that these would improve if the Constitution
underpinning all our legislation is amended, firstly, to produce greater
accountability of political representatives, for which we should definitely
have no floor-crossing – but that’s an aside; secondly, the division of
power is made simpler and clearer and is decentralised, not in a token
fashion but through the principle of subsidiarity; thirdly, that our rights
are more narrowly limited by a limitation clause that is not based widely
on freedom and equality but more narrowly on necessity; and fourthly, that
the institutions intended to protect our democracy such as the Public
Protector, the Auditor-General, the Human Rights Commission, the
Independent Electoral Commission and others are not answerable to ANC-
dominated committees, but are truly independent.

Do you not feel that it is time to revisit our Constitution in order to
address some of these issues? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, not at all, Madam Speaker. I don’t think
we need to revisit the Constitution. But one of the things that we are
currently addressing is, as you know, the new system of local government
that came into operation in 2000. What we didn’t do was to assess the
impact of that, particularly on provincial governments. Since we changed
the system, whatever might have been correct in the period from 1994 to
2000 with the system of local government as it was then, obviously would
have been impacted upon by what happened once we changed the municipal
system of government.

So, that process is on course to look at what it is that needs to be done,
that might include redelegation of powers and functions as between
municipal and local government. That is certainly one of the matters that
need to be addressed.

I really do believe that the Constitution and the legislation that we have
are sufficient to ensure that we do indeed have a democratic and
accountable system of local government, and I really don’t believe that the
problems that have been raised by the hon Mashiane would be addressed by
any constitutional changes.

In that context, I was going to say, when I ran out of time, that of course
there are other things that we have to do. The hon Rabinowitz referred to
this capacity problem. Amongst other things, we have carried out a
comprehensive orientation and training programme for newly elected
councillors to empower them to carry out their responsibilities, as well as
attending to the skills issue with regard to other officials at that level.

We have now started an orientation programme relating to the Batho Pele
values so that, again, as I was saying, where you have this disjuncture,
this disconnection between municipalities and communities, you then do get
the kind of problem that the hon Mashiane was referring to. As our
municipal officials absorb and respect those Batho Pele principles and
values, that would certainly help with regard to this matter. Thanks, Madam
Speaker.

Mr K J MINNIE: Madam Speaker, my follow-up question is as follows, and I
won’t make a speech: In order to ensure the effectiveness of organs of
state, is the hon President prepared to set reasonable targets for all
politicians who are responsible for service delivery departments, and if
they do not meet these targets, would you force them to resign? Thank you.
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, ordinarily what happens is
that the national government sets a programme for each of the various
departments, portfolios and, therefore, departments, Ministers, Deputy
Ministers and so on. These are the things we want to achieve and these are
the timeframes within which to achieve them.

As a consequence, of course, you will see that the House deals with these
questions every year and we are currently dealing with these now. We then
get budget allocations which ultimately have to be approved by Parliament –
budget allocations which address those particular programmes.

So, I am saying, yes, indeed, ordinarily all the politicians in government
have got targets to achieve. These are not targets of individual
politicians or individual Ministers or Deputy Ministers, but these are
targets of the government as a whole.

If there is any failure with regard to meeting those targets, it would be a
failure of the government as a whole. Obviously, particular Ministers and
Deputy Ministers are delegated to deal with particular aspects of
government.

I think - I know - the first thing that becomes of concern to the
government is not so much looking for ways and means by which to force
people to resign, but to look for ways and means to ensure that government
programmes are implemented, so that when there are problems - as obviously
there are, they arise from time to time - we would have a look at that, to
ask: Why is it that these targets are not being met in a particular
department and Ministry?

Having looked at that, we then decide what corrective measures to take. And
I believe that is what we need to do, so that, indeed, we do achieve these
objectives which we report to Parliament every year and, as I say, every
year are financed by a budget that is approved here.

Fortunately, we haven’t had an instance since 1994, as far as I can
remember, where there was such dereliction of duty by any Minister or
Deputy Minister that it was necessary that such a Minister or Deputy
Minister should resign or be dismissed. I can’t remember any such instance.
But, without doubt, if there was any instance of dereliction of duty on the
part of any Minister, I am quite certain that that would have its
consequences. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, service delivery is essential at grass-roots
level. Our communities look forward to living in a clean and liveable
environment. Hon President, don’t you think that there should be some sort
of monitoring system in place to see that service delivery is working
effectively? This can also assist in solving some of the problems facing
service delivery. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I am sure the hon member
would be aware that for some time the government has been working to refine
its monitoring and evaluation system precisely to address the matter that
the hon member is raising. Yes, indeed, you are quite correct, it is
important that there should be that monitoring to ensure that what we have
agreed needs to be done, is in fact done within the necessary frameworks.

There are all sorts of things that happen. Perhaps we don’t have enough
time to talk about these. For instance, the financial reporting systems in
government enable the Treasury, for instance, to detect quite early
instances where you have underspending or overspending, as the case may be.
That serves as an alert and a flashlight that there is something that is
going wrong in a particular area. You will pick it up like that. That is
part of the monitoring system. We would then be able to intervene.

We are certainly working on the completion and implementation of that
comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system, part of which is the reason
we decided to put the government programme on the government website to
indicate what this programme is, to indicate the timeframes and to indicate
what we wanted to achieve, so that the general South African population has
access to this, but, of course, also to assist the government to monitor
the progress.

So, indeed the matter is important, but I am saying it is a matter that is
being attended to. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

           Government action to resolve growing crisis in Zimbabwe

2.    The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the
    Republic:

    Whether the government has taken any action in the past six months to
    resolve the growing crisis in Zimbabwe; if not, why not; if so, what
    action has been taken to (a) help restore fundamental democratic
    freedoms, (b) protect human rights and (c) facilitate negotiations
    between Zanu-PF and the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC)?
                            N578E

The SPEAKER: I have been informed that the hon Chief Whip, Douglas Gibson,
is in charge of questions pending the election of a parliamentary leader by
the DA, so I call upon the hon Gibson. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I suppose therefore, if the
hon Gibson is in charge of questions, whatever that means, that he
instructed the hon Leon to pose this question! [Laughter.]

This, of course, is about Zimbabwe, Madam Speaker, as you know.
[Interjections.] As the hon Tony Leon is aware, an extraordinary SADC
summit of heads of state and government was convened in Dar es Salaam in
March this year, specifically to discuss political developments in Lesotho,
the DRC and Zimbabwe.

With regard to Zimbabwe, the relevant decision of the summit says, and I
quote:


   The extraordinary summit mandated His Excellency President Thabo Mbeki to
   continue to facilitate dialogue between the opposition and the government
   and report back to the troika on progress.

Happily, both the government of Zimbabwe and the two Movement for
Democratic Change groups, the MDC groups, unconditionally accepted the
decisions of the summit, including our role as facilitator. We should, of
course, remember that President Mugabe participated in the Dar es Salaam
summit meeting and was therefore party to the decisions taken by the
summit. Having been mandated by our region, we have indeed moved with the
necessary speed to execute its directive and are therefore engaged in
dialogue with our Zimbabwean interlocutors.

The hon member will undoubtedly understand that it would be improper for us
to divulge details of these engagements, even before we have apprised the
troika of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security, as required in
terms of our mandate. Indeed, I should also say that we have agreed with
our Zimbabwean colleagues that all of us should avoid conducting the
dialogue through the media, as this would be counterproductive. However, I
can confirm that the discussions are proceeding very well. Thank you very
much, Madam Speaker.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President,
Sir ... [Laughter.] ... there’s been a good deal of criticism about your
own attitude and that of many African leaders towards President Mugabe. I
do not propose dwelling on the past today. The decision by the Pan-African
Parliament to send a fact-finding mission to Zimbabwe signals a new concern
on our continent for the sufferings of our brothers and sisters in that
country.

May I ask what steps you propose taking to persuade President Mugabe to
allow the delegation into his country? We would not like to see the PAP
parliamentarians declared prohibited immigrants, as the hon Joe Seremane,
Cosatu and I were two years ago. [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, I do not know that the government of
Zimbabwe has said anything about the proposed visit of a delegation of the
Pan-African Parliament, so I don’t want to speculate on the matter. I think
the question is speculative. The hon Gibson is asking, in the event that
the government of Zimbabwe says “don’t come”, what do we do? Well, have
they said it? So I don’t think we should speculate on the matter.

Let’s see what happens, but I do not imagine that Zimbabwe, which is a
member of the Pan-African Parliament, would not want to talk to members of
the Pan-African Parliament. I don’t see how that would happen, but, as I
say, I have no information at all that there is a problem around this
matter, so let’s see. We’ll wait and see what happens.

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Thank you, Mr President. My question relates to the
escalation of conflict in Zimbabwe. I would like to ask whether the
President can share with us some sort of road map towards solving this
impasse in terms of the AU mandate.

I believe, Mr President, that that kind of road map would somewhat engender
hope in the people of Zimbabwe that indeed the President of the Republic of
South Africa is doing something.

Secondly, Mr President, what steps is the government taking to curb the
influx of political and economic refugees from Zimbabwe, which is now
quoted to be around 3,5 million?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: With regard to the first question, Madam
Speaker, I don’t know what I can say in addition to what I’ve said already.
As I’ve said, the SADC summit said we should facilitate dialogue between
the government and the opposition in Zimbabwe. That’s happening and the
agenda for that interaction is an agenda that would be agreed upon by the
Zimbabwean parties. They are quite free to put on the agenda any matter
that they consider to be relevant to the discussions, so I’m quite certain
that the matters that the hon Mncwango is raising would be matters that
would serve on that agenda and would come out as an agreed way forward in
terms of all of these issues that affect Zimbabwe.

There’s no limitation in terms of matters that would be put on the agenda
by our Zimbabwean interlocutors, so I’m quite certain that’s where the
matter would be addressed and that’s where the road map would come from,
namely an agreement among the Zimbabweans.

With regard to the migration of people from Zimbabwe to South Africa, well,
I think the hon member knows what the government tries to do, consistent
with our own laws, in that we do indeed act in the event that there are
people who have entered the country illegally and we manage to identify and
arrest them.

As for Zimbabweans who enter South Africa legally, well, they enter South
Africa legally and there wouldn’t be any need to do anything about that,
but as to this other influx of illegal people, I personally think it’s
something that we have to live with.

The hon member may remember the story which the Minister of Home Affairs
related a year or a bit longer ago, that you have an interesting phenomenon
around Christmastime, when some Zimbabweans come and report themselves as
officially illegal and request that they should please be deported to
Zimbabwe. [Laughter.] We then proceed to do that. So we pay for their fares
to go back to Zimbabwe, and the same person would then reappear a year
later and say he’s illegal and that he should be deported to Zimbabwe.

It’s a manifestation that is indeed difficult. You can’t put a Great Wall
of China between South Africa and Zimbabwe to stop people walking across,
so you will have this phenomenon of people for whom we pay transport around
Christmastime to go home year after year. They’re back after Easter. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: We now come to question No 3.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, Mr Gibson did indicate that he would like to
have a follow-up question if there’s a chance, and I believe there is a
chance for a further question.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, I
understand that the Zimbabwean government has already rejected the fact-
finding mission from the Pan-African Parliament. I understand that they
describe the PAP as a toothless talkshop with no power. Can we send a
message to the Zimbabwean government that we Africans are proud of the PAP,
that we want to strengthen it and do whatever we can to help solve
Zimbabwe’s problems?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, I don’t know who the “we” is.
[Laughter.] But I’m sure that whoever that “we” is, of course, they are
perfectly at liberty to communicate whatever they wish to the government of
Zimbabwe. [Laughter.]

With regard to ourselves, our principal task currently is to discharge the
mission that was given to us by the SADC summit, and I’m quite certain that
we mustn’t be diverted from that. It’s critically important that the
government, the ruling party, and the opposition in Zimbabwe should get
together and indeed together resolve the problems of Zimbabwe. That’s a
critical matter and I’m quite certain that that is the matter on which we
must continue to focus. But of course, as I was saying, the “we” are
perfectly entitled to communicate whatever they wish to the government of
Zimbabwe.

Even the PAP, I’m quite sure, would enter into its own dialogue with the
government of Zimbabwe, which is perfectly OK, but I’m saying with regard
to the work that we have to do, we have got to make absolutely certain, I’m
sure, that we focus on this principal task of facilitating this dialogue,
as was said by the SADC summit, to ensure that indeed we assist the people
of Zimbabwe to find a resolution to this whole complex of challenges that
Zimbabwe faces. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mr D J SITHOLE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, I need to say thank
you for not allowing this House to be turned into a stock market where
speculations are rife.
On that note, Mr President, will you agree that it could be important for
us as South Africa to intensify our work in regard to regional integration
and, in fact, expediting the process of approving the free movement of
people of the continent, so as to make sure that we deal with this element
of wanting to close ourselves as South Africa in exclusion of our region
and the continent?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, certainly, we are very firmly of the
same view, hon member, that we need to speed up these processes of the
integration of our region. As the hon member will remember, SADC even had
an extraordinary summit last year, precisely, solely and exclusively to
address that particular issue, but of course, it related mainly to
questions of economic integration such as trade and so on.

Yes, indeed, I would agree, and processes are in place to discuss this
other question of the movement of populations among the countries in the
SADC region. Yes, indeed, I think that the interdependence among our
countries in the region includes this question of the movement of people,
and therefore we do indeed want to put that on a firmer basis to contribute
to that issue of the integration of the region. Certainly, yes, hon member,
I would say that we would continue to focus on that to try to expedite that
particular process. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

         South Africa’s role in attainment of peace in Darfur region

3.    Mr S Siboza (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      What role is South Africa playing in the context of multilateral
      institutions such as the United Nations and the African Union to
      facilitate the attainment of peace and stability in the Darfur region
      of Sudan?                   N584E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, this question relates to the
situation in Darfur in the Sudan, and our role in that context. I would
therefore want to say that we are among the first countries to help to
conceptualise this strategic framework to deal with that Darfur crisis in
2004. That framework was based on two considerations: One of them was to
find an inclusive political solution to the situation, and secondly, it was
the need to protect the civilian population which culminated in the
formation of the African Union Mission in Sudan, Amis.
On 28 May 2004, the parties to the Darfur conflict reached an agreement on
the modalities for the establishment of a ceasefire commission, and the
deployment of military observers in the region. In accordance with that
agreement, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, with South
Africa as a member, took a decision to deploy military police and civilian
observers.

With the mandate of Amis being to provide protection for the civilian
population, an agreement was reached with the United Nations to provide
humanitarian assistance to the civilian population affected by the
conflict.

However, the success of the mission was, of course, contingent on the
success of an inclusive political dialogue amongst the armed groups in
Darfur and the government of Sudan. That led to the signing of the Darfur
Peace Agreement in Abuja, Nigeria in May 2006.

Of course, from the beginning, that peace agreement faced significant
constraints due to the fact that not all of the rebel groups supported the
agreement.

Then, of course, the other problem was that the effectiveness of the
African Union Mission in Sudan, Amis, continued to be hampered by lack of
financial and logistic resources and, accordingly, the need arose to
approach the Security Council of the United Nations to play its role in
terms of its being a custodian of international peace and security by
supporting the efforts of Amis.

Towards the end of last year, the UN and the AU decided to deploy a joint
African Union-United Nations hybrid force – it’s called the Hybrid
Peacekeeping Force for Darfur – which would be rolled out in three phases.
So, we have continued to play our role within the context of these
multilateral institutions to reach all of these agreements that I have just
mentioned. Indeed, more recently, we have had to intervene, both with the
Sudanese government and the United Nations Secretary-General, to try and
break a deadlock that had arisen around the matter of the deployment of
that hybrid force. To this end, we have regularly been in contact with the
President of Sudan and the government of Sudan to address all of these
matters that served as obstacles to the resolution of this problem.

As part of our contribution to that peace process in Darfur, we have
deployed 578 military personnel and 119 police officers to Darfur, who are
part of that peacekeeping mission there as part of the African mission. We
are further committed to increase our capacity in the context of the United
Nations-African Union hybrid force.

As you would know, the Darfur Peace Agreement is modelled on the
comprehensive peace agreement that was signed between the Sudanese
government and the Sudan People Liberation Movement at the beginning of
2005. I am saying that because it is important that we should succeed with
regard to the implementation of that Comprehensive Peace Agreement, because
that would indeed assist with regard to the resolution of the Darfur
process.

In that context, the hon member would know that South Africa leads the
African Union Post-Conflict and Reconstruction Committee for Sudan and is
therefore actively engaged continuously, with the Sudanese government, with
regard to that matter of post-conflict reconstruction to ensure that indeed
we move forward with regard to the CPA, which, as I have said, is important
with regard to the resolution of the Darfur conflict. Thanks, Madam
Speaker.

Mr S SIBOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, Comrade President,
for your response. Can the President please further elaborate whether the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is being fully implemented, especially with
regard to the issue of wealth sharing and elimination of borders between
north and south? How will this affect the Darfur Peace Agreement and the
processes?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, we paid a working visit to
Sudan last month. We discussed this matter of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, both with the federal government, led by
President Bashir, and we went to Juba in the south to meet the President of
Southern Sudan and the government there, President Salva Kiir.

Both of them reported that, indeed, a great deal of progress has been made
with regard to the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
They’re in perfect accord about this, that indeed there is a lot of
progress that is being made in that regard.

The biggest outstanding issue remained the matter of the demarcation of the
borders between the north and the south, but they had then already agreed
on a particular process and a certain timeframe to resolve that matter, and
were quite confident that they would implement that which would lead to the
resolution of these outstanding issues that relate to the border, and
therefore have an impact on the matter of the revenue sharing, because that
border will indicate where the oilfields are – whether they are in the
north or the south – which is an important matter with regard to the
revenue-sharing formula that they are using.

I am saying that both of them said they had taken all the necessary
decisions about how to move that matter of the boundary, and were quite
confident, both sides, that they would resolve this matter.

I must say, finally, also that they had decided to institute a system of
regular monthly joint interaction between the leadership of the government
of Southern Sudan and the federal government to make sure that they have
the necessary monitoring and oversight of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and that that would facilitate speeding up
that process of implementation.
It is important, hon member, that we succeed with regard to this matter. As
I was saying, all of the major elements of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement are directly relevant to the conflict that is taking place in
Darfur, and success with regard to the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement would indicate the possibility for the resolution of the
conflict in Darfur. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Thank you, Mr President, for the explanation, but with
further emphasis and clarification, one would like to concede that there
are various areas in which South Africa can play its role, for instance, by
providing infrastructural and technical expertise or financial support to
shore up and stabilise economic activity and sustainability in the area or
even providing that we do military peacekeeping forces in Darfur in
conjunction with the United Nations Peacekeeping Forces and mandate.

The question that is fundamental again for us is to come back to ask: With
all those roles or any roles that we are playing, how much do we
synchronise that with our obligations in terms of our budget and effective
service delivery in our country? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, generally the position – I
think the hon member is aware of this - that government has proceeded from
has been, ever since we came into government, that the future of our
continent is critically important with regard to the future of South Africa
itself. The questions of peace on the African continent are very directly
relevant to what happens to this country, questions of development on the
continent and so on.

We have tried our best to see what we can contribute to the progress that
the African continent needs to achieve, and indeed, with regard to this
matter that’s raised about Darfur and so on, we have taken the same
position that we should do whatever we can to ensure the success of this
peace process in Sudan, because of the critical place that Sudan occupies.

As you know, it shares borders with nine countries on the African
continent. It is a link between the north and the south of the continent
and, indeed, if we can resolve these problems in Sudan – and that includes
Darfur – that would make a very big impact on where the continent as a
whole is going.

It is a strategic country, and I am quite sure that we should contribute
whatever we can to the resolution of those conflicts. It does cost money to
do all of these things, but I think that our people understand that if we
can spend R1 in Sudan and it saves a human life, that is R1 well spent.
[Applause.]

I don’t think we should kind of put all these things in opposition to say
whatever resources we might devote to these challenges of peace on our
continent means we are denying our people the possibility to develop,
because I am saying that we can’t insulate South Africa from the rest of
the continent.

Therefore, what happens on the continent is really very directly of great
relevance to us, and as we have seen in the case of Zimbabwe with the
question that was put about the 3,5 million Zimbabweans here, we will
continue with that engagement with the rest of the African continent and,
of course, continue with doing what we have to do to meet our challenges
domestically. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, Mr President, I was privileged last
year to accompany a parliamentary delegation to Burundi and the Sudan, with
Mr Bapela and others.

Mr President, before that, I was very critical of your role in Africa. I
thought you were spending too much time there, and that you should spend
more time in South Africa. But then I saw the misery there, and I saw the
poverty - Burundi being the poorest country in the world - and the
bloodshed, and I saw all the misery there. Then I changed my view.
[Applause.]

After that, I felt, Mr President, that it is a good thing that you are
involved there, and South Africa, because we are alleviating the misery of
so many human beings there. I want you to strengthen our role there, and
see that their human rights and their lives are saved. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon President, I don’t know whether you need to say anything
about that?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, I only want to agree with the hon Koos
van der Merwe, and to say that I am sure that the delegation to which the
hon Koos van der Merwe refers, in its contacts with the ordinary people in
Burundi and Sudan, would also have heard this message from the ordinary
people of these countries – that they do expect South Africa to do
something to help them. That is a message that you would get around the
African continent. There is a great deal of confidence in this country, and
a great deal of hope that we can do something to assist with regard to the
resolution of the various problems.

I am quite sure that note one of our people who gets to hear that can, when
ordinary people say, “Please help”, turn around and walk away. So,
certainly, we will continue to do what we have to do and can do with regard
to assisting the rest of our continent, as we are assisting ourselves, to
overcome the problems that our continent is confronted with. Thanks, Madam
Speaker. [Applause.]

          Policy measures for regulation of political party funding

4.    Mrs P de Lille (ID) asked the President of the Republic:
      (1)   Whether any progress has been made regarding the formulation of
            policy measures that will regulate the funding of political
            parties; if not, why not; if so, (a) when will such policies be
            made known, (b) when can the implementation of these policies be
            expected and (c) through which institution will the funding of
            political parties be governed;

      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         N577E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the hon Patricia de Lille
asked a question about legislation that has to do with the funding of
political parties. She asked what progress we were making, if any, with
regard to the formulation of legislative measures. We are not formulating
any legislative measures, Madam Speaker. So, there is no process of that
kind that is taking place in government. But, I’m sure that we would all
agree that political parties indeed do need resources to do their work
effectively, because this is central to the strengthening of our democracy.

The Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act of 1997 provides a
regulatory framework for public funding of political parties represented in
legislatures. However, as we all know, private funding of political parties
is not regulated. My view with regard to this is that because the matter of
private funding affects all parties, Parliament is the appropriate forum
for political parties to discuss this matter. Therefore, in that context, I
would say, let Parliament indeed engage the issue and see what it is that
comes out of that process. I would say that the executive would most
certainly respect any recommendation that might come from Parliament with
regard to this issue, so that we have a collective view of the political
parties represented in Parliament as to how this matter should be handled.
Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Thank you, hon President, for the answer. You are correct,
Mr President. During the Idasa court case, the ANC told the court that the
matter of private funding should be dealt with by Parliament and not by the
courts. Now, two years later, Mr President, there is still no Bill before
Parliament. It does seem like the ANC deliberately misled the court and had
no intention of letting Parliament deal with the matter.

Given the recent scandals of Imvume and Brett Kebble, where both the ANC
and the DA benefited handsomely, and British Aerospace, and since South
Africa has ratified the African Union Convention on Preventing and
Combating Corruption of 2003 that requires the regulation of private
funding based on the principle of transparency that is in section 10 of the
convention, the question then is: Does the government recognise its
obligation under the AU convention and when is it going to meet this
obligation? Or has the government decided to abdicate its position of
leadership on the issue of corruption in Africa? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, obviously, the hon member
didn’t hear what I said. So, let me say it again. It’s our view, which is
what I tried to communicate, that indeed the government has absolutely no
objection to the approval of legislation dealing with this matter. We noted
the decisions that were made and the comments that were made by the judge
in the Idasa case that was heard in the Cape High Court. Indeed, the judge
said that it was not a matter to be resolved by the court but it was a
matter for Parliament to resolve, and therefore to formulate the necessary
legislation and not to ask the courts to legislate on the matter. We agreed
with that.

What I am saying is, here is an opportunity for our political parties that
are sitting here to discuss what in fact is a complex matter. Various
parties have made comments about this over the years. I even remember
comments being made by one of our parties that they are fearful of this
disclosure of private donors because if, for instance, it was companies
that were making these donations, as they do, some of them might indeed be
denied contracts by government because the ANC would be angry that such
companies gave these donations, and therefore we needed to be careful. I’m
saying it’s a complex matter and what I’m also saying is that it would be
very good if the leadership that sits here and in the NCOP engaged this
matter and said how we should address it. The executive would absolutely
respect the outcome of the processes that would come from our Parliament
with regard to this matter. So, let’s do that, hon De Lille. I think it
would be good if our political leadership that is sitting in this House did
that.

The hon De Lille made some reference to the ANC. The national chairperson
of the ANC sits in this House as a member. You might want to raise those
sorts of questions with him because I think that the hon member has been in
this House long enough to know that I have insisted on the fact that when I
stand here as the President of the Republic of South Africa, I don’t
represent political parties. So, you might want to ask the national
chairperson of the ANC. [Applause.] Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mr G R MORGAN: Mr President, there has been considerable attention in
recent weeks about the Progressive Business Forum, an initiative run by the
governing party, and the associated access that it provides its members to
briefings by certain members of the Cabinet. In the light of possible
conflicts of interest, I would like to ask you, Mr President, whether you
believe that it is appropriate for access to government Ministers to be
made available to certain sectors of the business community in exchange for
monetary contributions to the party to which those Ministers belong. If
not, why not? If so, how do you reach that conclusion? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the hon member will know that
the Minister of Science and Technology is the president of Azapo. I have
never ever asked him what he does as the leader of Azapo in terms of his
political work, and I wouldn’t. Indeed, I don’t ask members of the ANC who
serve in government what they are doing in the ANC. So, hon member,
whatever people who serve in government do as members of political parties,
it’s something that they do as members of political parties.

Then, with regard to the question about the Progressive Business Forum that
is run by the ANC that you mentioned, again, I would like to suggest that
you should ask the national chairperson of the ANC to stand here and answer
for the ANC about that. I am quite certain that he will be perfectly
competent to answer that question. [Applause.] Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, I hear what the President is saying. I fully
support and my party would fully support that all political parties need
funding. The question that I want to pose has to some extent been answered
in the last question. But, my concern is still this: As the President, do
you believe that it is right for any political party to benefit financially
by the services of any Cabinet member or any senior executive through
providing service to the community, the electorate, in the jobs that they
are paid to do, the jobs that they have been elected to do? Should any
political party be benefiting from that financially?
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I don’t know if I understand
the question at all, because I don’t think there is any Minister or Deputy
Minister who is ever put out for hire, to say that because they are
Ministers or Deputy Ministers, they are going to do this and a result they
should be paid as follows. I have no instance of that. I would be very glad
if the hon member could tell me which of these Ministers have hired
themselves out to anybody, because that would deserve expulsion from the
government. That’s not on.

What attracts funders to particular political parties so that they decide
to give support to them would be a whole variety of things. I know, for
instance, that the hon Dr Buthelezi is a very popular person. He is the
principal fundraiser of the IFP because the funders like him. [Laughter.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: It is defamatory per se. [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I mean, hon Seaton, I am quite sure that if
you approached me and said that the hon Dr Buthelezi was going to see me
for a fundraising drive for the IFP, because I like him I would give funds.
I would donate. [Laughter.] So, as I say, I really don’t know. Donors will
give donations to political parties because of what they think of the
particular parties. And if one particular party is very popular among
people who have got money, then it will get the necessary money. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

        Government’s role in tackling the challenge of climate change

5.    Mr B J Mnyandu (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:
   In light of the Government’s commitment to being part of multilateral
   solutions to the world’s global governance and security challenges, how
   is it tackling the challenge of climate change (a) domestically and (b)
   internationally?               N587E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I’m quite certain that all of
us agree that if countries around the world fail to curb the emissions of
harmful greenhouse gases, global climate change will indeed intensify and
the impact on sustainable development would be severe.

Amidst less greenhouse gases compared to other continents, scientists
indicate that Africa indeed would be one of the worst-affected regions of
the world and that the impact of climate change could drastically alter the
lives of millions of people. This has been reiterated in a report released
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change earlier this year,
concerning particularly the impact on the African continent.

Our view has been that these climate change issues need to be addressed
through partnerships. Internally among ourselves, we are determined to
ensure that all levels of government implement integrated plans on this
matter. Indeed we do need an inclusive and effective multilateral agreement
at the international level.
When the Kyoto Protocol was first crafted, it was seen as a critical first
step in the battle against climate change. However, progress within this
framework has been qualified, Madam Speaker. But today I think all of us
understand that the current Kyoto regime is not adequate to achieve a
future that is sustainable or equitable. The first commitment period of the
Kyoto Protocol, of course as the hon member knows, ends in 2012.

In considering a more effective climate regime beyond 2012, we understand
that all of us would have to do more, but on the basis of the agreed
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, as agreed
originally at the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992.

Equity in the climate regime requires all of us to acknowledge that
developed countries achieved economic progress through more than a century
of cumulative emissions, thereby building greater institutional,
technological and financial capacities and greater adaptive capacity.

The resulting risk of harm to the atmosphere and increasingly to the
climate may not have been knowingly undertaken. However, that risk is now
clearly defined and can no longer be disregarded or excused by appeals to
scientific uncertainty. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we do indeed understand
the urgency of the need to act and understand that the costs of doing
nothing about climate change far outweigh those of taking concrete
measures.

Given that the energy sector is the single largest source of emissions in
South Africa, our government’s current technological interventions are
aimed at efficient energy use, diversifying energy sources, research and
development of new technologies that promote clean and lower-carbon-content
energy sources. An important element of making our energy development more
sustainable is closing the price gap between carbon-intensive energy
systems and those that are more climate-friendly.

We also recognise that even if greenhouse gas concentrations in the
atmosphere are stabilised now, some impacts of climate change will be felt
for decades to come. And because of our vulnerability to these impacts,
which will be exacerbated by poverty, we are treating the implementation of
adaptation strategies as a top priority.

In this regard, there are a number of measures that have been taken by
government. At national level, the work done across the government and in
partnership with business and civil society is co-ordinated through the
National Committee on Climate Change, led by the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
In 2004 Cabinet approved the Climate Change Response Strategy. In terms of
that strategy, the national sector departments have done work to establish
their own sector strategies in order to ensure that the country can both
adapt to the impacts of climate change as well as reduce our own greenhouse
gas emissions.
As the hon member would also know well, Madam Speaker, a national climate
change policy conference was held in October 2005 at which all affected
national departments, provinces and municipalities committed themselves to
collaborating and integrating plans and programmes relating to climate
change.

The Departments of Science and Technology, Health, Agriculture and Land
Affairs, Water Affairs and Forestry, Minerals and Energy, as well as
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, have all done extensive work on climate
change, and this includes integrating into the departments’ programmes
those policies and measures that address the challenges of adapting to
climate change and reducing harmful emissions.

Let me stop there, according to the clock here. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mnu B J MNYANDU: Somlomo, Mongameli, ngibonga kakhulu ngempendulo
enohlonze. Nokho-ke Mongameli kubonakala sengathi kuningi okwenzekayo
ngasemkhakheni wenqubomgomo, uma sesiza kulolu daba oluphathelene
nokuguquka kwesimo sezulu futhi olusethusa ngokuthi umhlaba wonke ungase
ushabalale. Kodwa-ke, ngokubuka kwami, ngibona sengathi inselelo enkulu
kuyoba ilapho sesiza khona ekwenziweni kwezinto, esikubiza nge-practice.
Uma sekwenziwa izinto, kufuneka wonke umuntu, ocebile nompofu, omncane
nomdala, akwazi ukuyiqonda kahle inqubomgomo futhi enze njengalokhu
kufanele ukuze wonke umuntu nesintu sonkana sikwazi ukubhekana nale
ntshabalalo yokuguquka kwesimo sezulu.

Ngabe uMongameli wanelisekile yini ngasemkhakheni wokwenza ukuthi bonke
abantu babe nolwazi – uma sesisuka laphaya  kwinqubomgomo sesiza
ekwenziweni kwezinto ngempela – maqondana nokuthi wonke umuntu uyokwazi
yini ukuthi lokho akwenzayo akwenze azi kahle kamhlophe ukuthi ukwenzelani,
nokuthi iyiphi inselelo esibhekene nayo? Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr B J MNYANDU: Madam Speaker, Mr President, thank you very much for the
detailed answer. It is quite clear, Mr President that there is a lot
happening insofar as the policy on global warming is concerned. This issue
of global warming threatens to destroy the whole world. But as far as I am
concerned, the bigger challenge will only come when we implement things,
putting them into practice. When implementing things, everyone, rich and
poor, young and old, needs to understand the policy well and act
accordingly so that everybody, the entire human race, can face this
intensity of global warming.

Is the President satisfied with the level of  awareness amongst the people
in general – in case we come back from the policy conference and we want to
implement things here – because everyone would have to know what it is that
they would be doing and the reasons for doing it. And people would have to
know the challenge we are facing. Thank you.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I would say that I believe
that we do need to do more to raise the level of awareness in the country
about these challenges, understanding, of course, the complexity of the
issue, and therefore the impact that it would have on the communication
matter.

Kodwa-ke ngempela ngiyavuma nami ukuthi kufanele ukuthi senze okuthe xaxa
ukuze bakwazi ukufunda ukuthi uma sikhuluma ngokuguquka kwesimo sezulu
sisuke sikhuluma ngani. [I also really agree that we need to do more in
order for people to know what we are talking about if we talk of global
warming.]

Even in terms of their own behaviour, to the extent that whatever behaviour
they would be engaged in impacts on this thing ...

... kufuneka bazi ukuthi yini okufanele bayenze ukuze babhekene nalesi
simo. [... they need to know what it is that they must do in order to face
this situation.]

But, as I was indicating, hon member, the principal source of these
greenhouse gases in our country is our use of coal, with regard to the
generation of electricity. And therefore, these matters that relate to
energy and how we deal with the energy question in this country become very
important. Therefore, the development of technologies to deal with that
matter of how we reduce the emissions in terms of the power stations
becomes an important matter. That is the reason we were raising questions
about the diversification of energy sources and so on, work that is being
done in the various departments that relates to all of these things.

The matter of saving energy is important even in the context of the supply
of electricity, and we must push very hard to ensure that we use energy,
electricity, economically and not waste it. Even those reductions in terms
of the usage of electricity mean a reduction in the emission of those
greenhouse gases. But certainly, yes, it is important, I think, that we
should do more to familiarise the country with what is meant by all of this
and what needs to be done. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, hon President, in spite of what you are
saying – and we commend you for the increased interest in renewables and
reducing global warming – there is still a sense out there amongst the
people in the energy industry that South Africa is protecting Eskom. Our
targets for renewable energy are still very low. For example, the White
Paper suggests that we should provide 4%, and that’s only 100 000 gigawatt
hours of energy by 2014.

One would like to hear that the government is taking more initiative, as is
the case with a country such as Brazil, in which there are tax breaks for
industries that set up renewable energy factories. There is a great deal
more money spent on renewable energy: solar energy and wind energy in RND
research and development.

There are incentives to individuals who provide their own renewable energy
to the grid and they get a fixed feed in tariff. All of these, and many
others, are incentives that must come from government. But questions
addressed to the Minister of Finance in the past have suggested that
government is not willing to take the lead in providing tax incentives for
the development of renewable energy. There is still the feeling that
government’s thinking is along the lines of coal and oil.

Is there not somewhere where we can hear reassuringly from you that there
is going to be greater investment in government initiatives to solve the
energy crisis? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I’m sure the hon member is
aware of the electricity-generation regime in this country and the
dependence on coal with regard to the bulk of that electricity-generation.
And I’m sure she’s also perfectly aware of the plans that have been
announced, particularly by the Minister of Public Enterprises, with regard
to the further building up of the infrastructure to address this particular
challenge of electricity, of power.

Indeed, some of the new power stations that are part of that programme will
rely on coal. This is reality. That is the reason I am saying that for us
as a country seriously, critically to address this matter of greenhouse gas
emissions from here, we have to focus on the matter of the emission of the
greenhouse gases in the process of the generation of electricity.

The hon member would know, therefore, that in that context, for instance,
some of the power stations that are being built would be gas-fired in order
to help address this matter. But centrally, to impact on this matter is to
focus on this issue of dealing with the emissions that come from the coal-
fired power stations.

Now, the hon Deputy President has just reminded us that we are also dealing
with this question of more generation through new nuclear power stations.
All of these things, gas, nuclear power and so on, focus on this.

The Departments of Science and Technology and Minerals and Energy had quite
a big programme with the Johannesburg University to deal with solar energy.
Indeed, that particular programme has gone very well, and I know that there
are discussions that have been taking place between that university and the
government departments with regard to what has been developed with regard
to solar energy. Indeed, I saw a demonstration of this, and it was said
that the technology that has been developed is a number of times cheaper
than existing technology with regard to the use of solar energy. So work is
being done on this.

I think that if we understand objectively what is happening in South
Africa, the critical matter is indeed this matter of addressing the real
source of greenhouse gases in our country, and we know what that source is.
Therefore, what we should do is to put more money in terms of ensuring that
we develop this technology to make these emissions from the power stations
cleaner. That’s the critically important thing.

Work will go on with regard to this other matter of renewable sources. As I
was saying, there is this particular project, which in fact has been
completed, with regard to dealing with solar energy, which was handled
jointly between the government and the University of Johannesburg. I’m told
that that technology is already in the production stage, but it was to
address this. So I wouldn’t agree that we are dragging our feet with regard
to this matter, because we are indeed concerned about the fact that we are
one of the large emitters of greenhouse gases in the world. But we need the
electricity, and therefore we’ve got to do something about dealing with
those emissions. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Mr President, planning for ecological security
is a major part of promoting national security. As a matter of fact, South
Africa has an unsustainable ecological footprint. Whilst we may have
formulated some very progressive environmental legislation and policies and
may have developed some good plans and put in place measures, as you said,
in response to the challenges posed by climate change, what government
seems to clearly lack is the political will and capacity to implement and
monitor all this wonderful environmental legislation.

My question to you, Mr President, is: What do you intend doing to address
the lack of capacity in the national departments responsible for dealing
with the challenges of climate change in order to enable these relevant
departments to deal with the issues around climate change? Furthermore, the
human resources and the financial resources dedicated to these tasks seem
to be quite inadequate. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I would be pleased if the hon
member could give me information about all these things that he is
indicating. From what I know, in terms of what is happening with regard to
this matter, I do think that indeed a great deal of work is being done in
the various departments. I can tell the hon member what’s being done at
Minerals and Energy, Science and Technology, Water Affairs, Agriculture and
Land Affairs and so on, about these matters.

If the hon member has information that indicates that there might be lack
of capacity somewhere or that things are not being done, indeed I would
really like to see that information because I’m sure it would help us to
then beef up to address whatever shortfall might have been identified with
regard to this.

I don’t know about lack of political will and how one measures that, but I
can detail what is happening with regard to this matter in a whole range of
departments. If the hon member has information that might help us to
improve our performance, I would indeed be very pleased to look at it so
that we can then act on that matter. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mr C H F GREYLING: Madam Speaker, hon President, as a young South African
... [Interjections.] ... my party and I are very concerned about the issue
of climate change. We are also very aware of the difficult task that South
Africa faces in meeting our energy and development needs, while at the same
time reducing our greenhouse gas emissions. We cannot shirk our
responsibility, however, particularly as we are the 14th largest emitter in
the world and one of the most energy-intensive in the world.

This is going to call for an integrated and progressive approach from all
government departments, but so far we have only really seen action from the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, with other government
Ministries not showing a similar commitment in terms of action and money.

For instance, we haven’t seen any progressive reports from other government
departments relating to the conference that you mentioned that took place
in 2005.

The other issue, though, hon President, relates to the cutting edge Peewee
technology that you mentioned that was produced by the University of
Johannesburg. Why is it that South Africa did not invest the R500 million
to build a factory to produce that cutting-edge technology, but instead
allowed Germany to do so?

Hon President, are you prepared to commit South Africa to the renewable
energy revolution that is taking place in the world and to put substantial
amounts of money behind it instead of the paltry sum that is currently
going towards renewable energy development in South Africa? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, what we might want to do is
indeed to ask the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to give a
report here about what’s happening. The hon Greyling says that the only one
he sees of the departments is the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism. The ones that are out of sight are doing nothing. I think that’s a
wrong conclusion.

Perhaps the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk might want to come and give a
comprehensive report as to what government is doing and give more
information about what is actually happening. [Interjections.] It will not
be a short report, I can assure you that.

I said that there were discussions that have been taking place,
particularly between the Departments of Science and Technology and Minerals
and Energy, and the University of Johannesburg about the technology that
they had developed. I wouldn’t want, hon member, to jump to any conclusions
about this matter as to why production went to Germany. I do not know who
told you the reason that you have just given as to how that happened. I
wouldn’t want to jump to that conclusion as easily as you have. That is the
reason, in fact, there was a need for that discussion, because this was co-
financed by government. So there’s no point at which the government took a
decision that it would not invest in the production capacity to use that
technology; there’s no such thing.

But, clearly, you have some information that we refused to build a plant
for R500 million, and that is the first time I heard of that. But, as I
say, there were discussions going on about this because the matter of the
actual development and progression of the technology to the production
stage so that indeed it becomes available, was indeed very central to the
government’s thinking about this matter.

So, again, let me say, hon member, that I know the general focus on the
matter of renewable sources of energy, which is important, but I am saying
that centrally and critically for us in this country, we need power,
electricity.

We’ve got all these plans that have been announced to increase our
generating capacity, and inevitably we are going to have to depend in part
on coal. Indeed, as I was saying, we need nuclear, gas and biofuels, but
centrally, where do these greenhouse gas emissions come from? They come
from these power stations that are coal-fired. And indeed, precisely
because we are concerned about that, our central focus has got to be on
that.

Even if we said that we were going to produce 4% of our energy from
renewable sources by year such and such, we’d still have the problem of the
96%. That’s where we’ve got to focus.

If I were to get agitated about anything, I’d get agitated about the 96%,
not the 4%. I think that would make a bit more sense. Thanks, Madam
Speaker.

      Measures by Government to create an inclusive information society

6.    Mr S L Dithebe (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      What measures are being taken by the government to create an inclusive
      information society that contributes to building a better life for
      all?                                         N588E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, as you know, the hon member’s
question is about the information society. If I may, Madam Speaker, let me
start by answering a question that the hon member didn’t ask, which is:
What is the information society? In answer to that question, I will read
what the World Summit on the Information Society said. I believe it is
important, Madam Speaker, to understand what it is that has to be done and
is being done with regard to this.

The World Summit on the Information Society said:


  The digital revolution in information and communication technologies has
  created the platform for a free flow of information, ideas and knowledge
  across the globe. This revolution has made a profound impression on the
  way the world functions. The Internet has become an important global
  resource, a resource that is critical to both the developed world as a
  business and social tool and the developing world as a passport to
  equitable participation, as well as economic, social and educational
  development.

It went on to say:


  The purpose of the World Summit on the Information Society is to ensure
  that these benefits are accessible to all while promoting specific
  advantages in areas such as e-strategies, e-commerce, e-governance, e-
  health, education, literacy, cultural diversity, gender equality,
  sustainable development and environmental protection. At the WSIS meeting
  in Geneva in December 2003, world leaders declared “our common desire and
  commitment to build a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented
  information society, where everyone can create, access, utilize and share
  information and knowledge, enabling individuals, communities and peoples
  to achieve their full potential in promoting their sustainable
  development and improving their quality of life, premised on the purposes
  and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and respecting fully
  and upholding the Universal Declaration of Human Rights”.

So, this is the information society. Therefore, to build this inclusive
information society that the World Summit talked about, first of all, of
course, first and foremost you need the necessary infrastructure as well as
enabling policy and regulatory and institutional mechanisms. These, as hon
members are aware, have been put in place. I’m particularly talking about
the policies and the regulatory framework that have been put in place that
include the laws that have been passed by this House.

We continue to address this matter of the infrastructure that is very, very
necessary for the creation of that information society which must
contribute to meeting the challenges of a better life for all. And that
infrastructure process includes, of course, the launch of the second
national operator, Neotel, which will undoubtedly bring competition and
help to address this issue of high costs of telecommunications, which is
one of the blockages in terms of the further expansion of that information
society.

Further, Madam Speaker, the long-distance fixed services network currently
owned by Eskom and Transnet will be transferred to a new infrastructure
company as an effort to promote accessibility to and lowering the costs of
telecommunications. The immediate capital investment in this regard is
being undertaken to provide infrastructure which will also support Neotel.

In addition, Madam Speaker, the Broadband Infrastructure Company Bill,
which Cabinet approved last week, will be tabled in Parliament during this
session.

We have also made progress within the area of international connectivity.
As hon members may know, one of the contributory factors to high
telecommunication costs, and therefore slow blockages to the construction
of that information society, is our reliance on limited access to
international connectivity. Because of this limited broadband capacity, we
therefore have decided to expand our access to under sea cables.

We are currently involved in the process of completing processes that will
lead to the building of the Nepad ICT Broadband Infrastructure Network with
12 other countries that are signatories to the protocol related to this
matter. Collaboration among several countries in the region on this unique
project and its common and equal ownership by many African companies
constitute an important element of Nepad. A cable is due to be operational
in late 2008 or early 2009 and the protocol itself will soon be brought to
Parliament for ratification.

The clock says I have run out of time, Madam Speaker.

Mr S L DITHEBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Comrade President, as you’ve
indicated clearly in your response, the area of information and
communication technologies is indeed a very wide one. However, let me also
ask a follow-up question based on the issues that you have not covered in
your response that relate to the open source software movement. There are
countries such as Brazil and others in the developing world that have begun
to embrace the open source software route so as to enable easy access by
ordinary people of information based obviously on the existing
infrastructure. My question, Comrade President, is whether government is
pondering the possibility of formally introducing open source software in
government departments and other areas of life so that we do not benefit
only on the existence of the infrastructure that you have referred to and
that which we have yet to put in place but that, in fact, with the aid of
this open source software more people can access the information they need.
Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, certainly, Madam Speaker, we have
discussed the matter and in fact have agreed on it, precisely as the hon
member indicates - the need for us to access and to use that open source
software. So, it’s a matter that is decided already, precisely in the
directions that you indicate.

But if I may, Madam Speaker, continue a little bit with what I was saying
earlier with regard to the infrastructure, it is important for us to have
all of that open source software and so on. If we don’t have the physical
infrastructure to do this communication, then of course it doesn’t serve
any purpose. I would want to say that given our bid for the square
kilometre array, together with other deep space activities that are taking
place in our country, we have decided to build the high capacity submarine
cable on the West Coast. This will make a major, major impact in terms of
the physical capacity and therefore the possibility of further developing
that information society.

In connection with that infrastructure thing, the Minister of
Communications declared last year that the Post Office would be used by the
public to access this ICT infrastructure, and therefore this entails the
modernisation of the Post Office infrastructure to increase the number of
outlets as well as to ensure that the Post Office facilitates the
provision, the use, the applications in terms of the use of the technology
with regard to access to government services and so on.

We have also taken other decisions, which are very important with regard to
this, which relate to the issue of digital migration. Therefore, there is a
process that is taking place to move from analogue technology to digital
technology, which, as hon members would be aware, is also critically
important with regard to these matters of access and the usage of this
information and communication technology. That, of course, would include a
similar migration that is taking place at the SABC.

Other projects relate to this - and that includes the use of open source
software technology that the hon member mentioned – but in the end what it
amounts to is that indeed we are in the process of building the
infrastructure that we need. We have the policies and we have the
regulatory framework to deal with these things. Of critical importance is
that we have to build up its physical capacity and then deal with the
matter of the applications with regard to this. One of the challenges, for
instance, is a schools access to ICT that is very much part of this
information society. It is in fact still the minority of schools in our
country that have computers. In many instances where they do not have
computers it is because they don’t have electricity. So, where you have it,
you can see the impact that it makes in teaching, learning, school
administration with that kind of access. But that critically depends on our
being able to meet the infrastructure requirements, whether it has to do
with electricity or the availability of computers. Thank you very much,
Madam Speaker.

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, indeed the global
village enriches our lives, but it also carries some challenges with it.
I’m concerned that English is almost the most favoured language on the
Internet. How do we ensure the preservation and protection of our
indigenous languages used by our most vulnerable citizens? How do we ensure
that the media does not become an avenue for the proliferation of child
pornography? How do we protect the most vulnerable, our children?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I am going to appeal to the
Minister of Communications to come to my aid with regard to some of these
questions that have become very technical. I’m sure, hon member, you have
seen the Google Search engine. Of course, one of the things about it is
that in terms of access it has English, Afrikaans, Zulu, Sepedi and so on.
So, if you don’t know English and you speak Sepedi, you can access the
Internet because Google is there. This is a challenge that really faces us
as a country – to develop the content ourselves that then goes into the
Internet is our responsibility. It gives us the capacity, as the hon member
says, of this digital revolution, and all this information and
communication technology gives us the possibility in our own languages to
ensure that our own cultures survive.

But we have to address the content issues ourselves. And we can. We can say
that perhaps we are not paying sufficient attention to this matter. I know
for instance of work that is being done at the CSIR to address this
particular issue. So, there is work going on so that indeed we then don’t
get overwhelmed by other cultures and languages and so on that indeed might
be very dominant in terms of the Internet.

The question - that’s why I was appealing to the Minister of Communications
- with regard to how you deal with issues of the propagation of pornography
and so on in the Internet, is a global problem. It’s a global challenge.
Surely, we have to be concerned about it and, I think, there have been
instances in this country where I have seen reports of young schoolchildren
who have had access to pornographic material. Quite how you block it and
how you deal with this, seeing it’s a global problem, is a problem.
Technically, I don’t know how you do it, but that we have to address; it is
obviously a matter that we can’t ignore.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Speaker, the President and I still have to learn
how to surf the network. But I can understand that the President is doing
better than me.

Madam Speaker, we have seen what Mr Mark Shuttleworth and other South
Africans have achieved by being knowledgeable on using the network and
developing the network. We have also noticed over the past few weeks what
happens if people do not know and have not been retrained to use the
network with eNatis, where our licensing departments are failing to hand
out licences. My question is: Has the President received any report on his
table from the department or from the Minister of Science and Technology
and the Minister of Communications as to how to retrain our people, or to
train our people, to make better use of the networks and to understand
what’s going on there?

If one looks at what is happening in Sweden – our Parliamentary Technical
Committee has just returned from Sweden – one finds that
2 500 PhDs are surfing the network daily. Now, if that is the level of
intelligent people using the network in one nation, then South Africa and
smaller nations lag enormously behind that. We know that India and China
are also coming onto the network. So, the network is going to be extremely
crammed. For that reason, small nations like ourselves should become
acquainted with how to use it effectively and efficiently. My question is:
Has there been a report on training and retraining our people to use the
network as it is and to get onto that network?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, Madam Speaker, the hon member is
correct with regard to the issue of the need for us to empower as many of
our people as possible to know how to use this technology and how to access
the Internet. The hon member is quite correct. I should have said with
regard to the matter that was raised earlier, the open source technology,
that we are working with Mark Shuttleworth on this thing. He has done an
enormous amount of work on this issue. He is very much part of the people
who are engaged with the government with regard to this issue.

The Cabinet recently looked at this matter that the hon member is raising,
about skill with regard to this matter of access to the Internet and all of
that. We looked at work that is being done across government with regard to
these various levels of skills, and indeed we have taken a decision that
quite soon the Deputy President will make a presentation to the Cabinet on
this matter of the skills training at various levels, so that we have a
more consolidated picture of what is being done, because things are being
done with regard to the matter of training.

Therefore, we’ve discussed this issue and we will get the report, which
will indicate to us what we need to do next. This is related also to the
matter that the hon member knows of, that one of the areas in terms of the
economy that we thought we should focus on is this business process
outsourcing, which needs people who know how to use this technology. So, as
I’m saying, that question is related to that. You need to train people up
to a certain level with regard to that. But beyond that, you need to train
people at other levels, including people like the PhDs in Sweden. So, there
is indeed a focused programme where we are attending to this and we will
look, as Cabinet, at the question in a comprehensive way, once the Deputy
President submits that report. It is indeed work in progress. Thank you,
Madam Speaker.

Mr V C GORE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon President, we would like to
thank you for your very informative answer, as well as for reminding this
House of the definition of what an information society is, so that we can
understand what has been done or what is being done, so that we can
understand what must be done.

The ID believes that one of the challenges in creating an inclusive
information society is around, as you’ve identified, connecting
marginalised communities, whether those communities are rural communities,
poor communities or, in some instances, disabled communities. We would also
like to suggest that it is not only the infrastructure but the content that
we provide over the infrastructure to get to those marginalised communities
- in other words, hon President, bridging the digital divide in South
Africa.

You’ve quite correctly identified that some of the platforms are in place,
such as the Act, such as the policy, such as Infraco, Neotel and Telkom.
But I think you are perhaps a little modest in leaving out the Presidential
International Advisory Council on Information Society and Development. That
is a very important mechanism in developing policy.

But despite all these platforms and policies and initiatives, we still lag
very badly behind. Only 7% of our population has access to PCs, less than
3% of our population has access to the Internet and we have fewer than 900
000 broadband connections.

We have a long way to go, hon President. In other words, we have the
framework in place, we have the theory in place, but how do we translate
that into action? How do we roll out infrastructure and content to these
marginalised communities, in particular poor communities and rural
communities? How do we encourage the incumbents such as Telkom, Neotel and
Infraco to roll out infrastructure and content to these rural communities?
How do we encourage or force small companies and entrepreneurs to start
their businesses in these areas so that they can deliver services to these
marginalised communities? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the hon member is perfectly
correct. It’s an important thing he has pointed to about the reality of the
limited numbers of people in our country who have access to this
technology. He’s therefore correct to say that we have a long way to go
with regard to meeting this need. That’s why I quoted the example of
schools, precisely to make the same point.

Madam Speaker, I’ve already spoken about the various elements of that. Even
the broadband capacity in the country is not sufficient for what we need,
which is why we are moving with regard to all of these matters. For
instance, I mentioned the Transnet and Eskom cables coming into this
Infraco as a part of addressing that, the new cables on the East Coast and
the West Coast to help address this particular matter. With regard to
access, you need the computers to be there at all of these particular
points. With regard to the totality of that, for instance, we have
decisions with regard to ensuring Internet access at schools, clinics and
so on. Indeed, we want to work as quickly as possible to do that. But
having put a computer in a clinic, you must be able to connect it. So,
there must be electricity in the clinic. So, there is indeed a programme
that seeks to address all of those matters.

The hon member would know also of the discussions that we had with the
Minister of Communications and Telkom, which had to do with the matter of
costs. Part of the reason for these low numbers that the hon member has
quoted, correctly, is the high cost of the system. So, if you don’t have
the money, you won’t be able to have this access. We have to reduce the
costs.

So, yes, indeed, hon member, I agree with you that we have a long way to go
and it is necessary to make these various interventions, some of which you
mentioned, to make sure that we do indeed get that, because we are starting
from a low base. But I think with the programmes that we have and the
investments that we are determined to make, it should be possible. The
Minister of Finance was at MIT in the United States in recent weeks. The
reason he went there was because we were talking to people at MIT who are
developing a very affordable computer. They conceived of it as a $100
computer, which could then go into the schools en masse. The people at MIT
are already doing some work on the African continent, and the reason we
went there was to invite them to come here so that we can have these very
good but affordable computers to be spread out in their thousands, for
instance in our school system.

So, all of this is work in progress and certainly focused on achieving the
objectives that the hon member mentions, of ensuring broader access by as
many of our people as possible to this technology. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Order! That concludes questions to the President, and we thank
the hon President. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: On a point of order, Madam Speaker: There is a problem in
the Rules of the House or the Constitution on the issue of ...
[Interjections.]
The SPEAKER: Order, hon member! Under what point on the Order Paper are you
raising that point?

Mr H P CHAUKE: It is on the issue of the national chairperson of the
largest opposition party, his role and position in the House. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: No, hon member! Please.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the DA:

  That the House –


   (1)      debates the failure of leadership demonstrated by the Premier of
         the Western Cape and the MEC for Local Government and Housing in
         the province, who led a march on 16 March 2007 to demand that the
         multiparty government of the City of Cape Town stop implementing
         effective credit control measures, as is required in terms of the
         Municipal Systems Act of 2000; and
   (2)      considers the implications for service delivery when government
         Ministers encourage ratepayers to stop paying for the services that
         they use.

[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, of course, as you are aware, those are issues that
reside with the provincial and local government competencies. For you to
raise those issues in this House is really unfair, to say the least.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the DA:


  That this House –


   (1)      debates the educational crisis at Khutsong, where children have
         not been receiving tuition for more than three months;


   (2)      notes that this crisis is caused by the ANC government with its
         new system of forced removals; and


   (3)      further notes that only the government can resolve this matter.

Thank you.
Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving on
behalf of the DA:

  That the House requests the hon Minister of Defence, in his capacity as
  chairperson of the ANC, to carry out the recommendation of President
  Mbeki, announced during question time on 17 May 2007, to brief this House
  on the fundraising initiatives of the Progressive Business Forum and the
  associated access to Ministers that the forum provides its members.

[Interjections.]

The House adjourned at 16:04.

