---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 November 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-11-08
---

THURSDAY 8 NOVEMBER 2007
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


                                    ____





The House met at 14:02.


The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The SPEAKER: Order! The only item on today’s Order Paper is questions
addressed to the President. Question 17 has been asked by the hon Tsenoli,
and I call upon the hon the President. [Applause.]

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I have that question as
question 19. I don’t know whether I should answer it. You called it number
17.

The SPEAKER: That question according to the “bottle” is number 19.
     Progress made by government regarding Sustainable Rural Development
                    Programme and Urban Renewal Programme

19.   Mr S L Tsenoli (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      What progress has the Government made in the past six years regarding
      the (a) Sustainable Rural Development Programme and (b) Urban Renewal
      Programme?                                         N53ENG

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, that’s much better. So we are talking
about the same thing. With regard to this question relating to sustainable
rural development and the urban renewal programme, when we announced these
programmes in 2001, government committed itself to focus its support for a
period of 10 years on the 8 urban and 13 rural nodes in an effort to
address the neglect of the past, so as to bring a better life to our
people.

At the time of the announcement of the two programmes, the local government
system as we know it today was only two months old. It was anticipated that
the challenge for the next 10 years would be to get the three spheres of
government to work together in a coherent manner, to use their combined
resources to make a visible difference in the lives of both the rural and
poor.

This requires special interventions with regard to resource allocations and
support, while ensuring integration, co-ordination and sustainability of
the programmes. Indeed, we have made progress with regard to both the
integrated and sustainable rural development and the urban renewal
programme.

In terms of intergovernmental co-operation, these urban and rural nodes are
the sites where many national and provincial sector governments received
their first experience of what it means to support local government. These
have now used those experiences they gained in the nodes to improve the way
in which they support local government in general.

In terms of delivery of basic services, good results have indeed been
achieved. I can site many of these – the Kalahari district, Ugu in KwaZulu-
Natal, O R Tambo, Alexandra Township, Chris Hani and Bushbuckridge. Let me
just say about Bushbuckridge, just as an example, that today 74 000
households now have access to clean water and 12 000 households which have
water meters now receive free basic water.

Rural villages where no reticulation systems are in place receive free
basic water, extracted from boreholes and delivered by means of water
trucks on a daily basis. Diesel and electricity are supplied free of charge
to communities to pump the water from the boreholes. Free basic electricity
is currently supplied to 64 000 households, while a further 1 200
households make use of alternative energy such as solar power.
At the same time, access to land and the slow rate of the resolution of
land claims has continuously been a problem in all the nodes. This has a
negative effect on the pace of both social and economic development. Even
where development has taken place, the looming land claims hinder further
development and progress. The Mbizana local municipality, for example,
indicates that the town is subject to land claims, making it difficult for
them to develop further.

Successes have not only been in terms of basic services, but in some of the
nodes, especially the urban townships, the co-ordinated presence of the
whole of government has succeeded in building a platform for the first
significant private sector investment in large townships in almost 20
years. The approach we followed was to cluster public sector investment in
the nodes.

This resulted in the creation of government public services nodes in these
townships with different sector departments investing together in new
facilities close to communities, as well as resulting in attracting the
first new private sector investment in these townships; and I have said, in
last 20 years.

Examples of these you can find in Khayelitsha CBD; public services; retail;
public transport interchange; and recreational facilities in KwaMashu town
centre; the Bridge City – Inanda, which is currently
under construction; and in the Pan-African Square development in Alexandra
township - also currently under construction.
The neighbourhood development partnership grant, which we announced in
2006, builds on these early successes and will allow us to significantly
accelerate the pace of development in townships across the country. It is
also clear that these achievements that have focused on improving the
quality of life in the nodes cannot be sustained without giving attention
to this particular matter of economic activity.

In July this year we launched the Thembokwezi Development in the
Khayelitsha urban node. This development is the product of a partnership
between the three spheres of government and Old Mutual. This impressive
development seeks to establish an attractive residential and commercial
precinct centrally located in the medium and high-density area of Site C in
Khayelitsha, and will incorporate core social needs of the community as
well as a viable and sustainable commercial development.

When completed, the development will comprise 564 middle-income housing
units, 15 000 square metres of retail space, 5 000 square meters of office
space, and 5 000 square metres of maintained public open space. Of greatest
significance with this R350 million development is the fact that a
determination has been made that there is sufficient economic capacity in
this urban poverty node to sustain such a development. Further, an
undertaking has been made to source the majority of the labour required
during the construction period, as well as beyond, from within the same
node. There are other examples that I can or maybe will give, but that is
certainly our first response. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, the response you
have given points to important progress. Would you agree, sir, that we
could improve the quality by pooling especially public sector resources to
speed up the kind of progress that you have already referred to?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, certainly, hon member, a matter that we
have been trying to tackle from the very beginning of
these programmes is the need to ensure an integrated approach by all
spheres of government, and within each sphere, all departments, to act
together to pool the resources in that way. Therefore, to ensure that as
departments plan their work on a yearly, or three-yearly basis or whatever,
the plans they put in place must relate to those of other spheres and other
departments and sectors in government, so that all of these things are co-
ordinated.

It is a complex process and we earlier agreed on a protocol that would
govern this particular matter. The intergovernmental relations framework
legislation also assists in this regard, but I would indeed agree with you
that we probably need to do more work to achieve the outcome of a co-
ordinated response by all these spheres of government. I thank you.

Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the hon President. The concept
of this programme is a very good one. There was progress,
especially in the urban areas, but as the portfolio committee we visited
number of rural nodes where the progress is only on paper. I want to take
Sekhukhune district as an example, where despite promises, after six years,
people are still without running water and electricity in some villages.
When will this programme start to deliver in these areas? I thank you, hon
President. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I would agree with the hon
member. He said so himself - that you will go some villages in Sekhukhune
and find that there is no electricity. That statement also means that you
will go to some villages in Sekhukhune and find that they do have
electricity. [Applause.]

It is quite correct that indeed we cannot say that we have responded to all
of the service needs in these nodes, as indeed elsewhere in the country.
There is work that needs to be done, but the fact that there is more work
that needs to be done does not mean that no work has been done.

I am very glad that the portfolio committee visits these nodes and makes
the observations it does. I would be very happy, indeed, if the committee
could feed into government, its own observations, as to what we need to do
with regard to this. I don’t think we can proceed from the position that
nothing has been done. We can say that about the nodes as with the rest of
our country, whether in the nodes or outside of the nodes, that more needs
to be done. On that we would agree, absolutely and entirely. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Thank you, hon President. I here what you are saying and I
agree that a great deal has been done. I come from Ugu and I have seen what
has been done. Alexandra township is an area where one can see that a lot
has been done. Despite the fact that you said that a lot has been done in
some places and not in others, there is also a tremendous amount not having
been done at all. There are areas that have not really been tackled at all.
Hon President, at what stage will all the nodes be worked in the way those
at Alexandra and Ugu are? We would like to know, when will that progress be
seen?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I would imagine that all of
us here can understand that, given the problems that we are trying to
address, we are not going to get 100% results overnight. I would imagine
that we all accept that. With regard to the question that the hon Seaton
has just asked, part of the problem relates to the matter that the hon
Tsenoli raised.

You would have to look at, for instance, the capacity of the government
structures in particular areas. Take Alexandra township, for instance. Part
of the reason that it has made the progress that it has, is because it is
situated in Gauteng and near Johannesburg. Therefore, it has the benefit of
the Johannesburg Metro and the Gauteng provincial government. These are
very important material factors in terms of making an impact with regard to
this.

You may very well get to another part of the country, Ugu or Kalagadi or
whatever, and find that the structures of government over there don’t have
the same capacity. That is the actuality of the situation that you have to
deal with, whereas Johannesburg Metro would have better capacity to impact
on development in the Alexandra township.

It may very well be that another municipality wouldn’t have the same
capacity to impact on the node that falls within that municipality. I
wouldn’t imagine that you can answer that question in a general way. You
can say: How do we accelerate progress in Ugu? What has made it impossible
for us to move faster in Ugu? Then we can look at that and say, what are
the factors that would impact on Ugu  but not on Khayelitsha? They won’t
impact on Alexandra township, KwaMashu or Inanda. [Interjections.]

Indeed, yes. So, I am saying, hon Seaton, we will have to look at the
question differently and make it specific to each locality because that’s
what would impact on the rate, speed and the pace of development in each of
these localities. I hope the hon Seaton agrees. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Speaker and Mr President, I have a report here about
the nodes, especially in the rural areas. The achievements that are claimed
are about the students in the school, the increase in social grants, access
to water, and so on. Those are also the things that you have alluded to.
But, Mr President, what we really need is sustainable economic development
in these areas, and especially in the rural areas. That is not forthcoming.


The second problem is that not all the departments seem to have bought into
delivering those services to the people that they should. That was one of
the main aims of these two programmes – that all departments should work
together to address the backlog. Will you agree with me that we need
economic development in these areas, and not only basic services?
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, indeed, absolutely. The hon member is
perfectly correct. We do need that. Indeed this is a central part of these
two programmes – local economic development. That is why I cited just the
one example of Khayelitsha in this regard.

There are other examples that we can give with regard to this. For
instance, Maruleng and the Bushbuckridge rural nodes. A particular economic
development programme has been set up there, with finances committed to
investment in agriculture, agri-processing and tourism. Some jobs have been
created. Support has been given to small, medium and micro enterprises, or
SMMEs. But I would agree very much with the hon member with regard to this.


In that context, I must say that as we do the municipal izimbizo - this is
indeed one of the areas on which we focus on, because in many instances you
find that the local councils do not have the capacity to elaborate
meaningful local economic development programmes. They don’t have it. Many
of them hire consultants to work out a local economic development programme
for their locality. These consultants them come and dream up all sorts of
marvellous things that are completely impracticable. But that is because of
a lack of capacity in the municipality to do this.

So, this is one of the matters that we try to attend to. With regard to
this we need better co-ordination between the Departments for Provincial
and Local Government and of Trade and Industry, to be able to lend the
capacity to these localities, to be able to elaborate on these economic
development programmes. That is one of the problems.

In the end you have something which is presented as a local economic
development, LED, programme, but which actually has no meaning. As a
consequence, you can’t commit any resources to it. You have to go back to
the beginning, and say what is real and possible.

The hon member would also have noticed that I mentioned a problem that has
still not been solved – the resolution of the issue of land claims. It
affects many rural areas. There can be a great deal of uncertainty as to
what is going to happen to a particular piece of land. As a consequence, of
course, whoever might have wanted to invest doesn’t, because they don’t
know what is going to happen tomorrow. But I fully agree with you, hon
member, that central to the success of these programmes must be the
economic development in these areas so as to produce development that
creates jobs and all of that.

In the meantime, we have to attend to the matter of ensuring that the poor
in these areas - and one of the criteria that we have chosen was precisely
the level of poverty - that the poorest in these areas receive this support
by way of grants, this, that and the other, because they are poor. It is an
important intervention, although it is not enough.

As the hon member is saying, we need to act on the issue of ensuring local
economic development. I thank you.

 South Africa’s role in upholding peace accord in Democratic Republic of the
                                    Congo

20.   Mr P H K Ditshetelo (UCDP) asked the President of the Republic:

      Whether South Africa can play a role to keep the peace accord in the
      Democratic Republic of the Congo from collapsing, in view of the
      current conflicts; if not, why not; if so, what role?

                  N57ENG

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, not so long ago, all of us
joined the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in celebrating
the achievement of peace, holding of elections and the establishment of a
government after many decades – a government based on the will of the
people. Indeed, immediately after that, one of the central tasks became the
consolidation of and the defence of peace, and therefore the creation of
the conditions necessary for the reconstruction of the country. As a
government and as a country, we have indeed made a commitment to assist the
DRC with regard to all of these matters.

Co-operation between us and the government of the DRC is governed by a
general co-operation agreement, whose aim is to provide a broad framework
for the promotion of political, social, economic and security co-operation
between our countries. In the context of that agreement, we also undertook
to render assistance in the DRC in the areas of politics and governance;
defence and security; economy, finance and infrastructure; and social and
humanitarian affairs.

Many of our departments are involved in a whole range of projects in the
DRC, intended to achieve these goals. We are engaged in a programme of
helping the DRC to develop the necessary capacity to defend itself, to
strengthen peace and security in the country and to consolidate democracy.
In this regard, we have concluded a memorandum of understanding with the
DRC, in terms of which a South African detachment assisting with
integration and training has been assigned the task of assisting the armed
forces of the DRC with integration, demobilisation and training of former
combatants. We are also assisting in the training of units of the national
police force, the Police Nationale Congolaise.

Related to this is the work we are doing on security sector reform, the
primary purpose of which is the translation of political control over the
security mechanisms. This entails, among other things, the entrenchment of
civilian-military relations and the rightsizing, capacitating and
improvement of the level of skills and professionalism of the Congolese
security forces.

In addition, we are party to a tripartite agreement between the DRC,
Belgium and ourselves in terms of which we trained brigades that have been
integrated into the DRC national army. At the recent meeting of the
binational commission, we identified the development of a rapid reaction
force and the establishment of about 33 battalions as another crucial
element of help that we should provide to the DRC national army. South
Africa has been assigned the task of training 3 of the 33 battalions
immediately. The rapid reaction force would be used among other things to
address the security situation in the eastern Congo.

We are indeed perturbed by the apparent escalation of armed conflict in the
eastern part of the country and its consequences on the civilian
population.

But, hon members will recall that the National Defence Force contingent is
part of Monuc UN forces which are also deployed in the eastern part of the
Congo, known as North Kivu among other things to render advice and
assistance to the DRC’s national army and to support it with air
reconnaissance; air transport for munitions, troops and the evacuation of
the wounded; escorting humanitarian convoys; ensuring the security of the
local population; as well as protecting the towns of Goma and Sake.

We are in contact with the governments of the DRC and Rwanda to address the
security situation in the eastern Congo, and to find a peaceful solution to
the challenges posed by the Nkunda forces and the Rwandan ex-FAR and
Interahamwe armed groups that are still in eastern Congo, called the FDLR.

The reasons for the conflict in the DRC, both past and present, are
numerous and complex. It is not unexpected that a country with such a past
would take time to reach conditions of peace and stability. We are
confident that the DRC government is attending to this matter with the
necessary urgency and resolve, and we will continue to work with them in
that regard. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, we are grateful for the way that the
President has addressed this question. Regarding the involvement of South
Africa in the tripartite situation with Belgium, the DRC and ourselves, one
would just go on to ask the President this question: Is there any
possibility that South Africa could lend a hand in seeing to it that the
dissident Gen Laurent Nkunda’s international warrant of arrest that was
issued in 2005 is withdrawn so that, perhaps, he can be drawn to the
discussion table and, perhaps, then see to it that we restore peace in the
area?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, Madam Speaker, I do not imagine that it
would be possible for us to intervene with regard to the processes of the
International Criminal Court and such warrants that it may have issued. But
what I can say is that the government of the DRC is interested in resolving
this matter peacefully. Indeed, they have given that indication to Gen
Nkunda, that they would prefer this matter to be resolved peacefully.

The government of Rwanda is not involved in this conflict but is interested
in the eastern Congo because the people who committed the genocide in
Rwanda in 1994 are still in eastern Congo, still armed and still,
therefore, pose a threat to Rwanda. So, Rwanda is interested in this matter
because of that. The Rwandan government is also not asking for war, but is
asking for a resolution of the matter of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe in a
peaceful manner. So, we are in discussion, as I indicated. We have been
engaged in discussion and continue to be engaged in discussion with both
the government of the DRC and of Rwanda to see what can be done to produce
this peaceful solution.

I was pleased to hear in the media, last week, that Nkunda had said he is
willing to have 500 of his people integrated into the Congolese armed
forces, because that is part of the solution that has been proposed. All of
these armed people who are with Nkunda would be integrated into the
Congolese armed forces.

There would be a general amnesty that would be declared, affecting also Gen
Nkunda, so that within the Congo, at least, they would not face the threat
of arrest and all of that, so that we can indeed take this armed group,
integrate it into the national army and give the task of protecting the
population in the east, including the Banyamulenge, to the national army
rather than to the militia that constitute themselves and are claiming that
they have the task and responsibility to protect this minority population.

No, hon member, we would not want to intervene with regard to the
procedures of the International Criminal Court. But, certainly, what we
have to do, acting together with the Congolese and the Rwandan governments
to the extent that they are concerned with this matter, is to see what can
be done to find a peaceful solution to this matter. If it’s not solved,
indeed it will complicate not only the security situation in the Congo, but
also the relations among the countries in the Great Lakes region. I am
confident that we will move this matter forward. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Speaker, Mr President, one of the requirements in
public international law regarding the recognition of the state is that it
should have the capacity to enforce its laws throughout its territory. Now,
it appears that in the DRC they don’t have that capacity. Given the size
and population of the DRC, has at any stage consideration been given to
solving the problem by dividing the DRC into more than one state? If not,
why not? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the hon member knows that our
government and the country have been working with the Congolese on the
matter of this transition and the restoration of democracy and all of this
for some years now. In all of the years that we have been interacting with
the Congolese, from all parts of the Congo, all different political
organisations, civil society and the religious community and so on, I have
never ever come across any Congolese who has suggested that the DRC should
be divided into different states. If there is such a view, I do not imagine
that it comes from the Congolese people. It might come from somewhere else.


I think that even if you see the manner in which the elections took place
last year for the national legislature, provincial legislatures, national
government and for the president, there was a response from the Congolese
population from all parts of the Congo to elect a government and parliament
representing the entirety of the people of the Congo. I really do not have
a sense that there is any feeling for secession.

Now, it is true that there are indeed challenges with regard to the matter
the hon member has raised, concerning the capacity of the state to enforce
its laws. Indeed, that is true. But one, of course, has to understand where
the DRC comes from and understand what happened to the country during all
of those years when Mobutu was head of state, which included the virtual
collapse of the state system and the disappearance of the capacity to
govern in the Congo. That’s indeed part of what we are helping the
Congolese to address.

Yes, indeed, this matter will be a feature of the present-day Congo
regarding that capacity of the government to enforce the laws everywhere in
the Congo. That will happen. But I think that’s a consequence of that past.
I do not think it should lead to a conclusion that, because there is a
process of recovery, therefore we should in any sense encourage any notion
of the fragmentation of Congo. Certainly, I haven’t come across this
sentiment anywhere in the Congo and we have been dealing with the Congolese
in this transition for 10 years now. In any case, I don’t think it would be
good, also for the continent, to contemplate such an outcome. Thanks, Madam
Speaker. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, hon President, last month Gen Laurent
Nkunda called for another ceasefire between his soldiers and government
troops and said he was then ready to start integrating his fighters, once
again, into the national army. On the other hand, it was reported that the
DRC government ruled out further negotiations with Laurent Nkunda, as they
saw him as a criminal. They chose rather to send reinforcements to the
areas of conflict.

Now, will the President support the DRC’s President Kabila who is
determined to stamp out rebel violence in the eastern North Kivu province,
or will the President try to persuade President Kabila to continue trying
to negotiate a peaceful political settlement with the rebel leader in spite
of the fact that he seems to be refusing to reintegrate his forces into the
national army?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the government of the DRC did
enter into discussions with Laurent Nkunda, seeking a peaceful resolution
of this matter. Some elements of the agreement that the Congolese sought
were that a general amnesty would be given to everybody involved with
Nkunda, preferably starting with Nkunda, so that nobody would face the
possibility of an arrest for mutiny and so on. Secondly, all of these
forces would then be integrated into the Congolese national army.
Gen Nkunda argues that he and his friends have taken this position to form
this militia in order to protect the Banyamulenge population in the eastern
Congo, which he feels is threatened, for instance, by the people who came
from Rwanda who had committed the genocide against the Tutsis in 1994, in
Rwanda, and who have been in the eastern Congo since then and are still
armed. He claims that that group is threatening the Congolese Tutsi
population in the eastern Congo, and therefore would need this armed force
in order to protect them. The Congolese government then says, quite
correctly, “But that’s the responsibility of the Congolese government.
These are Congolese nationals and every citizen of the Congo is entitled to
be protected by the government of Congo.”

Therefore amnesty and integration were put forward to solve this matter;
and the protection of everybody in the Congo, including the Banyamulenge in
the east, is the responsibility of the Congolese army and the Congolese
government. That’s the offer the government made. Well, in the end, Gen
Nkunda did not accept that. That’s what led to the violent confrontation
because, obviously, the Congolese government could not accept a situation
where, for instance, Thabo Mbeki decides to set up his own army and plants
himself somewhere in Cape Town. Lekota would have to instruct his armed
forces to attack me, naturally. So, that is what happened.

Then the Congolese government, after that first attack this year, stopped
the attack and made the offer again. There was no response from Gen Nkunda.
Then there was a second attack that pushed the Nkunda forces closer to the
border of Rwanda. Again, the Congolese government stopped and gave a
deadline saying, “By this date, let’s act on this thing. If we don’t act by
that date, then of course we will resume the military offensive.” Nkunda
then said he was ready for 500 of his people to be integrated.

The Congolese government has extended the ultimatum to give more time to
Nkunda and his people to respond to this. So, the essential point, hon
Meshoe, is that the Congolese government seeks a peaceful resolution of
this matter and all of us seek a peaceful resolution of this matter. We can
only hope that Gen Nkunda will understand that, because it is not possible
for the Congolese government to allow some sovereign military force in the
Congo and not act against
it.

However, they would rather not do that and instead resolve the matter via
this route of integration and reconciliation. Indeed, this would include
steps that would be taken to make sure that the population in the east,
which Gen Nkunda says he is representing and protecting, is properly
represented in all structures of government so that you don’t just
integrate the armed forces but that the population itself must also feel
that it has a voice in all of these systems of government.

That’s the framework for the resolution of this matter, including the
resolution of the matter of the people in eastern Congo, who
committed the genocide in Rwanda in 1994. That has to be dealt with,
because as long as those people are there, as long as the Tutsi population
in the eastern Congo feels threatened, so long will Rwanda feel threatened.
So, that’s another matter which the Congolese government is very interested
to resolve, so that we don’t have that situation as a point of tension.

So, all of us, all the time, appeal to Gen Nkunda to listen to what in
reality is a voice of reason. In the end, he also must know that there is
absolutely no possibility for that armed group of his to survive forever in
the eastern Congo. It will get destroyed if it doesn’t come into this
process and take the preferred route, which is a peaceful resolution of
this question. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R S NTULI: Chairperson, we in the ANC still believe that South Africa
can and should play a facilitating role. Why do we say so? Because our
experience in the negotiation process of Codesa, that is Codesa 1 and
Codesa 2, and among different groupings in our country taught us that a
permanent solution can only be facilitated if all role-players or
interested parties come on board at the negotiating table. Learning from
our past experience, we recall that some political parties wanted a
Boerestaat, others wanted a federal state, some even wanted to take us to
the Republic of Azania. The dissolved New NP, as a brainchild of the now
defunct NP, which was under the stewardship of a credible man like Mr F W
de Klerk, on 30 June 1996 walked out of the government of national unity.
Thus the facilitating role of South Africa can be to mediate between the
rebel militias and the government of President Joseph Kabila. Therefore,
Comrade President, what is your comment on this view? [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon member, I want to agree very much - I
thought that’s what I was trying to explain. [Laughter.] Yes, indeed, we
are working on this matter and we are in very good and regular contact with
the government of the Congo to see in what way we can assist in that
mediation process so that the eastern Congo becomes, like the rest of the
Congo, peaceful. Thanks for the encouragement, hon member. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

 Government assistance to apartheid victims permitted by US Appellate Court
                      to proceed with class-action suit

21.   Mr L M Green (FD) asked the President of the Republic:

      Whether the Government will assist the victims of apartheid who were
      recently given permission by the US Appellate Court to proceed with a
      class action against 23 multinational corporations that supported the
      apartheid government; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
      details?               N58ENG

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, when a class-action suit was
instituted in 2003 against multinational corporations that had not
disinvested from South Africa during the years of apartheid and others that
had dealt with the apartheid regime, government stated that it would not be
party to such litigation then and in the future.

When government presented, for the attention of Parliament, its response to
the recommendations of the TRC in April 2003, we stated that it was
completely unacceptable that matters that were central to the future of our
country should be adjudicated in foreign courts which bore no
responsibility for the wellbeing of our country and the observance of the
perspective contained in our Constitution on the promotion of national
reconciliation.

Now, with regard to the particular matter that the hon member refers to –
this decision taken by the US Appellate Court – when that decision was
handed down, there was a dissenting judge, Judge Korman. Judge Korman
eloquently explained why the case should be dismissed based on deference to
the views of the governments of the United States and of South Africa as to
the effect of these cases on US international relations and particularly
because these matters should be properly addressed within South Africa’s
political and legal processes.

According to Judge Korman, and I quote: “A decision to hear these cases
would reflect the worst sort of judicial imperialism ... and send the
message that the United States does not respect the ability of South
African society to administer justice by implying that US courts are better
placed to judge the pace and degree of South Africa’s national
reconciliation.”

We took the same position, knowing full well the appalling ravages of
colonialism and apartheid. Our stance is primarily informed by a desire to
ensure that as South Africans we remain fully responsible for our own
programmes to rebuild our country.

We appreciate that our people understood and accepted that what reparations
were disbursed consequent to the recommendations of the TRC, could only be
symbolic as they could never comprehensively and adequately recompense any
single person.

The impact of white-minority domination, implemented so systematically and
thoroughly over many years and throughout our country, spanning virtually
every facet of our lives, affected virtually all black people, and in
various respects some individuals from the white community.

The freedom and democracy that we attained in 1994, therefore, represent
the most fitting and profound reparation for those of us fortunate to have
survived the nightmare. Freedom and democracy and the programmes of social
reconstruction and development constitute the most comprehensive response
to the crime of apartheid.

We also, of course, do recognise that individuals and communities affected
by specific acts of gross human rights violations deserve specific
reparations. This is precisely what the TRC process sought to achieve – and
much more still needs to be done to ensure that its
recommendations, as accepted by government and by Parliament, are indeed
implemented.

The variety of programmes in this regard includes individual reparations in
respect of which the overwhelming majority of individuals identified by the
TRC, and/or their relatives, have been traced. Efforts are still under way
to identify the rest of the TRC-designated “victims”.

The programmes include assistance in areas of education, health, housing
and other services; and, while joint and individual projects are being
implemented by various departments, our programmes in this regard may
indeed need to be improved. There are also community reparations, and we
are working with the business community for them to make a contribution to
the programmes that government is implementing in the selected nodes. With
regard to monuments and name changes, hon members should be familiar with
the work being done in this area.

As government, of course, we also recognise the right of individuals or
communities to pursue their specific grievances through the courts, within
and outside South Africa. However, for reasons that we have advanced,
government has not deigned in the past, and does not intend in future to
form part of such class actions.

Indeed, we wish to call on the business community in our country, both
domestic and foreign, to work with us to implement the programmes of
reconstruction and development, as well as the specific projects proposed
by the TRC, the better to ensure comprehensive redress arising from the
consequences of the apartheid years. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, Mr President, thank you for your response. I
can understand why the US government should come to the defence of
multinational companies, because most of these multinational companies are
based in America and, of course, the US benefits the most from these
companies. But I actually fail to understand why our own government, which
has been elected by the majority of the people who are victims of apartheid
and who are bearing the brunt of the legacy of apartheid, should come to
the defence of these multinationals in a US court at the expense of our own
people.

These multinationals have the best legal resources because they can afford
them and they do not need our government to defend them. It is improper and
morally inexcusable for our government to prop up the defence of these
multinationals which aided and abetted the apartheid regime and which had
the opportunity to make full disclosure before the TRC in order to receive
amnesty.

Now, the opportunity being lost and given, the fact that the US Appellate
Court has ruled in favour of Khulumani, my question to the President is:
Does our government have any intention to further support these
multinationals in court at the expense of the victims of apartheid when
Khulumani argues the merits of the case, and what progress has been made
with the disaster relief fund to assist these victims in terms of the TRC
Act of 1995? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, it is clear that the hon
Green and myself have been following different cases, because he is talking
about the South African government supporting multinationals, acting in a
US court in defence of the multinationals. The South African government has
done no such thing at all. Now, I don’t know where he gets this. That is
why I am saying that he is following a different case from the one that I’m
following. [Applause.]

What we are defending, hon Green, is not multinationals. What we are
defending is the sovereign right of the people of South Africa to decide
their future. That is what we are defending. [Applause.] We are saying, in
terms of all these matters that have to do with the past, what do we do
with the past? How do we change things? How do we deal with reparations –
whatever it is that arises from the past?

The best-placed people to answer those questions are we, not a judge in a
US court. Now, if you think a judge in a US court should address that;
that’s your view. I don’t agree. That’s why I was quoting the American
judge, Judge Korman, who was quite right: “A decision to hear these cases
in a US court would reflect the worst sort of judicial imperialism ... and
send the message that the United States does not respect the ability of
South African society to administer justice by implying that US courts are
better placed to judge the pace and degree of South Africa’s national
reconciliation.” Judge Korman is right.

Now, what you are doing, hon Green, is to invite what Judge Korman calls
“US judicial imperialism”. I can’t understand why any South African would
want to be brought under such judicial imperialism. Why do you find it
attractive? It can’t be. [Applause.]

This is a matter that we must resolve, hon Green. If the hon Green and
anybody else should feel that they are aggrieved about something that
happened during the apartheid days, don’t take it to New York, bring it to
Cape Town. [Applause.] Then we’ll deal with it here. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, Mr President, in this instance I rise – and
I repeat – I rise to support the President. [Applause.] In fact, I was
going to say that I will rise in his defence against the hon Green, but he
has so eloquently dealt with Green ... [Laughter.] ... therefore my defence
is superfluous.

However, Mr President, I would like to invite you to comment on two further
considerations. The one is that surely we must not support an action which
is not found in our own law, because I doubt most sincerely that our South
African law will allow that type of action.

Secondly, on a matter of practicality, and you have alluded to history:
where do you draw the line - at the concentration camps in South Africa?
Then, do I have a claim against the Roman Catholic Church for having forced
Jacques Delport out of France during the persecution of the Huguenots? You
cannot deal with history in that manner, and think that by all sorts of
class actions you can come to wipe out what happened in the past. You are
fully correct, Mr President, and I invite your comment. So my question is:
Do you agree that it lies within our hearts to make the necessary
reparations against one another?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: This is a good day, because I stand here
fully in agreement with the hon Delport. [Laughter.] [Applause.] I do
indeed, hon Delport, agree. The first thing we need to do with regard to
matters of this kind, in my view, is say, “What do we want to achieve?” And
we have made this point very, very clear here that we want to achieve
national reconciliation. We want to ensure that the past does not continue
to dictate our future. Therefore we have to deal with all of these things
in a particular way. This is where we want to go. Indeed, if the Delport
family decided to sue the Catholic Church for what they did to Jacques
Delport, I would really discourage that, because it wouldn’t help us.
[Laughter.]

Of course, I have no doubt at all that the hon Green was speaking honestly
in posing this question and arguing in the manner that he did. There does
need to be reparation with regard to those that were harmed by apartheid. I
am sure that he was speaking honestly and genuinely, and all of us would
agree with him.

The question, hon Green, is how best to do that; how to achieve that
reparation within the context of what the country has agreed is the
direction that we need to take in order to achieve that national
reconciliation. That is the question to ask, and I would agree, hon Delport
- you are a lawyer, I’m not – that you are probably right about matters
that relate to law, but that really in all respects it cannot be that there
is somebody outside South Africa who is wiser about what should happen to
us as a people than we ourselves. It cannot be. Thanks, Madam Speaker.
[Applause.]

Ms C B JOHNSON: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, flowing from what
you have just said about national reconciliation, at the time of the TRC
process you said: “There is a need for understanding but not for vengeance;
a need for reparation but not for retaliation; a need for ubuntu but not
for victimisation.”

Now, Mr President, flowing from the recent prosecution of apartheid-era
crimes in terms of the National Prosecuting Authority, there are people who
are saying that it would be in the interest of national reconciliation to
have a second TRC. What would your comment be on that and do you not think
that it could undermine the outcome of the first TRC? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, I wouldn’t agree personally, Madam
Speaker. Certainly, in government we have not at all discussed
any possibility of a second TRC. I think we would have to respect all the
circumstances that led all of us to agree to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, to respect the decisions that were taken, for instance, by the
Constitutional Court, with regard to the TRC processes, and so on.

I think it is important that we do that. I do not believe that it would be
correct that we have a second TRC. It is true that there are people – as
President of the Republic I have many requests for pardon of people - who
are serving jail sentences, having been convicted for what they believe to
be the sort of offences that would have been indemnified in terms of the
TRC process.

The hon members would remember that the cut-off date, in terms of the
offences that could be considered by the TRC and its amnesty committee, was
10 May 1994. But all of us know very well that the violence that had been
afflicting our country did not stop on 10 May 1994, when Nelson Mandela was
installed as President of the Republic, and that conflict continued beyond
10 May.

Many of the people who have asked that we should consider pardoning them
are people who were involved in actions after 10 May 1994, and, as I say,
who then claim that those actions can be defined in the same way as the
actions that were considered by the amnesty committee with regard to
offences that took place before 10 May. That’s what they say.

So there is a challenge: what do we do about that? This is because the
practicality of life goes beyond the law. The law said, “These are the cut-
off dates and this is what the TRC should do from this date to that date”,
but the evolution of our country wasn’t bound by those processes. So I am
only saying that there is a problem. I do not believe that it requires a
second TRC, but we can’t pretend there are not requests sitting with the
President that say, “Can you please deal with this matter?”

We have to deal with it and it does indeed involve a large number of
people. Quite how we are going to deal with it is a big challenge. Whatever
happens with regard to this matter, we would certainly have to bring it
back to Parliament and say together, “What do we do to respond to this
challenge?”

The hon Koos van der Merwe once brought a cake into the House to try to
sweeten our tongues so that we could respond to a request that he had
tabled which concerned this kind of person. We are trying to deal with this
matter. We are really reflecting deeply on it – but it is difficult. It’s
challenging because we do not want, in any way, to undermine or act in a
way that would in effect undermine the TRC process. But, certainly, there
has been no consideration of the establishment of a second TRC. Thanks,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, in the whole debate around reconciliation,
hon President, I can recall that at one stage we were talking about a
community reparation policy. I just want to find out whether we do have
such a policy and where we can get hold of it.

The Khulumani support group, I think, requested it, from what I read in the
papers, from the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, but
it has not been forthcoming. I just want to know whether such a policy does
exist. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon member, as I tried to indicate in my
first response to this question, of course the challenge with all of this
is that there is no community in our country that does not require
reparation. There is not any black community in South Africa that would not
say, even in the context of what was defined as gross violations of human
rights in terms of the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act,
that these are the gross human rights violations we suffered – urban and
rural. So, what is the response to this?

It is not as though it’s possible to say, “Here is what happened at
Crossroads; let’s do a community reparation programme specific to
Crossroads”. Then you would need 10 000 of them – each specific to the
10 000 communities that were affected in different ways, but affected
nevertheless.

So, the response to it, as I was trying to indicate, is that we have to
deal as vigorously and in as sustained a manner as possible to the
fundamental issue of the legacy of the past. So, all of these issues about
development, water and electricity, and roads, and houses, and health, and
jobs, and education, and so on are in reality the only reparation that can
go to the people.

It is the freedom they got; it is the change in their conditions of life
for the better; it is a safer life without crime; and, indeed, I must say,
hon De Lille, it is also about the arrest of any such people who did
crooked things with regard to the defence acquisition, a subject that is
very close to your heart. Let us arrest them and lock them up. That is part
of the reparation process. Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

        Implications and outcomes of India-Brazil-South Africa Summit

22.   Ms F Hajaig (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      What are the implications and outcomes of the recent India-Brazil-
      South Africa (IBSA) Summit for Africa and developing countries in
      general?                                     N54ENG

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With
regard to IBSA, India-Brazil-South Africa, the participating member states
of the IBSA Dialogue Forum have, indeed, since its inception in 2003,
always understood that the forum was more than a trilateral initiative
intended to benefit solely their own citizens. Indeed, the three countries
have consistently reasserted their commitment to ensuring that
globalisation benefits especially the developing countries.

In this regard, IBSA has sought to contribute to the efforts of the
countries of the South to establish an international political, economic
and social order that is fair, representative and equitable. Similarly, the
forum has pledged to contribute to the renaissance of the African continent
through support for the socio-economic development plan of the African
Union, Nepad.

Against this background, the 2nd IBSA Summit held in Tshwane on 17 October
2007, among other things, reflected on the WTO Doha Development Round of
trade negotiations and reaffirmed the commitment of the three countries to
carry out negotiations towards an outcome that is fair and acceptable to
all. Of particular importance, the forum reiterated the centrality of the
development dimension of the round and welcomed the strengthened
engagement, solidarity and co-operation among developing countries in that
process.

Hon members will of course be aware that these three countries, IBSA, are
together in the G20 group that is one of the negotiating groups in the WTO
process. We are together in the NAMA-G11 group of developing countries that
is negotiating the non-agricultural market access issues, and of course,
all three of us are also part of the G5 developing countries that continue
to engage the G8.

The summit also emphasised the need for the re-organisation of the global
system of governance, with the United Nations assuming its pre-eminent role
in that regard. It especially expressed its full support for a genuine
reform and expansion of the Security Council, both in permanent and non-
permanent categories of membership, with greater representation for
developing countries in both categories. We, accordingly, called for the
immediate commencement of the intergovernmental negotiations relating to
the reform of the Security Council.

We also expressed ourselves on the challenges facing the global community
on the issue of climate change, noting, of course, that it had a
disproportionately high impact on developing countries, particularly with
regard to their vulnerability, inadequate means and limited capacities to
respond adequately to its effects.

We also addressed the matters of the Millennium Development Goals, which
relate to all of the developing countries, and some decisions were taken as
to what we need to do in this regard. That includes the matter of
continuing to address the issue of the debt that is owed by developing
countries, fast-tracking official development assistance flows and of
course reductions in the inequalities in the international trading systems.

The IBSA Summit therefore underscored the significance of adequate, new and
additional financing for the adaptation efforts of developing countries
without diverting resources for development.

The IBSA Summit supported the Pan-African Infrastructure Development Fund,
and indeed, as the hon member would be aware, we also have established a
poverty and hunger alleviation fund, renamed the IBSA Fund Facility for
South-South Co-operation, with the purpose of assisting other developing
countries. In this regard, projects are already being implemented or
envisaged in Burundi, Cape Verde and Guinea Bissau in Africa, and in Timor
Leste, Laos and Palestine in Asia.

These outcomes of the 2nd summit of the IBSA Dialogue Forum demonstrate the
importance that, indeed, all of us attach to promoting the interests not
only of India, Brazil and South Africa, but, given the weight and place of
the three countries in the global community, also to their role in ensuring
that we do indeed focus on the interests and concerns of developing
countries in general. Thank you.

Ms D M RAMODIBE: Madam Speaker, let me express my sincere gratitude to the
President for his elaborate response. Now, hon President, given the extent
to which some countries are most vulnerable in terms of poverty and hunger,
in particular women and children, what progress has been made thus far by
IBSA in this sector?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, Madam Speaker, as I was indicating, we
established IBSA in 2003, and one of the things that we have done is to set
up this fund to address precisely the matters to which the hon member
refers, namely poverty and hunger.

I have indicated some of the projects and countries to which we are
committed, either actually already involved or planned, to deal with these
matters related to poverty and hunger. So, we will continue that programme.
We are concerned to ensure that, in fact, those interventions are actually
effective and producing the results that are intended with regard to the
issues of poverty and hunger.

That is also part of the reason why we are so focused on the matter of the
Doha Development Round, and, as I’ve indicated, particularly on the
development nature of those negotiations. It’s called the Doha Development
Round because it’s supposed to impact on development and therefore to
reduce hunger and poverty.

I’m saying that is precisely the reason why we are so focused on that and
indeed keenly interested that this process should be speeded up so that we
end these negotiations in a manner that will produce that development with
regard to the poor and the hungry of the world. That is why, also, I have
referred to matters of the Millennium Development Goals and issues about
flows of overseas development assistance.

We are even now, hon member, involved in a discussion with some of the G8
countries to try and elaborate a focus programme with regard to those
Millennium Development Goals, to ask, for instance - one of these
Millennium Development Goals relates to education; universal access to
primary education, education of the girl-child and all of that – do the
resources exist? Has the developed world given the resources for us to
achieve that goal by 2015?
Secondly, I’m saying we’re engaging some of the developed countries to get
that question answered. As a related question that we have to answer,
particularly on the African continent, we have to ask whether the continent
has the capacity to spend that money if it is available.

I’m giving you that example just to indicate that, indeed, with regard to
IBSA and its concerns about the rest of the developing countries, we want
to get down to that kind of detail so that we do indeed produce these
positive outcomes for countries that are poor, people who are hungry, but
that indeed we don’t just use IBSA to strengthen and develop our own
countries and our own peoples, but also have an impact on the lives of
other people in the developing world. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Mr H J BEKKER: Hon President, the IFP is very strongly in favour of the
broadening of trade and other relations, particularly as far as
international policy is concerned, and even in our economic policy we
endeavour to broaden additional trade blocs.

In this regard we regarded the European Union and the ACP, or Asian-
Caribbean-Pacific, actions very, very positively. Similarly with the Asian
Tigers, but Mercosur has shown us the very importance of the Southern
American states, and particularly that of Brazil. You will find a very
strong ally in the IFP, particularly with the outcomes and the future with
regard to the IBSA process and the way forward.
My question, Mr President, is, would the apparent inability that we do find
among some of our African countries, and the SADC nations, to a certain
extent, to be right on the ball with us in this whole thing, hamstring us
in going forward, or do we perhaps need to have an approach in that we say
we go forward regardless of this, and should they then at a later stage
come on board, that we simply will have to leave them behind for the time
being? That is my question.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I must express my
appreciation for the hon Bekker’s offer of forming an alliance on this
matter, but I don’t think we should be allied going in the wrong direction.
[Interjections.]

I think that the countries of the continent understand very well the need,
first of all, for regional co-operation within the continent. All of these
regional economic communities, whether it is SADC or ECOWAS or whatever, I
think the countries of the continent understand the critical importance of
achieving that regional integration.

The matter of how you achieve it, of course, becomes a challenge, as, for
instance, the simple matter of saying let us open our borders, let us have
free-trade areas and so on, but do you have the transport means to move the
goods between those countries? The decision might be quite correct and very
good; but no roads, no rail, no whatever. So I am saying I don’t think
there’s a general reluctance.

The African continent also understands the importance of forming these
partnerships with other areas of the world in any case. The continent is
already part of those arrangements, as you’ve referred to quite correctly,
through the ACP. The African continent is in a particular relationship with
the European Union anyway. It doesn’t
have to be argued. The United States, with its AGOA, established a
particular relationship with the African continent.

The challenge is not reluctance, not unwillingness to move, as a
consequence of which we should then take a decision that we will move on
our own and the rest will follow, but the challenge is to answer all of the
questions on detail that always, always arise when you’ve got negotiation
agreements of this kind.

Let us negotiate these things and let’s agree, rather than to say we’ll go
it alone, because in the end I do not believe that that going it alone
would in any case be in the interests of South Africa either.

I do not perceive a sense of reluctance, but it’s not easy. Even, hon
Bekker, when you look at the straightforward matter of the capacity to
negotiate, to have the human resources, the people with the skill and all
of that to be able to sit and negotiate an agreement, that in itself can
serve as an obstacle. However, I think it would be incorrect, really, for
us to say let’s go it alone and the rest will catch up with us. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon President, given the delay in
the finalisation of the WTO Doha Development Round of talks, the ACDP
welcomes IBSA’s commitment to the India-Mercosur-SACU trilateral free-trade
agreement and initial discussions held in this regard.

In view of the fact that the parties involved in the IBSA Summit “urge the
need for sustained efforts to realise early an India-Mercosur-SACU free-
trade agreement,” what are the steps that will be taken to achieve this
goal of a free-trade agreement, and will this have any impact on the WTO
Doha Development Round of trade negotiations, which, the IBSA Summit
recognised, was entering a critical stage? In other words, would such a
trilateral free-trade agreement strengthen the hand of the developing
nations vis-à-vis the developed nations? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I’m quite certain that it would, Madam
Speaker, because an agreement among ourselves as developing countries would
have to be predicated on the matter of development that such a free-trade
area would have to be focused on the matter of addressing poverty and
underdevelopment in our countries.

We couldn’t negotiate an agreement between the three regions – SACU, India
and Mercosur - which would result in increasing poverty in any of these
countries. Indeed, I’m quite certain that it would communicate a message as
to how to structure these international trade relations in a manner that
helps us to address this challenge of poverty.

What is required is that, as we are saying regarding what steps would be
taken, we just have to begin the negotiations, set up the necessary teams,
etc. There is indeed a very firm commitment to move on this matter, because
it’s a very strong feeling, not only in the governments in the three
countries, but also in civil society and business in all three countries
that, in fact, these three countries can do things together which would
have a very critical impact in terms of development, including this
question of addressing poverty.

Yes, hon member, I would say that, indeed, it would give a good example as
to the sort of outcome that we would want out of the WTO process. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, as you have
indicated, during the past couple of years, we’ve put a considerable amount
of effort into the IBSA Dialogue Forum, with 10 focal point meetings of
Ministers and senior officials. Also, as you have indicated, two
presidential summits, and one of the positive spin-offs has been to enhance
the recognition by the international community of the increasingly
important status of this group of emerging markets. You indicated one of
the dividends was the fund facility which is able to fund projects. You
mentioned Guinea-Bissau, Burundi and Palestine, among others.

Could you give the House an indication of what is in the fund at present to
undertake these projects and, in this connection, may I draw your attention
to what Deputy Minister Van der Merwe said in this House in May? She said:

   We are starting to translate foreign policy outcomes from global
   platforms, such as IBSA, into programmes at the national level ...


So perhaps the President could indicate if any such programmes for South
Africa received attention at the past presidential summit – I think it was
last month – and if so, what they are. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I hope the hon member will
pardon me, because I won’t be able to answer the question. I can answer the
question, but it’s somewhat of a different question.

You see, the question that was posed, hon member, had to do with, not the
impact of the IBSA forum on the IBSA country, but the impact of IBSA on the
rest. Now, I can answer the question about the issue, for instance, that
you say was raised, quite correctly, by the hon Deputy Minister Sue van der
Merwe about the internal programmes that we have to implement arising out
of the IBSA Summit.

I can, but it’s a different question, and I did mislead myself when I first
read the question and thought that it was what the hon Camerer was asking,
so I have a seven-page answer here for that question about the impact
domestically of these programmes, but I do not think this is the place to
do that.

I wouldn’t know, honestly, how much money is in the kitty, with regard to
that fund, but I’m sure that it’s a piece of information that we can
supply. Perhaps what I should do is to send her a copy of this response
about the internal implications of the IBSA process. That we can also do,
rather than for me to answer it now. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

      Government policy on racial composition of national sports teams


23.   The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the
      Republic:

      With regard to comments he made in 2002 that for two to three years we
      should not mind losing international competitions because we are
      bringing our people into these teams, (a) how has this been given
      effect in government policy on national sports teams up to now and (b)
      how will it affect government policy on the racial composition of
      national sports teams in the future?
                  N59ENG

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, as the Leader of the
Opposition knows that all sporting federations in South Africa are
autonomous - with the federations responsible for their day to day
activities, including the selection of national teams. Although we adhere
to this practice, it does not detract from government’s responsibility to
accelerate transformation in sport; making sport accessible to all South
Africans; making more funds available to school sport; and establishing
academy systems and sporting facilities that will facilitate talented
athletes to reach their full potential.

To assist in achieving these goals, the National Sport and Recreation
Amendment Bill will provide the Minister of Sport and Recreation the scope
to engage and influence the national federations constructively to ensure
good and responsible governance in the best interest of South African
sport.

The Leader of the Opposition has to agree that we still have a somewhat
skewed picture of sporting facilities and opportunities in our country. As
government, we want to correct this and ensure that our national teams are
representative of the total South African population. We want all our
children to start from the same line. The one who finishes first must not
be predetermined by the disparities of where they individually started.

To this end, government has resolved to correct the situation and to ensure
that there is grass-roots development of sport in these areas so that more
young people from disadvantaged areas are afforded the opportunity to
unlock their potential. This is done through the Mass Participation
Programme and School Sport Programme. To fund these programmes, government
has budgeted R 376 million up to date. The total budget for the period 2004
to 2010 will be in excess of R1 billion.

Furthermore, we encourage the local authorities, provincial departments and
the Department of Housing to include the building of sport facilities in
their respective housing programmes. As government, we fully support the
notion of a winning culture in sport. Indeed, we rally fully behind our
national teams when competing in the international sporting arena.
However, to have a real and lasting impact on our nation, we cannot compete
with the exclusion of certain parts of our population.  If we win, it must
be a victory for the whole country as it was demonstrated now by the
Springboks.  With true transformation, as a country, we can become an even
greater force in world sport. Through proper development programmes by our
national federations and good supporting systems, we can exploit our wealth
of sporting talent with representative teams being a natural outcome.
If indeed we address the matter of equality of facilities, equality of
access to training and stadia, etc, the law of averages will probably tell
us that we will in the end merge with these representative teams. So, we
must turn things around in the shortest period of time. But indeed, as all
of us have said, not at the expense of any of our athletes. I have no doubt
that all sport-loving people in this country, which is the entire
population, acknowledge the importance of representative teams.

Sport must belong to the nation. It is an integral part of our way of life
and of the South African culture over which government, with its elected
representatives, also has a serious responsibility. Thank you very much,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker and Mr President, on behalf of the Leader of
the Opposition, if I have listened and heard you correctly, Mr President,
then there will be a greater emphasis on development in future. If that is
so, I am in a very embarrassing position for the second time today to
support you whole-heartedly. [Laughter.]

But that has certain implications, Mr President. I want to ask you whether
the government is up to doing the following:  Spend up to R40 billion –
that’s what the department says – on facilities and infrastructure; also
see that it will be necessary to reintroduce a culture of competitive sport
at school level; and introduce a huge programme of training the trainers or
coaching the coachers. It will be a massive effort to really develop our
human resources and our sporting talent for everyone. If that is the core
and the door to achieving diversity, we will be with you all the way.

We have so much talent on tap in our country, but you can’t put a man in a
team before he is ready. We must assist him to get to that level of
achievement in order to know that the day he puts on a Springbok jersey or
a Protea jersey or a cap, he is truly the best man in that position in
South Africa. For that we will support you 100%. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No! I think the women hon members of the
House need to applaud hon Delport, because he says that one can’t put a man
who is not qualified in a team to play for the Springboks. But women can
play for the Springboks at any time. [Applause.] I think we should applaud
him.

Hon Delport, you are quite correct. We have to concentrate on the
development of sport. We can’t address this matter just in the context of
the composition of the national teams. We are saying that sport is
critically important to the challenge of social cohesion. We need to be
able to create these facilities for young people so that they are able to
participate in sport - take them off the streets and keep them from
wrongdoing. This is very important. So, all of the matters and the things
that you raise have to happen. They are development.

A lot of things need to be done in schools. This includes trainers,
facilities, etc. I am sure the hon Minister of Education would agree with
me that this should also include encouraging teachers to regain the
enthusiasm to stay on after class in order to work with young people to
develop them in sport. [Applause.] We have to do all of
those things. We may not be able to find R40 billion, but let’s start with
what we have.

Issues have been raised in schools and in communities - I know that the
Minister of Sport and Recreation has been raising this matter. For
instance, there used to be interprovincial competitions of all sorts in
schools – in athletics, rugby, cricket, etc. What happened to all of that?
This might still be there in rugby, but what about the other sports. So,
yes, we must have that, coaches and everybody.

We may not be able to find R40 billion, but that is the direction we must
take, in the first instance, to attract as many of our people
into sport as possible - not exclusively the young, but of course the
young. But the hon Delport also needs to put on some shorts and engage in
sport somewhere. But then, he must have access to a sport facility. So, the
hon Delport does not need to feel embarrassed for supporting the correct
things. He can get embarrassed for supporting wrong ones, but this one, I
think, is the correct direction to take. Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Hon President, whilst we are moving across the length and
breadth of the country as a multiparty portfolio committee, including the
DA, the people of this country say that it is unprecedented for the
President of the country to lead in sport, unity and social cohesion.
Therefore, we must seize that opportunity to profile matters on sport for
the purpose of unity and social cohesion.

But one area which is a weakness in South African sport, is the lack of a
comprehensive policy for the allocation of funds and all the other
responsibilities of who should do what in as far as sport is concerned. In
the light of that, hon President, is the government willing to consider
this so that in the end we may be able to consider the policy as a
blueprint and a direction whereby all of us can begin to allocate scarce
resources to all the people - particularly the majority of the people who
do not have those facilities? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I would agree indeed that
this is an important issue, as the hon Komphela says. Addressing these
matters of unity, social cohesion and
all that is important. We should indeed have a comprehensive policy that
addresses the question of what it is that we want to do. I would imagine,
where he refers to a comprehensive policy on the allocation of resources,
that this would arise after we have said that this is a comprehensive
programme that we are putting in place.

This is what we want to do in schools, villages, townships and wherever.
This is what we want to do in rugby, cricket, athletics, traditional sport,
and so on. Here is where we want to go and this is what we want to do.
Indeed, in that context we would then have to ask ourselves how to allocate
resources.

That would be the natural consequence of that. So, I would indeed agree. We
do need a comprehensive policy and targeted programmes to the extent that
we can generate funds to finance such a programme. I do hope that we are
all moving in that direction. This does require a comprehensive approach,
because it is possible to become caught up by fashion - this particular
code becomes very popular and you would devote resources there.

I heard the Minister of Sport and Recreation complaining the other day,
quite correctly, that none of us were there to see the netball team off
when they left the country. He was quite right, but I am saying that we
could of course avoid that in the context of a comprehensive policy. We
would then have a comprehensive allocation of funds – I would agree.
Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr W D SPIES: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon President ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Spice!

Mr W D SPIES: No, it is Spies.

The SPEAKER: Spies! [Laughter.]

Mr W D SPIES: It is Spies, hon Speaker. It is an Afrikaans word for
assegai.

Hon President, thank you very much for the answer that you gave. Like the
hon Delport, I would like to add my support to what you have said. I think
what you have said actually underlines what was said by the Minister of
Sport and Recreation a few days ago when he said that we should place a
high emphasis on development and move away from the concept of racial
quotas and racial targets in sport. I think this very same principle is
very important.

For this reason, you also referred earlier on to the hon Van der Merwe, who
presented a cake to sweeten the appetite. I would like to present a book
today, also to sweeten the appetite. The title of this book is: The Naked
Emperor - why affirmative action failed. The reason why I would like to
present this book to the members of the Cabinet and to you is that this
book is actually asking for exactly this same principle to be applied in
the workplace. What is being asked for here is an emphasis on development
and a moving away from racial quotas.

My question is whether you would be prepared to open a debate about moving
away from racial quotas in the workplace and in the economy as well.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, that sounds like a totally different question to
me. But the hon President is at liberty to answer the question if he feels
like it.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: It might be wiser, Madam Speaker, for me to
reserve my response up until the hon member has given me this book, and I
have read it. For instance, Madam Speaker, he talks about racial quotas in
the workplace. I don’t know what workplace that is. [Interjections.]

No, I have never heard of any factory which says that 20% of our sweepers
shall be African at the end of the day. [Interjections.] No, he is talking
about quotas. Honestly, I haven’t heard about that. That is why I am saying
I might be wiser once I have read the book, because it will explain this.

Whatever we do with regard to this discussion, one of the things we really
should never ever underestimate is the need to build a non-racial South
Africa. [Applause.] It’s critically important for the success of this
country. It has to happen. We should never ever forget it. We might have
all manner of debate about the means to achieve that particular goal, but I
do not believe that we should put forward proposals that relate to this
matter whose effect would be to perpetuate a racially divided society.
[Applause.]

That’s part of the challenge with regard to what the hon Delport was saying
about man and sport. The easiest position to take is for us to select all
Springbok players on the basis of merit without racial quotas. It sounds
right. What this means is that, until that time when you have created the
physical and other conditions which have created and given birth to a
Springbok player of excellence, John Smit, we shall keep the team as it is
because that is what merit means. You see, your merit is not inborn.

It is a merit that arises from the social conditions that you were born in
and grew up in. [Applause.] So, indeed we may very well say no racial
quotas, but we must still answer this question: How then do we speed up the
process of the emergence of non-racial national teams? Away with quotas,
but in with the non-racial team! How? So, that question must be answered.
[Interjections.] Sure, agreed - development. But what I am saying is that
10 years down the road, where shall we be? [Interjections.] It depends on
the development.

Let us not have this debate for too long. The point is that we have to
accelerate the process of the building of a non-racial society. I am saying
that you should accelerate that process. Development, facilities and so on
are a critically important part of this, but, I don’t want to enter into
this debate.

Jake White, at a certain point in recent years, said: I know many black
players in the provincial sides who could be Springboks. We are not giving
them space and we are waiting for this
day of maturity. It is because we are not giving them the space to mature
as they play against more difficult teams, that we are slowing the process
of transformation down.

I am saying, yes. No quotas indeed, but we must answer this other question.
How then do we accelerate this process of change? The development, the
building of stadia, the training of coaches and so on is necessary but not
enough. So, let’s answer this question together.

I nearly mentioned the name of a player who I think the Cheetahs are
underplaying. I won’t mention his name. They always bring him in late.
[Interjections.] I will not mention his name. [Applause.] That’s the
problem. They bring him in at the end. The Cheetahs bring him in during the
last 15 or 20 minutes, when they are losing. I don’t think that is correct.
Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Madam Speaker, hon President, I have received that book.
But unfortunately I was given the book by my colleague, the Minister of
Correctional Services. He doesn’t want it. [Laughter.]

Madam Speaker, I am not taking anything away from what the President has
said. It is quite a thing that ought to be done. I am also not taking
anything away from what the hon Delport has said. I am simply trying to
bring in the other side of the coin as a question. Mr President, had we
started integrating in 1994 in terms of transformation in sport and lost a
few games and begun to win after coaching and training, we could have won
even now with an integrated team. We could have won if we had sacrificed in
1994 and integrated and lost. Some people were saying we were going to
loose if we did that, because the others did not have the merit to be in
there.

 I am saying that we should have done that, Mr President, and sacrificed to
lose as a nation and looked at the bigger picture that eventually we were
going to win as an integrated nation. I think we are riding on a tiger at
the moment. We really don’t know when we are going to be in there and
whether we are going to win.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC:  Yes, I agree with the hon member. It should
not be too difficult a principle and a practice to understand. To back up
what the hon member has just said, hon members, you’ll remember that in the
last Tri-Nations tournament, the national coach of the Springboks refused
to let some of the players participate in that tournament because he said
that they should rather lose in the Tri-Nations and not retain the cup so
that they will win the World Cup. It was the same principle.

So, I agree, hon member, because putting in people who are developing into
these national teams is part of their training and
their development. It may be that therefore you do not win all the games.
In the end you win this other thing, which is the building up of a truly
representative South African side. Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]


                    DISTRIBUTION OF MATERIAL IN THE HOUSE


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before I proceed to the last question, I wish to
point out to hon members that nobody is allowed to distribute any material
in this House without prior permission from the presiding officers.


                         WELCOMING CUBAN DELEGATION


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Secondly, I wish to take this opportunity to recognise in the
gallery a delegation from Cuba led by the Minister of Foreign Investment
and Economic Co-operation, hon Martha Lomas Morales. [Applause.] You are
welcome, hon members. I also see the South
African ambassador to Cuba, whom we also welcome home. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I have been flashing again.
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: You always flash very late. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: But it is a very ... [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it
parliamentary for hon members to flash? [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, it is a very brief question.

The SPEAKER: Hon Van der Merwe, I have taken the four supplementary
questions. I am now moving on to the last question. The President has been
standing there for two hours now.

   Implications of, and steps to sustain, the current surge of investment

24.   Mr B A Mnguni (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:
      (1)   Whether he has found that the current surge of investment was
            largely due to preparations for the 2010 Fifa World Cup
            tournament; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,


      (2)   whether the government has taken any steps to sustain these
            investment trends after 2010; if not, what is the position in
            this regard; if so, what steps;


      (3)   whether the current surge of investment will enable the
            government to achieve the employment and poverty reduction
            targets that have been identified by the Accelerated and Shared
            Growth Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa); if not, what is the
            position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   N148ENG

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, currently, South Africa is in
the ninth consecutive year of positive economic growth, which is
unprecedented in our history. The current surge of investment is also
unprecedented, at least since the 1960s. And indeed, this is partly - and
naturally so - as a result of the FIFA World Cup 2010. But our investment
vision for the economy has been considerably broader than World Cup-related
activities. We know that the performance of the economy in the past few
years suggests that higher rates of growth and employment creation are
possible and achievable.
The South African historical precedent shows that investment of over 25% of
GDP and GDP growth at 6% were achieved in the 1960s and 1970s. These are
the levels we are aiming for. And it means that a structural growth
acceleration of this order of magnitude will require well-targeted and
efficiently implemented policy changes and development initiatives.

Therefore we have deliberately placed ourselves on the course that
continues to commit government to investing in infrastructure backlogs- to
overcome backlogs and improve logistics - as well as programmes that will
crowd in private sector investment. An example of this is the increasing
success now being achieved at Coega.

Private sector investment is currently growing by 13% annually in real
terms. Investment by the public sector is rising even more rapidly. The
latest Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement estimates that investment by the
public sector will be in the vicinity of R500 billion for the coming three
financial years.

Of this, spending attributable to the 2010 FIFA World Cup will amount to
R40 billion to R50 billion – 10% or less of total planned investment by the
public sector. What these trends suggest, is that investments directly
related to 2010 will be around 3% to 4% of total fixed investment in South
Africa over the next three years. Clearly, as impressive as these figures
are, relying only on the World Cup for fixed investment is not sustainable.
Sustaining investment trends will require that we continue our work to
further improve the investment environment. Investment in economic
infrastructure, particularly the network industries, is a major contributor
to growth and should enable us to do more things faster and cheaper and
enhance the competitiveness of the South African economy. Improved economic
efficiency and the reduced cost of doing business that will result would
promote the ability of all key sectors to compete and create employment.

Improving economic infrastructure such as communication, port and rail, in
line with our targets, will have a significant impact on economic growth.
Investment in road infrastructure is as important as port and rail, given
that it brings into the economy people in outlying areas. Where road
construction and maintenance uses labour-intensive methods, such as with
the infrastructure Expanded Public Works Programme, or EPWP, it is
additionally valuable as it is contributing to work opportunities and
skills development.

Further, to promote investment we will continue to focus on promoting an
accessible, affordable and competitive information and communications
technology infrastructure. We will also continue to implement an
accessible, quality, reliable 24-hour public transport system which should
support productivity, service delivery and a reduced cost of living. The
first phase of this public transport plan will coincide with the 2010
transport plan that prioritises twelve large cities, including all nine
host cities for the World Cup. In line with all our public investment
initiatives, our priorities go beyond 2010, and in this instance the final
phase of investment in public transport will conclude in 2020.

Similarly, we will continue to invest in energy infrastructure such as
generation capacity in electricity and storage capacity in liquid fuels.
These investments will support the rebalancing of our energy sources,
including the development of the nuclear industry. Thirdly, we will
actively explore and promote alternative sources and renewable energy such
as wind, solar, and wave energy.

With regard to employment matters, Madam Speaker, recent performance shows
that we are indeed making progress in rolling back unemployment and
poverty. Since 2004, employment has been growing. And since 2002 the
poverty head-count has fallen by nearly 20%. Our strong recent performance
in relation to poverty and employment can and must be maintained and we
will therefore continue our planned public investments and create the
environment for encouraging investment in labour-absorbing economic
activities. In this regard, we are constantly reviewing and improving our
performance in programmes such as the Expanded Public Works Programme, the
Small Enterprise Development Strategy and the Industrial Policy Action
Plans.

Finally, encouraging investment is as much an art as it is a science. Our
track record shows that we are getting this right, thanks to macro-economic
stability, strong institutions of democracy, improved infrastructure and
strategic government activity that lead to the crowding in of investment.
Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Mr B A MNGUNI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Mr President for your
elaborate answer. Almost all my follow-up questions have been answered.
However, as the Fifa World Cup is not only for South Africa but for the
region and the African continent in general, what economic opportunities
does the Fifa World Cup tournament provides for the SADC region and the
African continent in general?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, what the hon member knows is
that right from the beginning the position that we took with regard to this
in our bid to host the 2010 World Cup, was that we said that we want this
to be an African World Cup, and we said then that when we say Africa we
include the African Diaspora.

That has been our approach. Fortunately, Fifa has also taken the same
position. I am sure the hon member would be familiar with the programmes
that have then been launched by Fifa to make the impact on the African
continent that he is talking about, which has to do with refurbishment of
stadiums and training of people. Even last week we had women soccer coaches
from various parts of the continent attending a course here and you would
also be familiar with what the countries in the region are doing. Of
course, many of them look forward to hosting the teams when they prepare
for the tournament.

So, countries are indeed busy with stadiums and other activities - hotels
and so on – to ensure that they have the capacity to host such teams. That
also includes work that is going on in the region with regard to the issue
of tourism, because expectation is that with all of these people coming
here it would be possible also to attract them to visit the neighbouring
countries as tourists.

So, there are, certainly, many economic activities taking place in this
region. But more broadly, with regard to the continent, we are working with
Fifa to ensure that in these practical ways - regarding sport
administrators, coaches and facilities - that indeed this does become an
African cup. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr President, we cannot do
anything else but support you in terms of what you have said so far. But,
despite the current surge for fixed investment in the preparation for the
Fifa World Cup, do we still not experience sufficient sustainable fixed
foreign direct investment in especially the manufacturing sector with the
objective to export these products through which valuable foreign currency
can be earned? The Medium-term Budget Policy Statement warns against the
weak export performance, which is our best option to assure rapid growth to
ensure the required labour absorption and the overexposure of South Africa
in the portfolio investment market.

We know that the deficits on the current account of the balance of payments
are largely financed by these investments - but with the real threat that
certain capital outflow will leave South Africa ill-equipped and in an
embarrassing situation and a predicament. Mr President, what other fiscal
measures do you intend using to stimulate and support the manufacturing,
export and skills development sectors to ensure that South Africa can
sustain the recent domestic investment boom? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I would imagine that the hon
member has received a copy of our Industrial Policy Action Plan. It would
be important for the hon member to look at that, because it addresses
especially this matter that he is raising, which was correctly raised by
the Minister of Finance, namely the matter of what we need to do to
strengthen our manufacturing sector to increase exports, competitiveness
and all of that. This matter is why we thought it was important to have an
industrial policy and an action plan for its implementation.

I’m sure the hon member would find the indications there, as to the sort of
measures that we need to take. He would also be familiar with the work that
we are doing in order to address this critically important matter of skills
shortages, whether through Jipsa, more work with the Setas, universities,
more work with the FET and so on. The hon member is indeed correct that it
is something we need to address.

If we do indeed implement, as we must, this Industrial Policy Action Plan
that we have agreed upon, it should make an impact on this issue of what
happens to our manufacturing sector. The matter of continuing to attract
foreign direct investment is a permanent challenge. We just have to keep at
it and I’m sure we will succeed, but it’s just something that we must
continue to do.

The hon member expressed his concern about the crisis that might be
generated by a sudden reversal of short-term capital flows. I don’t think
that is going to happen. I can’t imagine under what circumstances that
would happen. I don’t think we should scare ourselves unnecessarily. There
is sufficient confidence in the country by the international investor
community and so on. We have to focus on the programmes we have agreed
upon, including this Industrial Policy Action Plan, and do whatever is
necessary in that regard. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The House adjourned at 16:20
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


      1) The Minister of Science and Technology


         (a)     Technology Innovation Agency Bill [B 49 – 2007] (National
             Assembly –  proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 30164 of 17 August 2007.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Science
         and Technology of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
         the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
         Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within
         three parliamentary working days.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Proclamation No 26 published in Government Gazette No 30297 dated
         13 September 2007: Commencement of the Pension Funds Amendment Act,
         2007 (Act No 11 of 2007).

      b) Proclamation No R.27 published in Government Gazette No 30338 dated
         28 September 2007: Determining of a date on which section 12(1) of
         the Act shall come into operation, in terms of the Second Revenue
         Laws Amendment Act, 2004 (Act No 34 of 2004).

      c) Government Notice No R.834 published in Government Gazette No 30275
         dated 7 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1343),
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 2004 (Act No 34 of 2004).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      a) The following private member’s legislative proposal was submitted
         to the Speaker on 29 October 2007, in accordance with Rule 234:

            Legislative proposal to amend the Protection of Constitutional
            Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities Act (Mr H J
            Bekker)


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
         Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.

2.    The Speaker

      a) Letter from the Minister of Defence, dated 6 November 2007, to the
         Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         Castle of Good Hope for 2006-2007.


         LATE TABLING OF THE CASTLE OF GOOD HOPE ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE 2006-
         2007 FINANCIAL YEAR


         Madam Speaker


         It has been brought to my attention that the Castle of Good Hope
         received its final audit report only at the end of August 2007 from
         the Auditor General. Resulting from this, the Castle’s internal
         preparations were completed on 10 October 2007.


         Kindly note and accept my deepest regret for any inconveniences
         caused by the delay in tabling the attached document.


         Yours truly,




         M G P LEKOTA
         MINISTER OF DEFENCE: MP

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
   Tourism on the Convention on the Conservation and Management of Fishery
   Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), dated 1 November
   2007:

      The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism, having
      considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Convention on
      the Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources in the South East
      Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
      Constitution, 1996, referred to it, recommends that the House approves
      the said Convention.

Request to be considered.

