---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 February 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-02-20
---

TUESDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 2007
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS –see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice:

   That I will move that the House discusses the role of the judiciary in
   our democracy.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice:

   That I shall move that this House believes that the untimely premature
   death of internationally renowned historian, David Rattray, as a result
   of violent crime is a tragedy for our country.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                       (The late Mama Adelaide Tambo)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move

   That the House–


   (1)      notes with profound sadness the death on Wednesday, 31 January
        2007, of the struggle icon Mama Adelaide Frances Matlala Tambo;


   (2)      recognises that Mama Adelaide Tambo represented in her very
        being, and lived her life in a manner that served us, an
        indestructible monument to the values and practice of ubuntu;


   (3)      recalls that Ma Tambo was and activist who from an early age
        vowed to dedicate her life to the fight against discrimination,
        oppression and human suffering and as a teenager became politically
        active in the ANC at the time when Congress was itself becoming more
        militant and assertive;

   (4)      remembers that as an early recruit to the fledgling ANC Youth
        League, the young Adelaide Tshukudu - her maiden name - excelled as
        an organiser, the leader and unifier, and that the qualities she
        demonstrated during her early years of political activity were to
        remain an integral part of her character throughout her involvement
        in the liberation struggle;


   (5)      further remembers that Adelaide Tambo was called upon to bear
        the burden of dislocation and exile and the disruption of family
        life and that she bore such hardships with fortitude, knowing that
        her family circumstances were not unlike the experiences of
        thousands of our people whose family members were in exile, in
        prison, or in the underground, or those of the oppressed masses;


   (6)      acknowledges the great contribution that the late Mama Adelaide
        Tambo made as a Member of Parliament from 1994 to 1999;

   (7)      believes that she discharged her responsibilities with
        dedication, discipline, diligence and humility and that the life of
        this great leader epitomizes heroism and commitment to the cause of
        our people; and

   (8)      conveys its condolences to the Tambo family and the African
        National Congress.

Agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I must draw you attention to the fact that
there is an ongoing problem with the microphone.

The SPEAKER: There is a different microphone that was supposed to be put on
the podium.

Mr W J SEREMANE: The DA sends out its sincerest condolences to the Tambo
family, relatives, friends and the ANC. We share in the loss of a great
stalwart and a real mother, the deceased Mrs Adelaide Tambo.

This House unconditionally shares in the sorrowful sentiments, and yet in
the pride and glory of having heard such a great personality leaving her
footprints in the sands of time of this House and country as a whole.

A ke matshidiso a ka Setswana go thweng ga a bole. Mmarona o ile go ikhutsa
le badimo mo diatleng tsa Modimo - Mmopi wa rona rotlhe. O dirile, a
konosetsa tiro le pitso ya gagwe ka botlalo le ka botswerere le ka
bopelokgale. O godisitse matshwititshwiti a banna le basadi mo lefatsheng
la rona le Aforika ka bophara. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[This reminds me of a Setswana saying that condolences do not expire. Our
mother has taken her final rest to join ancestors in the arms of God – our
Creator. She has done her work exceptionally well by executing her calling
with brevity. She brought up and nurtured many of the men and women in our
country and Africa as a whole.]

Much has already been said about this special person and mother, this
courageous fighter for human freedom and dignity. Allow me therefore the
opportunity to conclude by modifying only two stanzas from two different
poems.

The first one is, “God give us men”. In this instance it will be women.

  God give us ``women’’; a time like this demands strong minds, great
  hearts, true faith and ready hands.


  ``Women’’ whom the lust of office cannot kill
  ``Women’’ whom the spoils of office cannot buy
  ``Women’’ whom possess an opinion and a will
  ``Women’’ who have honour and women who will not lie,
  ``Women’’ who can stand before a demagogue and damn his/her treacherous
  flatteries without winking”,- by J G Holland


Such was our mother, Mme Ma-Tambo. This dynamic lady, mother, friend and
comrade had all these facets. Like a prism, she reflected so many beautiful
colours and attributes and touched so many lives in many different ways.

The second stanza is that:

  ``Women’’ are still the rock and solid rock.
  Touch them and crack your fragile and political ego
  From cradle to the grave, forever they shall rock you”.
  Bagaetsho le bakaulengwe gomotsegang. Mmarona o re tlogeletse
  boswa jwa kgololosego le tshiamo le kagiso. A re somareleng dilo
  tsena.Ke a leboga. Inkomo. [Comrades and compatriots, my condolences to
  you all. Our mother has left us a legacy of freedom, peace and goodwill.
  Let us preserve them. Thank you.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker and hon members of the House, even as
sorrow gatherers, all of us, at Mama Tambo’s funeral service, one could not
believe that she was no more, for we will never see the likes of her again.

I cannot help recalling many poignant moments with her. When I arrived in
London in August 1963, en route to Canada, as a delegate to the Anglican
Congress in Toronto, I went to the Tambos’ home. Because OR was in Lusaka,
Mrs Tambo had to inform him that I was in London. He came especially to
London to see me.

I recall that before this Mama Tambo went to the Cumberland Hotel with me
where we met Jomo Kenyatta and his party’s delegation, who were in London
for the Lancaster House discussions on the Kenyan constitution. I recall
that before we reached the hotel she remarked to me with a chuckle about
the strange eyes of Jomo Kenyatta. And also mentioned the fact that when
they throw the Mau Mau episodes at him, when they throw at him that he was
antiwhite, he would say: “No, I am not anti-White; I am antiwrong!.’’ And
Mrs Tambo would laugh so much.

Indeed, I met Jomo Kenyatta, Burning Spear, and some of his delegation
which included two people I had studied with at the Adams College and Fort
Hare University - Dr Munyua Waiyaki and Dr Njoroge Mungai, both of them
whom later became Foreign Ministers of Kenya.

I recall that both me and OR paid a visit to the home of Clare Urquhart,
the lady who supported the liberation movement in London. As Mr Tambo was
not there, I told Mrs Tambo about how I was amused by the great lady. She
would serve us yoghurt - and that was my first taste of yoghurt in my life.
[Laughter.] And if only one cup was left she would say: “No, this one is
for the little makhulu baas” - in reference to OR. Which amused Mama Tambo
and me immensely. We laughed so much at the references to OR as “little
makhulu or baas”.

OR and I met with our respective party delegation in 1979 at the Excelsior
Hotel at Heathrow Airport to discuss our differences regarding the
strategies of the ANC and Inkatha on the issues of sanctions, disinvestment
and the arms struggle.

Mrs Tambo mothered all of us. I recall that on the day that Mr Tambo’s
tombstone was unveiled, it was with her suggestion, as well as the
suggestion of the leadership of the ANC, that I was given an opportunity to
pay tribute to OR, with whom they knew that I worked with so closely, for
so many decades until 1979.

It was in fact on this occasion that the Gauteng leader of the ANC, Mr
Cleopas Nsibande, in his address, revealed that he was actually present
when Inkosi Albert Luthuli, the then President of the ANC, and his deputy
Mr Oliver Tambo sent a message to me via my late sister Princess Morgina
who also lived in Benoni with her husband.

The message was that I should not refuse to take a position to lead the
government of KwaZulu, which the government of the apartheid regime was
imposing on us, if the people elected me to such a position.

After he passed away, I said that, when the history of South Africa’s
liberation is finally written up, Mama Tambo’s name will be written in bold
gold letters. Her husband’s achievements are as much hers, as his. They
were a winning team who fought the good fight for our liberation together.

The fact that Mama Tambo worked with other South African exiles to help set
up the African-Asian Solidarity Movement and the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation takes on an even brighter allure, when one considers that she
moved in what was then, quite frankly, a male-dominated world.

One cannot help recalling what a wonderful trio she, Mrs Albertina Sisulu
and Mrs Winnie Mandela were in supporting their husbands, both before and
after their conviction in the Rivonia Trial.

I can never forget as long as I live that, even when the tragic rupture
between the ANC and Inkatha took place, she never publicly denounced me
once, nor had her attitude towards me and my family ever changed.

I think one of Mama Tambo’s great joys would have been receiving the Order
of Simon of Cyrene, the highest order given by the Anglican Church for
distinguished service by lay people for the people of God. It is splendidly
fitting that an award named after the man who carried the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ should be given to Mama Tambo. Her life’s work was carrying
the cross of countless souls who crossed her path. Mama Tambo and her
simple Christian credo were indivisible.

I am humbled that up to the end of her illustrious political career I was
to her just “ubuti” and she was just my sister.

Until we will meet again in the Holy City, we bid the lady of our struggle:
Mme, tsamaya hantle! O robale ka khotso! [Ma’am, Go well! Rest in peace!]

Malibongwe! [Praised!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Speaker and hon members, it is with deep regret that
we received the news of the passing away of Mama Tambo. On behalf of the
UDM, I once more extend our heartfelt condolences to her family, the ANC
and her many friends across the world. Our thoughts and prayers are with
you.

Her role in the struggle is well-documented. What one can learn from her
remarkable life is the extraordinary manner in which she was always there
for her husband, her children and the wider community during happy and
difficult times. She was a shining example of the power of love and of
family.

South Africans will miss her warmth, her dignity, her achievements and her
style. Many communities will miss her common touch, including the people of
the East Rand, particularly, Benoni. Mama Tambo is renowned for the energy
with which she united communities, even in exile in London. People speak of
her endless compassion for others.

It is a remarkable achievement for a woman in her time and circumstances to
have faced so much, endured so much, carried so much, and still have
continued without bitterness. She represented the many qualities of caring
and perseverance that exemplified the ability and courage of South African
women. We know that her life and her memory will serve as an example to
many future democrats, especially young women. Lala uphumule Mama Tambo.
Ukulwile ukulwa okuhle [Rest in peace, Mrs Tambo. You fought your battles
well.] I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ID, I want to pass my
sincere condolences to the ANC and also to the family of Mama Tambo. She
struggled long and hard against apartheid and she managed to defeat it. She
also lived to enjoy, like all of us, our right to vote for the first time
on 27 April 1994.

She came from a generation that believed in service, sacrifice and
suffering. She will always be remembered for her friendly smile and also
her beautiful outfits. I always admired her. I want to say, “Hamba kahle,
Mama Tambo.” She will now follow heroes such as O R Tambo, Luthuli, Robert
Mangaliso Sobukwe, Steve Biko, and Barney Desai. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, hon members, the ACDP regrets and mourns
the loss of a great patriot and a woman of substance with rare qualities.
Mama Adelaide Tambo’s unique and unusual ability to make members of all
parties in Parliament feel needed and important in the first democratic
Parliament was both inspirational and unequalled.

She was a true democrat, full of warmth, compassion and the ability to
accept even those she disagreed with. Her political maturity and personal
security enabled her to embrace and treat members of the opposition with
dignity and respect. One day, as I expressed my appreciation to her for the
way she related to members of other parties, she said that she knew very
well that large organisations such as the ANC started small and grew with
time.

She was indeed a very wise woman. She knew how to encourage others. On a
few occasions she advised me to carry on with the good work we were doing,
as she knew that we had a great future in this country. Our deepest
condolences go to her children, grandchildren, the ANC and all those who
loved her and affectionately referred to her as “Mama Tambo”. We will
surely miss her, and may the Lord bless and keep the family. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, the FF Plus expresses its sympathies to the
family of Mrs Adelaide Tambo, following her passing away. Mrs Tambo was
known for her work within her community. The loss of Mrs Tambo, therefore,
will not only be felt in her family, but also in the broader community.

She had a passion for women’s rights and the dignity of the disabled and
elderly people. Her contribution to the welfare of her community is an
example worth following, which stands to the honour of her family. The FF
Plus extends its wishes for strength and for sympathy to the family and the
children of Mrs Tambo in these difficult times. I thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, we in the UCDP align
ourselves fully with the motion of condolence on the late Mrs Adelaide
Mmatlala Tambo. UMama uTambo was an embodiment of dignity, and somebody to
whom young women had to look up regarding how to lead a married life. She
stood by her husband through thick and thin. She bore all the difficulty
with great fortitude.

Even on her return from exile, she had not lost the fire that saw her pick
up the cudgels since her grandfather was pushed to the ground by one
irresponsible policeman. On the occasion of her return from exile, when a
police tossed her around at what is now aptly called O R Tambo
International Airport, she emphatically told them that she had been away
from the country for three decades and was not prepared to be delayed and
derailed by them as she was then coming home to settle, to which they
obliged.

As a mother, she hosted very many people of South African origin while in
England. Such hospitality she displayed to all, regardless of their
backgrounds. They enjoyed the warmth of a family on their sojourns to Great
Britain.

We have no doubt that having fought a good fight and gone the full
distance, she has been called to higher service in the world beyond. Our
hearts go out to the family, friends and the ANC. May her soul rest in
peace. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, comrades and hon members, the PAC wishes to
associate itself with the sentiments expressed by those who stood on this
podium before us. So it was to be that Mama Tambo passed away, not that it
was not inevitable, for death is a necessary end. In the dialectics of
mortal existence life should give way to death. Life and death in
themselves are not spectacular. It is the deeds of the dearly departed that
give it the edge, the sparkle and impact.

We are, correctly so, making our eulogies to one who has lived her life to
the fullest in a personal and larger sense. She has lived through all the
stages of life, raised a family and beyond it, served her people and
country. Mama Tambo is undoubtedly one of our liberation struggle stalwarts
who served, suffered and sacrificed, in the interest of the majority.

She belonged to a generation that was fired up by altruistic ideals of
solidarity, liberation and struggle. Her role in our liberation struggle is
well-known and needs no adumbration. She is one of those who fought against
settler colonialism, survived that struggle and contributed the remainder
of her mortal life to the reconstruction and development of our country.

Hers is a contribution, like those of so many of our stalwarts, never to be
forgotten. She has fought and has fallen like a heroine. Her example is
worthy of emulation. Reflecting on her life and contribution to society, we
cannot but agree with Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe’s assertion that we are
nothing but tools of history. When we are gone, history shall find new
tools. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, Mama Adelaide Tambo started her political
fight from the early age of 10 years. At that young age this little girl
could understand the harsh shackles of apartheid had to be broken and her
people freed. Blossoming into a young lady, Mama’s efforts were endorsed by
political activity and assistance to overthrow the former government.

But God was kind; even in the toughest times he blesses us with love, and
her beloved union with the late Oliver Tambo would embrace a united effort
to attain democracy and a freedom for all.

Mama, your commitment to the people is a beacon of encouragement to
everyone. Your strength, determination and undying love as a comrade, a
friend, mother and South African is a shining example for all women.

From Mama’s example we carry with us that the state of our nation, our
people and our lives, is the responsibility of every individual.

Mama symbolised the true spirit of ubuntu. The loss of such a great being
leaves all of South Africa weeping, but Mama needs to know that she has
left us a legacy of freedom, democracy and individual effort for unity that
shall live on eternally.

On behalf of the MF, we extend our heartfelt condolences to the family and
loved ones of the beloved Mama Tambo. We extend our condolences to the ANC,
which has indeed lost a great mother, and to all of South Africa as we say
farewell to one of the most remarkable heroines of our time.

We ask God to give us the strength to get through this difficult loss and
always to hold you close to guide us on our road to true democracy.

Mama Tambo, may you rest in peace. May your path to the Lord be paved with
the petals of soft flowers. May your destination be a most pleasant and
enjoyable one. Hamba kahle, Mama wethu. [Farewell, our mother.] Siyabonga.
[Thank you.] [Applause.]

Ms N M MDAKA: Madam Speaker, hon members, I join my colleagues in
expressing my deepest condolences to the family, the ANC, and the friends
of Ma’ Tambo. The South African people have suffered a great loss with the
passing away of this heroine. The UIF received with great sadness the news
when it was announced that Ma’ Tambo had succumbed to an illness.

There is no doubt that the actions of Ma’ Tambo in this Parliament did
count and will continue to count. This clearly indicates that Ma’ Tambo was
the mother of the people. Her contributions to the country’s political
arena were tremendously noble. She will be remembered for her humbleness
and character, which made her one of the greatest stateswomen in the
history of our country.

Above and beyond all else, she will be remembered for nurturing her
husband, the late Oliver Tambo. Amandla! [Power!]

HON MEMEBRS: Ngawethu! [To the people!]

Ms N M MDAKA: Hamba kakuhle, qhawekazi! [Go well, heroine!]

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, Azapo joins the ANC and the people of
South Africa in expressing its heartfelt condolences to the family of
Adelaide Tambo.

To Azapo, Ma’ Tambo was not just another member of the ANC, but to us she
was a true daughter of the soil and a mother of the nation, who
demonstrated her strength and commitment to her motherland by dedicating
her whole life to the struggle to free our people.

She did this by establishing community projects for those in need. Our
members who met her in London testified that she was a mother to all South
Africans, irrespective of their political affiliations.

Her life speaks for itself and her dedication to the struggle is
unquestionable. Her commitment, and that of her husband, to Africa and the
African cause are unparalleled.

As Azapo, we salute this freedom fighter. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the FD wishes to express its sincere
condolences to the family members and loved ones of the late Mrs Adelaide
Tambo, former ANC stalwart and Member of Parliament. Our condolences also
go the ANC for their loss of a valuable member, role model and ANC
stalwart.

Today we honour Mama Tambo for what she gave to our nation: dignity, hope
and liberty.

From a young age, Adelaide Tambo projected the spirit of a leader and the
heart of a champion. Faced with the harshness and cruelty of a regime that
tried to box in her gigantic spirit, she proved that no obstacle would
prevent her from reaching her dream of a free South Africa. She and her
husband Oliver Tambo, a dynamic duo, together with former President Nelson
Mandela and others, forged the road to a free, democratic and reconciled
South Africa.

She became a history-maker and a world shaker. She pursued her purpose with
intent and with courage. Many things shaped her life; the choices she made
as a young woman directed her path into the future and many today reap the
fruits of her labour.

As a mother of the nation, and a beacon of hope to many, she selflessly
poured out her life for the poor, the orphaned and the elderly. Displaying
dignity and grace, she made every individual believe that they were
important and helped them to pursue their dreams.

She became the voice of the voiceless, fighting vigorously against abuse
and violence against women and children. She helped to shape the political
and legislative landscape in South Africa by ensuring that women have a
presence and a place in our democracy today.

Although we are saddened by her sudden departure, we are comforted by the
fact that we were privileged to have known her and shared in her life.

Thank you, Mama Tambo, we are the richer to have had a mother like you in
our nation. Your legacy will be a memorial for many generations to come.

The FD fully endorses this motion. May the Lord Himself console the loved
ones, children and grandchildren of Mama Tambo. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to start by thanking
the Members of Parliament from the various parties who have expressed their
condolences to the family, friends of Ma-Tambo and to the ANC. Born on 18
July 1929 in Top Location in Vereeniging, Ma-Tambo was to dedicate her life
to the achievement of South Africa’s liberation and that of its people.
Her political life started at a tender age of 10 years when she had to look
at how her ailing grandfather - aged 82 – was arrested, together with other
demonstrators, and ill-treated by the police. It is the way the police
treated her grandfather that made her decide once and for all that she
would fight the system of apartheid to the end, and she did.

At 15 she was an ANC courier, quite a risky task at the time as she too
could be arrested and tortured if found. As soon as her age qualified her
as an ANC Youth League member, 18 years that is, she did not hesitate to
join. Her active role in building the ANC Youth League saw her become the
chairperson of her branch, the George Goch branch. Her ability to initiate
action saw her open branches of the ANC Youth League in the then Transvaal.
Even as a nurse at the Pretoria General Hospital she had the courage and
determination to start an ANC Youth League branch.

Because of her human and correct political approach, she never lacked a
following. It is therefore no surprise that another great activist of the
ANC, Oliver Reginald Tambo, found a Miss Right in Adelaide Frances Matlala
Tshukudu. As South Africa knows, together the couple dedicated their adult
lives to freedom and service for others.

Sister Adelaide’s strength, compassion and determination to serve others
were to see her literally embrace the whole ANC community during the years
of struggle in exile. She made many contacts internationally, including
while working for the International Defence Aid Fund - IDAF.

She became a pillar of support for families in exile as well as inside the
country. When she visited Africa ANC cadres - be it women cadres in Angola,
communities in Lusaka, students in the ANC school in Tanzania – they knew
that Mme Adelaide had arrived and she would definitely bring the necessary
logistics for them.

In this regard she acted in a manner consistent with the ubuntu value
system of which she was a living embodiment. Ma-Tambo played a very
important role in promoting the values of women’s emancipation and through
her active participation in the ANC Women’s League ensured that women were
an integral part of the liberation struggle. She also interacted with ease
with people of different nationalities; hence she was deployed as the
founder member of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation, then based in
Algiers, where she made a significant contribution.

As a mother Ma-Tambo took on both political and family responsibilities,
bringing up her children single-handed in a foreign country. She did not
look after her children only. All the young people under the ANC at the
time became part of the extended family that she served.

Indeed, she was the mother of the liberation struggle. Her example was the
embodiment of the hopes and aspirations of a nation in struggle, a builder
who brought people together for the love of their country. This is why she
became one of the first group of members to represent the ANC in the first
democratically elected Parliament in 1994.

During the early years of democracy in Parliament, Ma-Tambo made a
noteworthy contribution to the making of our Constitution, acclaimed the
world over for its provision for women’s and children’s rights. She
participated, amongst others, in the Portfolio Committee on Welfare, now of
course called Social Development, ensuring the transformation of the sector
through legislation. Her interventions in the debates never omitted
articulating issues affecting women, the elderly people, people with
disabilities and children. This was her real passion.

Some of us will remember her walking along the passage over there. She used
to sit somewhere there and she would be composed as always, with dignity
and always with a friendly smile. Outside Parliament, some of her
activities that I am aware of included organising functions for the elderly
and the disabled in her constituency, especially during Christmas time.

Ma-Tambo will be remembered as one of the great heroines of our nation. As
Parliament, indeed as a nation, we can learn from her example, rediscover
and remain true to those values that she upheld. These must remain for us a
guide to the future. Ma-Tambo represented the greatness of spirit which she
infused into our organisation, this Parliament and the nation.

She represents the call to return to those values that she represented and
lived by - the humanity of the value system of ubuntu, based on respect for
the humanity of human beings, regardless of race, class, gender and age. Ma-
Tambo is today saying to us as South Africans that we must reclaim ubuntu,
put emphasis on mutual understanding, appreciate differences and tolerate
diversity in the multicultural environment we live in. She is saying that
the ubuntu values we promote must sufficiently meet the challenges of
reconciliation, reconstruction and development.

To the Tambo family as a whole, the ANC is saying:

Ngxe! Tutwini! Akuhlanga lungehlanga! Kakade isitya esihle asidleli.
Enkosi. [Our condolences to the family. Peace be with you. What has
happened always happen. A precious vase always breaks before it is used.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That concludes the speakers’ list on this matter. I
take it there are no objections to the resolutions being adopted. The
Presiding Officers associate themselves with the motion. The condolences of
the House will be conveyed to the Tambo family and to the ANC.


           FOODSTUFFS, COSMETICS AND DISINFECTANTS AMENDMENT BILL


                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move the
draft resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the House, in accordance with Rule 226, elect the following members
  as nominated by their respective parties as the Assembly representatives
  on the Mediation Committee on the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants
  Amendment Bill [B 35D – 2005] (National Assembly - sec 76):

    Nel, A C (ANC);
    Louw, S K (ANC);
    Ngaleka, E (ANC);
    Ngculu, L V J (ANC);
    Malumise, M M (ANC);
    Matsemela, M L (ANC);
    Madella, A F (ANC);
    Morgan, G R (DA); and
    Bekker, H J (IFP).
Agreed to.

                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS


                            RELOCATION OF PEOPLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M J J MATSOMELA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC–led government is
committed to working with the people to ensure that they are decently
housed and that they bring up their families in comfort and security.

Last year, Merafong, which is located in the southern district municipality
of Khutsong, was declared unsuitable for human habitation after sinkholes
and unpredictable ground movement were detected there. President Thabo
Mbeki was shown these unsettling developments in the area during a
presidential imbizo, and he called for the affected community members to be
moved to a safer location.

The ANC–led municipality of Merafong, in the North West Province, has
secured R800 million to help resettle the affected Khutsong residents.

The ANC applauds the proactive initiative taken by the municipality as a
clear demonstration that the people’s ANC-led government really cares. I
thank you, Deputy Speaker.

                           DA’S ALTERNATIVE BUDGET

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I O DAVIDSON (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the value of the DA’s efforts
in compiling its annual Alternative Budget is confirmed by the fact that
the President announced government’s intention to implement a wage subsidy
this year – an idea floated by the DA two years ago when it was
vociferously opposed and indeed trivialized by Finance Minister Trevor
Manuel.

This year our Alternative Budget for 2007, launched yesterday, rests on
four pillars: a stimulatory package to the supply side of the economy to
boost confidence; lower the cost of doing business and stimulate private
sector investment; a job creation programme which includes a refined and
targeted version of our regional wage subsidy; improving access to and the
creation of opportunities to skill our nation and concentrating resources
on the fight against crime.

Our budget promises to create an environment in which every South African
that wants to do so can get access to the necessary opportunity to rescue
herself or himself from the painful grip of poverty.

We hope that this serious and credible document will be accepted in the
constructive manner in which it was intended. I thank you. [Applause.]

                             ANC FUNDING SCHEME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S A SEATON (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP would want to register
its shock and outrage at an article that appeared in Sunday Times of 18
February 2007 that reported on the ANC’s new fundraising scheme which
allows businesses to buy access to government information and ANC policy-
makers.

The IFP finds the scheme absolutely shocking. Members of Parliament and
politicians are elected to serve the people of South Africa and therefore
the ANC cannot charge for this essentially democratic service. It should
not be allowed; it is completely immoral.

But we should not really be at all surprised, because this is another clear
indication of how the ruling party goes about manipulating and misusing its
power. Selling access to senior public representatives and public servants
is outrageous, to say the least.
The IFP supports the call of the Institute for Democracy in South Africa
for regulation of party funding. There is a broad consensus across
political parties that there is a need to regulate private party funding.
Regulation should cover as to why the definition of donation is possible in
order to close as many potential loopholes as possible.

Unless we adopt a more transparent approach, the current absence of a
regulatory framework will allow for unethical funding schemes such as the
one being run by the ANC at present. [Applause.]


                          THE SONG ABOUT DE LA REY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv A H GAUM (ANC): Adjunkspeaker, die liedjie De la Rey het die afgelope
tyd wye openbare debat ontlok. Sommiges meen dat dit maar net ’n gewone
liedjie is, sonder politieke bymotiewe. Ander reken die liedjie poog om
Afrikanernasionalisme weer opnuut aan te vuur. Nog ander voel dat dit die
feit onderstreep dat Afrikaners herderloos voel. Voorspelbaar het die
oposisie onlangs politieke munt uit die situasie probeer slaan, deur die
Minister van Kuns en Kultuur oor sy woordvoerder se reaksie op die liedjie
te kritiseer.

Wat ook al mense se opinie oor die liedjie mag wees, een feit staan vas:
daar sal geen De la Rey soos ’n ridder op ’n wit perd kom om Afrikaners of
enige ander bevolkingsgroep te kom lei nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die tyd van
’n politieke leier vir die Zulu of die Xhosa of Afrikaners is verby. Ons is
een nasie met een leier - die President van ons land.

Dit is waartoe Afrikaners en alle ander bevolkings- en kultuurgroepe hulle
verbind het deur die onderhandelde skikking. Alle Suid-Afrikaners, ook
Afrikaners, moet daarom die nodige vrymoedigheid hê om hul uitdagings en
probleme met hul leier en sy regering op te neem. Dit sluit sake in wat mag
wissel van grondhervorming en armoede-uitwissing tot geweld en sosiale
transformasie.

Hulle kan dit doen welwetende dat hierdie regering geen behoefte het om
slegs ’n regering vir enkele bevolkingsgroepe te wees nie, maar daartoe
verbind is om al die mense van ons land te dien. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Adv A H GAUM (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the song De la Rey has recently evoked
widespread public debate. Some people feel that it is merely an ordinary
song, without political and ulterior motives. Others feel that the song is
an attempt to ignite Afrikaner nationalism once again. Furthermore, some
people even feel that it emphasises the fact that Afrikaners believe that
they are without a leader. Predictably so, the opposition recently tried to
gain politically from the situation by criticising the Minister of Arts and
Culture for his spokeperson’s reaction to the song.

Whatever people’s opinions about the song might be, one fact remains –
there will be no De La Rey who will come like a knight in shining armour to
lead the Afrikaners or any other population group. [Interjections.] The
time has gone for a political leader for the Zulus, Xhosas or Afrikaners.
We are one nation with one leader – the President of our country.

The Afrikaners and all other population and cultural groups committed
themselves to this when they negotiated a settlement. All South Africans,
also Afrikaners, must therefore have the necessary confidence to take up
their challenges and problems with their leader and his government. This
includes issues that may range from land reform and the eradication of
poverty to violence and social transformation.

They can do so with the full knowledge that this government has no need to
be merely a government for a few population groups, but is committed to
serving all the people of our country. I thank you. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]]

                         ELECTRICITY ENERGY SHORTAGE

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr H B CUPIDO (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP is concerned that the
electricity crisis we are experiencing in South Africa will surely have a
very negative impact on the Southern Region. The energy shortage we
suffered recently ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order hon members! It’s even difficult for us to hear
from here. We are pleading with members who are conducting private
conversations or meetings to please do that very decently outside the House
and leave those that would like to continue with the debates in the House.
Hon member, it was difficult for me to follow from the beginning. So, may
you please restart the time.

Mr H B CUPIDO (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP is concerned that the
electricity crisis we are experiencing in South Africa will surely have a
negative impact on our bordering neighbours in the Southern African region.
The energy shortages we suffered recently were a costly experience for
industries and ordinary households in South Africa.

Due to rapid urbanisation and the boom in the construction sector and other
industries, the need for greater energy supply came much faster than was
anticipated by our energy supplier – Eskom - and also by the government.
Because South Africa is such a vast country whose time is set on just one
time line, the ACDP is of the opinion that a huge impact can be made
immediately during peak hour usage of energy, if the time for the Cape is
set back by one hour. By doing so one hour of daylight energy will be
saved.

The electricity crisis in South Africa needs some drastic intervention that
will have an immediate effect on energy savings without capital input. Such
a change will see the peak usage being spread better and consumption
doubled. Thank you.

                              CRIME CONVENTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A HARDING (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ID would like to thank the
President for instructing Parliament to set up a national convention for
crime, poverty and transformation. However, we want to call on the
government to adopt a social democratic focus on the importance of social
workers who are crucial in tackling the root causes of crime. Simply
beefing up the police and criminal justice system needs to be avoided.
Instead we must favour a more compassionate crime prevention approach.

Many of our poor disadvantaged communities have suffered hundreds of years
of cultural chauvinism and neglect, and the ID believes that we must deploy
thousands of social workers to our communities. We must stop sending petty
criminals and first-time petty crime offenders to prisons that turn out
hardened criminals. Instead we also need to focus more on the establishment
of more rehabilitation centres. In addition, Parliament needs to finalise
the Child Justice Bill which has a budget and has been on the shelves for
some time.

How can we expect our teenagers to fight off the temporary attractions of
crime when the child grant stops at the age of 14? How can we expect them
not to drop out of school to search for work or commit crime for the same
reason? How can we expect them to achieve the best results when their
stomachs are empty because the national school feeding scheme does not
reach high school?

Poverty does not stop magically at the age of 14. The crimes against our
people must not be reciprocated but must be fixed. I thank you.

                     ANC COMMITTED TO RURAL DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M L MATSEMELA (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government has
ended the practice of using the countryside as a dumping ground where rural
people are subjected to poverty and abuse, denied their citizenship and
dignity.

The Expanded Public Works Programme projects that are being undertaken in
the rural communities of Modimole and Modimoeng in the North West are
another demonstration of how committed the ANC is to the efforts of
eradicating poverty and creating jobs.

A total 7 441 job opportunities have been created in terms of the two
projects since they began two years ago. These projects have borne the
necessary fruits by equipping our people with skills, whilst giving them
employment opportunities.

The ANC will continue to strengthen the relationship we have built over the
nine decades of our existence. I thank you. [Applause.]

                     INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Deputy Speaker, the information technology to
date is still very white and very male-oriented, not only in South Africa,
but also on the international front. It is a big problem to get mature
managers who are quite prepared to help resolve these imbalances.

Our elders should also be taken on board in this modernised,
technologically inclined world. To be able to fill the shortage of these
skills, we must give more and proper attention to the up-and-coming
graduates, and they must have more than a basic understanding thereof and
foundation-level qualifications.
The youth must also be allowed areas of specialisation. I think research
ought to be done just to find out exactly what areas of specialisation are
needed, and then have these put into the curriculum of the Setas. I bet
information technology will be on top of the list.

We need to have all these big businesses come on board and play their part
in eradicating this problem. This will help to benefit the economy. We are
now faced with a serious problem of crime, and this would also help to
reduce it.

The youth and the elderly need to be taken into consideration when we move
towards changing the imbalances in technology. I know for a fact that
Telkom is playing its part in that it is supporting schools with equipment
and is also pushing for more training. [Time expired.]

                   BULLYING TACTICS BY MINISTER OF DEFENCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R J KING (DA): Mevrou die Speaker, die DA het met weersin kennis geneem
van die onsmaaklike aanval van die Minister van Verdediging, tydens die
staatsrededebat, op ’n 80-jarige dame en ander Suid-Afrikaners wat hul
vaderland verlaat het as gevolg van die herhaaldelike aanslae van moord en
doodslag op hulle en hul geliefdes.

By ’n vorige geleentheid, soos die Raad sal onthou, waartydens die agb
Minister hom op die speelveld van die agb Minister van Veiligheid en
Sekuriteit begeef het, was dit met die rampspoedige rol wat hy gespeel het
met die afskaffing van kommando’s - en dit met noodlottige gevolge vir die
stryd teen misdaad.

Agb Minister Lekota, om soos ’n speelgrondboelie ’n bejaarde dame onder die
smeerkwas van rassisme te laat deurloop, en terselfdertyd te veralgemeen en
beledigende stellings oor alle Suid-Afrikaners wat hulle tans in die
buiteland bevind die wêreld in te stuur, getuig van uiterste swak smaak. Hy
beledig sommer op die koop toe alle Australiërs ook. Mens vra jouself af:
wat het die Minister besiel om so klaarblyklik uit te haak tydens ’n
voorbereide toespraak?

Die DA wil pleit dat ten spyte van die rooiwarm magstryd wat besig is om
drasties in temperatuur toe te neem, betrokkenes in die ANC, staatsmanskap
aan die dag sal lê en sal onthou dat hulle eerste lojaliteit lê in die
belang van Suid-Afrika as geheel. Om nou skielik rammetjie uitnek op jou
borskas trom te speel, en die hele wêreld uit te daag, getuig van gruwelike
politieke onvolwassenheid en laat ’n mens sidder oor die gehalte in die ANC
se opvolgstryd. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr R J KING (DA): Madam Speaker, the DA has taken notice with aversion of
the distasteful attack by the Minister of Defence, during the debate on the
state of the nation address, on an 80-year-old woman and other South
Africans who have left their fatherland because of repeated incidents of
violence against them and their loved ones.

At a previous occasion, as the Council will recall, when the hon Minister
entered the territory of the hon Minister of Safety and Security, he played
an ill-fated role in the abolition of the commando system which had
disastrous consequences for the fight against crime.

Hon Minister Lekota, to behave like a playground bully by targeting an
elderly lady with accusations of racism, and at the same time generalising
and sending derogatory remarks about all South Africans who are currently
overseas across the globe, bears testimony to extremely poor taste. For
good measure, and without further ado, he then also insulted all
Australians. One asks oneself: What possessed the Minister to lose control
during a prepared speech in such an obvious manner?

The DA wishes to urge that, in spite of the red-hot power struggle that is
drastically heating up, those concerned in the ANC should display
statesmanship and should remember that their first loyalty lies with the
interest of South Africa in general. To start swaggering around all of a
sudden, singing one’s own praises and challenging the entire world, bears
testimony to abominable political immaturity and makes one shudder at the
thought of the quality of the succession battle in the ANC. I thank you.]

    FREE STATE PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT’S EFFORTS AT FIGHTING POVERTY LAUDED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms I W DIREKO (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government remains
firmly committed to the vision of reconstruction and development, a vision
that embraces the idea that growth and development are significantly
linked.

As part of the Free State provincial government’s efforts to fight poverty
and boost skills, more than 3 000 jobs were created through the Expanded
Public Works Programme in the past year. The Free State provincial
government has placed the need to create jobs through a mass-targeted
approach and to implement a poverty eradication strategy at the centre,
focusing on the development of the N8 corridor and the rehabilitation and
revival of the rail network from Thaba Nchu to Bloemfontein.

The ANC commends the efforts of the Free State provincial government to
intensify the struggle against poverty as we advance in unity towards 2012.
I thank you. [Applause.]

           SUSPENDED TRIAL ON HIV/AIDS GEL WAS CONDUCTED ETHICALLY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, contrary to the initial
impression created by certain newspapers that the recently suspended trial
on the use of microbicide or gel was conducted with questionable ethics,
the trial appears to have had the highest possible ethical standards.

It was conducted in the United States of America, as well as in Africa and
India, and was stopped at the first hint that results may not be
favourable. In time they may yet turn out to be so. However, in spite of
its stated aim to monitor the ethics of medical trials in South Africa, the
SA National Regulatory Ethics Committee does not have an independent and
effective inspectorate. Hence Dr Rath has conducted trials on the effective
supplements on HIV with impunity, and a trial on the safety of a local
herb, Sutherlandia, conducted by the Western Cape University and the
University of Minnesota, does not report results publicly in South Africa.

There must be many more such irregularities, and the IFP calls on the
Minister to ensure objective and effective monitoring of research ethics in
our country to protect all persons in all provinces. Without such
monitoring, concern expressed for the exploitation of the poor in drug
trials is no more than the shedding of crocodile tears. Thank you.

EASTERN CAPE PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT COMMITTED TO JOB CREATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz P TSHWETE (ANC)eh: Sekela-Somlomo, urhulumente oxhuzula imikhala,
okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, kunyulo-jikelele lonyaka wama-2004 wenza
isibhambathiso nabantu sokulwa indlala nokudala amathuba emisebenzi.

KuLwesihlanu ogqithileyo, iNkulumbuso yephondo iMpuma Koloni idandalazise
isigqibo sikarhulumente sokutyala imali engangewaka lezigidi zeerandi. Olu
tyalo-mali lujolise ekuveliseni uhlobo olutsha lwamafutha eenqwelo angayi
kudala lungcoliseko kwimo yezendalo yaye luza kudala imisebenzi engaphaya
kwamawaka angamashumi amabini. Oku kukubonakalisa okwekati emhlophe
ehlungwini ukuzimisela kwalo rhulumente ekulweni indlala nentswelo-ngqesho
kubantu bakuthi. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement
follows.)

[Mrs P TSHWETE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, during the 2004 general elections,
the ANC-led government committed itself to fight against poverty and
provide job opportunities.

On Friday the previous week, the Premier of the Eastern Cape explicitly put
her government’s decision about its R100 million investment plan. This
investment is aimed at seeing to the production of environment-friendly
fuel and is going to create 20 000 jobs. This is further proof of our
government’s commitment to fight hunger and unemployment. Thank you.]

      CONCERN AT NEGATIVE PUBLICITY ABOUT OUR COUNTRY IN OVERSEAS MEDIA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, it is always distressing to
read negative articles about our beloved country in the overseas media,
particularly in internationally influential ones, such as The Economist of
this week. It is, however, appalling when the actions of the South African
government give foreign critics grist to their mills.

This is appalling because we profess that our foreign policy is informed by
our Constitution and commitment to human rights, and then we indulge in
tardy lip service and hide our actions behind spurious technicalities.
The apartheid government and the Soviet Union hid behind the technicality
of noninterference. The present government does likewise regarding the UN
Security Council Resolution on Myanmar. These arguments are totally refuted
in the letter by the executive director of Human Rights Watch in Geneva.

The South African government insists that the Human Rights Council is the
correct forum to address such issues, but as the letter points out, every
time human-rights-related issues came before the General Assembly’s third
committee and the Human Rights Council in 2006, South Africa turned a blind
eye to abuses.

As the letter concludes, and I quote: “Whether the persecuted are near or
far, South Africa finds itself with unclean hands.”

It is said that for evil to triumph, good men remain silent. Where would
the exiles and others be today if good men and women remained silent? The
tragedy is that we are not surprised.


                             ERMELO HIGH SCHOOL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B MTHEMBU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC believes that education
must be directed at the full development of an individual and the
community, and at strengthening respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It must promote understanding, tolerance and friendship amongst
all South Africans, and it must advance the principles contained in the
Bill of Rights.

The ANC is shocked by the reports that surfaced in the newspapers over the
past weekend. The reports indicate the ill-treatment of black learners at
Hoërskool Ermelo in Mpumalanga. These learners are not allowed to use
ablution facilities in the main school block. They are not allowed to take
part in sports activities and continuously suffer racial taunts from other
learners.

The ANC urges the Department of Education and the SA Human Rights
Commission to investigate the allegations. If crime is found to have been
committed, legal proceedings must be instituted against those responsible.
Thank you.




                             ART WORK RELOCATION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M R SONTO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, under colonialism and apartheid
the culture of the majority of South Africans was neglected, distorted and
suppressed. Freedom of expression and creativity were stifled. People and
communities were denied access to resources and facilities to exercise and
develop their need for cultural and artistic expression.
The works of black South African artists, depicting life in the townships,
were collected by foreign diplomats and art collectors and shipped out of
the country more than two decades ago.

Ilifalethu Foundation, launched 18 months ago, is scouring the globe to
recover and bring back home these priceless works. The efforts of the
foundation have been a phenomenal success to the extent that they have now
broadened the scope to include other areas of our South African heritage
such as music, films and documents.

The ANC urges all South Africans, especially art collectors from our
country and the world over, to join hands with the foundation in its
efforts to recover our lost heritage. I thank you.

                         WELCOMING SWISS DELEGATION

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we take responses, we have pleasure
to recognise the presence, in the House, of the Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of Switzerland, His Excellency Mr Michael Ambühl and his delegation
who are visiting Parliament today. Mr Ambühl, you and your delegation are
most welcome. [Applause.]


                            MINISTERS’ RESPONSES





                     RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND JOB CREATION


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to respond
to the two statements that were raised by hon members from the ANC
regarding rural development and job creation.

Indeed, we would like to appreciate, as the members of the executive, that
the interventions that we’re making in dealing with issues of rural
development and job creation are bearing fruit. Hon members would also
appreciate that, as the President said in the state of the nation address
last week, the challenge we are facing remains poverty, which we must
confront at all cost.

I hope the various provincial governments, as they make their state of the
provinces address, would also assist us in pushing the frontiers of poverty
far back and where possible towards the elimination of poverty in our
country, and ensuring that we can create opportunities for creating even
more sustainable jobs so that our people can have the better life that
we’ve all being struggling for.

I must say that the work that we would be doing with the young people, in
terms of the National Youth Service, will in part continue to enhance the
skills that those young people would have but would also expose them to job
opportunities, which may have a lasting effect, because, as we know,
maintenance of state assets, particularly at government level, is a
challenge that we have to confront as we go forward.

But if you look at the two projects that hon members referred us to, it has
not just been the contribution towards job creation, but we’ve have also
been contributing to developing the infrastructure that our country so
needs.

I would like to point out that, even though I’m responding as a Minister,
I’m also doing so as a member of the ANC National Executive Committee. I
agree with hon members that maybe the discussions should be broadened as to
how we would deal with issues of fundraising such that they do not
compromise our ethics.

But I would like to assure hon members that the ANC Business Forum is a
voluntary group where members do contribute, not just by coming to a dinner
once or twice, but they also contribute monthly to the organisation as
members. They understand that if, indeed, our democracy has to be
strengthened, the ANC as a leading party in government also has to be
strong.

So, when some of us as members of the ANC are invited to address the
Business Forum, we address them as members of the national executive.

I can also say that any political party, if they want to invite us, the
Ministers, to talk on any issue of government in portfolios, we would never
refuse. We can be invited. [Interjections.] What? Fundraising? Is there
anything wrong in fundraising for the party? I don’t think it’s wrong. We
have done that, and other parties have done that before to fundraise for
its party or party work. We will continue, as the ANC, to do so, because
there is nothing unethical about what we’ve done. Thank you very much.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]


                      PROBLEMS REGARDING SOCIAL WORKERS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, Chairperson. I just
want to respond to the statement by the IDP about social workers.

First of all, the fact that the President mentioned the training of social
workers in his state of the nation address shows us that the issue is
receiving attention. Also, the Department of Social Development has a
recruitment and retention strategy for social workers and for related care
workers. The department provides bursaries at this present time for the
training of social workers, and the salary scales of social workers have
recently been increased. At the moment we are working on the salary scales
of auxiliary social workers and we are paying attention to the shortage,
particularly in rural areas and rural provinces, which is a problem,
because once people are educated they tend to move to the cities.

Also, the department continues to consult with the professional
organisation, and the training organisations for social workers, in order
to find solutions to the ongoing problems that exist.

Besides social workers there are auxiliary workers, there are home-based
care workers, child and youth care workers, and various other care workers,
who together will be alleviating the problems. In addition to that,
government has committed itself to providing support to children over 14
years who are poor. This may be in the form of grants, but not necessarily
– it has not been decided. [Time expired.]

                            COMMUNITY OF KHUTSONG

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to thank the
hon member who raised the issue of ... [Interjections.] Chairperson, please
protect me from the Minister here.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): You are protected.
The MINISTER OF HOUSING: I would like to thank the hon member who raised
the issue of the praiseworthy and proactive work of the Khutsong
Municipality. This shows government at its most caring, ensuring security
and comfort for our people, especially in the form of housing. I sincerely
hope that a lot more municipalities will follow this trend, ensuring that
our communities who live in dangerous and stressful situations will be
given priority treatment in the work of municipalities.

I hope in particular that the City of Cape Town - and I am glad that a
number of DA members are here listening - will take a leaf from this
experience. Nowhere in the country do we have people living in more
stressful and dangerous situations than those that live within the Cape
Town city boundaries. If the city could prioritise these communities,
allocate the necessary land and budget for this, I think it would be a
commendable step.

Importantly, what needs to be noted is the relationship that exists, in
this particular case, between our communities and their government, the
confidence that they have in their government that they will be able to
move from their areas and willingly relocate to other areas. We found that
this is a big problem in most of our areas. I would like to commend the
community of Khutsong, firstly, for deciding that they were going to raise
this with the President during the imbizo, and that, secondly, they were
willing to relocate so that better accommodation could be provided for
them. I thank you.




            SOUTH AFRICA’S VOTE ON MYANMAR IN UN SECURITY COUNCIL


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I would like to
respond to the question from the DA on the vote in the Security Council.
South Africa voted on the UN Security Council resolution on Myanmar based
on principle, and the principle is that the Security Council’s mandate is
to deal with threats to international peace and security.

As we as South Africa do, always have done and will continue to work
together with other multilateral organisations to resolve international
problems, our ambassador in New York consulted with the ASEAN group, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, nations that live in the same
neighbourhood as the Myanmar Republic. They also agreed that the matter
should be dealt with by the Human Rights Council, an organisation of the
United Nations developed very recently in order to deal with just these
questions.

In addition to this, UN Secretary-General’s Good Offices envoy, Prof
Gambari, had visited Myanmar. His diplomatic work continues and such a vote
in the positive would, we believe, have contributed to jeopardising the
position of the Good Offices envoy.

South Africa does not, nor ever will, turn a blind eye to human rights
abuses, and I think it is extremely spurious of the hon member to suggest
such a thing.


                 FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS IN SCHOOLS AND ICT


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I would like to respond to
two of the statements, one by the hon Mthembu and by the UCDP in terms of
ICT.

With regard to education, today we can celebrate the fact that we have a
national curriculum statement from Grade R to Grade 12. This curriculum
statement has three pillars: knowledge, life skills and values. Amongst the
values that run through the curriculum are those of human dignity,
nonracialism, nonsexism and respect.

Now, certainly, the reports are quite disturbing. If they are true, it is
most reprehensible that a school seeks to exclude learners from enjoying
the fundamental rights which are underpinned in the Constitution, that of
human dignity and equality. It is a matter that indeed has to be
investigated, by both the Department of Education, as well as the Human
Rights Commission.

I may add that it is quite interesting that the governing body of this very
school sought to exclude 113 learners from the school on the basis that it
is a single-medium school. The High Court, composed of three eminent
judges, dismissed the application. The Minister, who was included in the
application, said that the basic right to access to education could not be
compromised under any circumstances.

What the opposition then sought to do was to put a different spin on it, to
say that we were diminishing the esteem of Afrikaans as a language. There
is no single instance in the past 13 years where any school was prevented
or discouraged from teaching in any of the 11 official languages. So, there
again, there is a distortion.

I do believe that what is fundamental is that we have to ensure, in an
unequivocal way, that we provide access to quality education to all our
learners, irrespective of their racial backgrounds, and prevent any form of
discrimination.

With regard to the issue of ICT, I am sure the hon member from the North
West is aware of the White Paper. We do believe that ICT is an important
cross-curricular tool that has to be used to enhance education. We
certainly intend to ensure that all our high schools have ICT capacity by
the end of 2008. We’ve made huge strides. In Gauteng and the Western Cape
more than 80% of schools have ICT. We are ensuring that, in terms of
teacher development programmes, ICT is taught and is part of the core
curriculum. Thank you so much. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We are only allowed a maximum of six
responses, and we have already had five. I saw various Ministers and Deputy
Ministers wanted to respond, but in terms of who raised their hands first,
I shall now go to the Deputy Minister of Arts and Culture. That is the last
response, unless there is a trading. OK then, the Deputy Minister of Safety
and Security.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We are only allowed a maximum of six
responses, and we have already had five, and I saw that Ministers and
Deputy Ministers really wanted to come in. So, in order of who raised the
hand I will then go to the Deputy Minister for Provincial and Local
Government. That’s the last response.

Sorry, it’s of Arts and Culture; the Deputy Minister of Arts and Culture,
unless there is a trading that the two will agree. OK, the Deputy Minister
of Safety and Security.

                             CHALLENGES OF CRIME

                            (Minister’s Response)
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I want to respond
to the question raised by hon King from the DA. May I indicate that South
Africa is a democratic country. Those people who are leaving South Africa
are not helping us. But may I also indicate that during the apartheid era,
we saw a lot of people leaving this country, running away from apartheid
instead of dealing with the matter decisively as some of the people who
remained in this country did.

I think the same situation applies; South Africa is a free country and the
challenge of crime is another form of struggle, and it requires every South
African to make sure that we create a better, safer and peaceful South
Africa.

I think it is important to understand that various forums which are created
in this country between government and business leaders, and religious
leaders and government are part of those forums which are committed to
creating a peaceful and safer South Africa, instead of attacking the
Minister and ultimately deciding to leave this country.

I would like to challenge everybody, and those individuals who are leaving
this country, to follow what the community of Sebokeng is doing right now
in crime prevention. Today they are a community working together with their
police station, which is a station no 1 in fighting crime in this country.
That’s the only way of making sure that we are able to create a better
South Africa for all of us, instead of leaving this country.

May I also say to Mr King that it is very important for all of us to work
together towards fighting crime instead of merely grandstanding here. The
President has posed a question and a challenge to all of us. So, to stand
here and make statements is not going to help us. Let’s seize the
opportunity created by the President in creating a safer and peaceful South
Africa. That’s the only way! We can stand here, go back and do nothing;
it’s not going to change this country. I thank you. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I understand that the Deputy Chief
Whip will be moving on three motions which the Whippery was consulted on.

                       TORRENTIAL RAINS IN MOZAMBIQUE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that the torrential rains that fell in January have
        swamped vast areas of Mozambique;


   (2)      further notes that about 30 people have lost their lives as a
        result of the floods, a total of 86 000 have been rescued and
        thousands more displaced, thousands of people are left homeless
        facing new problems including food shortages and health related
        difficulties;


   (3)      appeals to the African continent and other members of the
        international community to act together urgently to assist the
        people and government of Mozambique to deal with this humanitarian
        crisis; and


   (4)      conveys its deep condolences to the families of the deceased,
        the government and the people of Mozambique.


Agreed to.

                       PROTEA WORLD CUP CRICKET SQUAD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes the announcement of the Protea World Cup Cricket Squad to
        represent our country at the 2007 ICC World Cup in the West Indies
        during March this year;


   (2)      acknowledges the excellent performance of the Proteas team in
        the one day series victories against India and Pakistan;


   (3)      further acknowledges the great strides made by Cricket South
        Africa to transform the game at all levels through sustained
        development programmes;


   (4)      congratulates the Proteas for clinching the top spot ahead of
        Australia in the recent ICC World ranking for limited overs cricket
        and for being tipped as one of the favourites to win the Cricket
        World Cup and


   (5)      calls upon all South Africans to rally behind the team and to
        support the Proteas to World Cup glory.


Agreed to.

            PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FINANCE TO REPORT TO THE HOUSE

                             (Draft Resolution)
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That upon the introduction of the Main Appropriation Bill on 21 February
   2007, the Portfolio Committee on Finance, notwithstanding Rule 290 (3),
   report to the House within 14 consecutive working days.

Agreed to.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF PROPOSED EXCLUSION
 OF PORTION 1 OF FARM MOZIB 279, THE FARM DROOGE VELDT 292 AND PORTION 1 OF
    THE FARM THAN 280 FROM THE VAALBOS NATIONAL PARK IN TERMS OF SECTION
   21(1)(a) OF THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: PROTECTED AREAS ACT,
                            2003 (NO 57 OF 2003)

Mr D K MALULEKE: Chairperson, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental
Affairs and Tourism wishes to request the National Assembly to approve the
deproclamation of the Vaalbos National Park in terms of section 21(1)(a) of
the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act of 2003, as
amended, which reads as follows:


   21(1) a declaration under section 20 may only be withdrawn –


      (a) by a resolution of a National Assembly ...
The Vaalbos National Park is currently in the areas of the farms, namely
portion 1 of the farm Mozib 279, in the extent of 2 044,7217 hectares, the
farm Drooge Veldt 292, in the extent of 6 450,8037 hectares, and portion 1
of the farm Than 280, in the extent of 9 626,3051.

The request for the approval is based on the necessity to honour the
outcome of a successful land claim lodged by the three indigenous
communities in the location of the Vaalbos National Park. I thank you.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

Question put: That the proposed exclusion of land from the Vaalbos National
Park be approved.

Agreed to.

Exclusion of Portion 1 of Farm Mozib 279, the farm Drooge Veldt 292 and
Portion 1 of the farm Than 280 from the Vaalbos National Park in terms of
section 21(1)(a) of the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
Act, 2003 (No 57 of 2003) approved.

     THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENT IN INTENSIFYING THE STRUGGLE AGAINST POVERTY

                          (Subject for Discussion)
Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, I thank you for agreeing to have this debate
today. We as the ANC welcome the start of the debate around poverty
alleviation, and indeed intensifying the struggle against poverty. Hon
members and fellow South Africans, the eradication of poverty has, of
course, been at the centre of many ANC policies and programmes since
before, and after, the first democratic elections.

Drawing on the experience of the first 10 years of freedom, and building on
the firm foundation laid by our people in 2004, the ANC identified the goal
of halving poverty in South Africa by 2014. A report emanating from the
Reconstruction and Development Programme, entitled “Key Indicators of
Poverty in South Africa”, that was done in 1995, provides one of the early
postapartheid empirical studies attempting to understand the issue of
poverty and quantitatively measure the various facets of this social
phenomenon. Since the indicator report, a range of more detailed studies
has been conducted.

The report at that time already established, amongst other things, that:
among other middle-income developing countries, South Africa has a very
unequal distribution pattern; poverty has a strong racial dimension in
South Africa; geographically, poverty is severe and concentrated in the
rural areas; and that poverty also has a strong gender dimension in South
Africa with women, of course, earning less, being more vulnerable and
concentrated in the poorer economic categories.
Equally so, the 2005 Millennium Development Goals Report by the United
Nations also notes that, despite significant progress with regard to
reducing absolute poverty in some parts of the globe, there are regions of
the developing world where absolute poverty and hunger have increased
between 1990 and 2005.

Also, the Beijing Platform for Action called upon all governments to take
action in the following 12 critical areas of concern identified as barriers
to women’s empowerment. They included poverty, education, the economy,
power and decision-making, health, violence, armed conflict, institutional
mechanisms for the advancement of women, human rights, media, environment,
and the girl-child.

What has Parliament done? Several parliamentary conferences and regional
parliamentary meetings have confirmed the role that parliaments could play
in poverty reduction. The 24th Conference of Speakers of National
Parliamentary Assemblies of Africa, which took place in Abuja, Nigeria in
2001, already called on parliaments to take part in the preparation,
monitoring and evaluation of poverty alleviation actions and programmes
which would strengthen transparency and accountability, and guarantee an
equitable distribution of resources.

Similarly, African parliaments at the International Parliamentarians
Conference on Development in Africa, in 2005, called on governments to
strengthen the African Union and Nepad, and demanded a stronger voice in
the design and implementation of poverty reduction strategies. So quite a
number of things have been done and have been called for at that level.

In responding to these calls that have been made and continuing to talk
about poverty, we think some of the issues around poverty reduction that we
need to focus on closer to home could be set out as follows. First of all,
we are reminded of the mandate of this Parliament. It derives its mandate
from the Constitution, and in particular the mandate around the Bill of
Rights in South Africa, which enshrines people’s rights. The majority of
those rights lend themselves to poverty alleviation aspects.

Secondly, Parliament’s functions stem from Parliament’s own vision and
mission. Parliament’s mission states that, as the freely elected
representatives of the people of South Africa, our mission is to represent
and act as the voice of the people in fulfilling our constitutional
functions of passing laws and overseeing executive actions. Our vision is
to build an effective People’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs
of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better quality
of life for all the people of South Africa: a People’s Parliament to
transform the entire society.

Herein lies the objectives of what Parliament should do and what it should
set itself out to do. Of course, the spirit and intention of our
legislation should include and translate into this mission and vision that
we are talking about. It should translate into a People’s Parliament, and
therefore it should address poverty and create an enabling regulatory
environment.

Oversight is not just about looking at government departments functioning
properly; oversight should be about whether policies are passed and
translated properly for the benefit of the people, and the majority of poor
people in particular, ensuring that the goals set by government are met and
that members have the political will to do that.

Parliament should ensure that the legislative frameworks enabling poverty
reduction programmes are in place, and monitor the implementation of such
legislation. Parliament clearly has a role to play in ensuring that the
budget allocations are in line with the priorities identified for poverty
reduction and the goals set to halve poverty, as outlined by the WSSD
obligations, by 2015.

As representatives based in constituencies, parliamentarians could serve as
an important link between the communities and government, and provide that
information. As the direct representatives of constituencies, they could
mobilise communities into acting on opportunities for development and
growth, and ensure that they follow up on the progress made with regard to
particular projects.

Firstly, within Parliament and legislatures, there is a need for poverty
alleviation to become the priority of all committees – not only for those
committees that have traditionally been linked to poverty alleviation and
eradication. It is further being argued that Parliament could play a much
stronger role in providing a platform for debate on issues of poverty, and
ensuring that the voice of civil society is heard at such platforms.
Members of Parliament must play a role in continuously calling attention to
the levels of poverty, the impact of poverty on the human development of
the people they represent, and apply pressure both nationally and at
regional level, and of course at international forums, to ensure that
resource allocation for the reduction of poverty becomes a main priority.

As was noted at the Abuja conference referred to earlier, Parliament must
promote respect for the civil and political rights, as well as the economic
and social rights, of citizens within the framework of democracy and the
rule of law. According to the Constitution, Parliament has a legislative
function, and that is of course, as I stated earlier, the passing of laws
after deliberating, in most instances, at the committee level.

Legislation has been passed by this Parliament which is intended to redress
the imbalances of the past, in the process, directly or indirectly, having
an impact on poverty alleviation. This includes amongst others the
preferential policy, which ensures that the tendering process of government
favours previously disadvantaged groups. The preferred groups include
women, the disabled, those vulnerable to poverty and so on. However,
monitoring the implementation of such progressive legislation is crucial if
the intended benefits for the poor are to be realised.

Public participation is of course crucial in Parliament’s and legislatures’
efforts to alleviate and reduce poverty. It is essential that Parliament
should capitalise on the process that is already in place and which
guarantees public participation. Public participation in Parliament is of
course regulated. However, there are several ways in which people can
become involved in the business of Parliament, and which I think we should
debate much more.

As Parliament now has a tool for oversight, being the tool that most of us
use as a guideline for legislative oversight through annual reports, this
tool should now start specifying and reflecting the mission and vision of
Parliament, and the political will of members.  Indeed, we trust that this
House, the National Assembly in particular, will find some consensus around
the issue of eradicating poverty and intensifying the fight against
poverty, and indeed about us meeting our own obligations as enshrined in
the Constitution. I thank you. [Applause.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson and hon members, we all know the
significant role that a parliament plays in the life of a nation. Indeed,
the decisions taken by Parliament and policies developed in this august
House impact on the lives of all our people in a very profound way.

The question to ask is whether this Parliament is seriously fulfilling the
expectations that the people have of it. Surely the only crucible in which
to evaluate the success and efficacy of a parliament is to determine the
degree to which it meets the needs of all the people. This is after all the
people’s Parliament. Are the views of the opposition parties, which
represent a significant portion of the electorate, taken seriously? Are the
views and opinions of the various stakeholders, including NGOs, academics
and ordinary people, incorporated into government policy?

Parliamentary portfolio committees frequently invite comments when drafting
Bills and legislation, allowing interested parties an opportunity to make
personal submissions. When doing so, are their concerns given due
consideration or are they ignored?

Unfortunately, politics in our country continue to throw up what appears to
be personality clashes and attempts to win or hold onto power and positions
of high office for personal gain, rather than the interests of society as a
whole.

Chairperson, this can lead to continuing disillusionment of the public with
regard to politics and politicians, and even Parliament itself, which would
be a tragedy, especially when we have just celebrated 10 years of democracy
and our hardwon freedoms, won at great cost to life and limb.

In the DA we believe strongly in Parliament’s role in the struggle against
poverty in our country, and we would like to believe that we have set a
very good example to our colleagues in Parliament in this regard. Our many
widely praised initiatives this past financial year count among them the
following: we released an authoritative document on how to make the
currently completely inappropriately implemented Expanded Public Works
Programme really work; we ran an extensive campaign covering a number of
aspects concerning enterprise development, including the establishment of a
one-stop shop, making it easier to start a small business by removing
unnecessary costs and some of the red tape, and addressing the problem of
skills and employment; we have released a document urging a vital review of
the seriously deficient Asgisa programme, a plan which, though well
intended, has some severe deficiencies, which none of the other political
parties present in this Chamber today has been able to engage with; and we
have yet again compiled our alternative budget for South Africa for the
year 2007-08, entitled “Budgeting for Growth, Jobs and Opportunity”.

Chairperson, the facilitation and creation of opportunities for the
advancement of the poor and improving access to such opportunities is of
great importance in assisting the poor in this country.
The DA is concerned about the fact that most young South Africans do not
get a fair chance at success, particularly new entrants to the job market,
fresh from high school. Those who cannot afford to enter tertiary education
are forced make do with fewer marketable skills, making the quest even more
difficult.

Also, most employers look for some form of work experience, but because
young South Africans cannot break into the labour market in the first
place, they have no way of acquiring this experience. In this regard the DA
proposes an opportunity voucher system in terms of which annually R4 500 in
opportunity vouchers are given to Grade 12 graduates for the first three
years after school. Opportunity vouchers are all about choice and will
assist school-leavers in entering the job market. These vouchers can be
utilised in various ways, to pay towards university fees or any recognised
form of tertiary education, to subsidise an apprenticeship or learnership,
or to subsidise a newly formed small business as a tax offset.

If young learners know they can look forward to better prospects after
Matric, we believe more of them will decide to finish their secondary
schooling, and fewer will turn to crime. This, we believe, will be a
worthwhile intervention in the struggle against poverty and one that
Parliament should not hesitate in recommending to the executive.

Now the question is: Will this proposal be considered seriously and
implemented in this House, or will it be ignored simply because it is a
solution coming from the opposition? I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, I think we have to look at the role of Parliament
generally, and acknowledge that parliaments all over the world are charged
with two overriding functions, namely the passing of legislation and
maintaining oversight of the government of the day’s actions or lack
thereof.

This is no different in the constitutional democracy that is South Africa.
Therefore Parliament represents the public and not the government of the
day. It is not the servant of the executive, nor is it the useful idiot of
technocrats in the Public Service. It is supposed to be the watchdog, which
has demonstrable bite to hold the government to account, and to make the
executive and its servants understand that if they do not perform to the
required standard there will be consequences.

We as parliamentarians must therefore affirm the rightful place of
Parliament in our constitutional democratic dispensation. We can do this in
at least two ways that will strengthen the struggle against poverty.

Firstly, we have to keep poverty and its consequences as a top priority of
our national agenda. This has been done by the President in the state of
the nation speech earlier this year. Therefore, whenever we consider
legislation, we must ask ourselves as parliamentarians: How will it improve
the lives of our most vulnerable people? We must hammer this home to both
the executive and the Public Service. If Parliament is not satisfied that
its objectives are achieved in a meaningful manner, we must reject it.

If we are satisfied that a piece of legislation has the correct policy and
philosophical approach to poverty, we must insist that it is both practical
and implementable, and that it will not gather dust on some government
shelves.

Secondly, we must put more bite into our oversight functions, and we must
take oversight to the poorest communities, so that we can see their plight
firsthand, consult with them and respond to their real needs. It is no good
to think that we are conducting actual and effective oversight by sitting
in a meeting and listening to briefing after briefing from government
officials, insisting that all is well. No, we have to see for ourselves
what the situation is on the ground, where it matters.

We need moral and political courage to take Ministers and their departments
to task, and expose them when they have failed to deliver on government’s
promise to the nation and the poor. A mere slap on the wrist or a polite
request to do better next time is simply not enough.
It is time for this Parliament to use its voice to redefine its role as a
protector and champion of the most vulnerable of the poor. To our
detractors, who see this Parliament as the lapdog of the executive, we have
to prove that they are wrong, and that Parliament is able to carry out its
responsibilities to the people. For that we redefine our role, and we need
more and better resources so that we can compete in scope and technical
ability with the resources of government. We have the teeth: Let us use
them effectively. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, we often debate the challenge
of poverty in this House. Last year, in one of those debates, I said:


   The prevalence of poverty in our society continues to cast a shadow
   across the achievements under democracy.

It is not poverty alone that threatens societies, but rather the extreme
inequalities and disparities between the poorest of the poor and the super
rich. It is societies such as South Africa, where these extremes live
within viewing distance of each other, that breed mutual resentment and
contempt.

Sadly, the growth of a new middle class and elite, even though it has given
some black individuals wealth, has only exacerbated the vast gulf between
the haves and the have-nots. Parliament addresses this in its quest to hold
the executive to account and together with the government to ensure that
the policies and laws that we pursue lead to equality and prosperity for
all.

In the processes of this Parliament we provide a forum for policy debate
that excludes nobody, where the colour of your skin or the size of your
wallet does not diminish your right as a citizen to participate. I am
certain that there is no party in this House that does not view poverty as
one of the top challenges facing this country.

Thus, you can safely assume that we will jointly intensify the struggle
against poverty although we may disagree on the ways in which we can reach
our common objectives. The single biggest threat to the struggle against
poverty is the way in which power and money seek to monopolise influence
and access to governance and policy development. In this regard we must
take note of and utterly condemn the ridiculous notion of the ruling party
selling time with the senior members of the government to wealthy companies
and individuals. This is a classic example of the wealthy buying while the
poor remain excluded heavily. [Time expired.]

Me F BATYI: Voorsitter, nie te lank gelede nie is ’n opname gedoen waarin
lede van die publiek gevra is of hulle weet wat presies die doel en funksie
van die Parlement is. Baie het geantwoord dat hulle nie seker is nie en een
persoon het selfs so ver gegaan deur te sê dat die Parlement net ’n “talk
shop” is.

Dit is ’n persepsie wat ons spoedig sal moet verander. Een manier om dit te
doen, is om seker te maak dat wetsontwerpe wat hier gedebatteer word so ver
moontlik die belange van die minderbevoorregtes in ons land in ag neem. Ons
moet waak teen wette wat op nuwe liberalistiese beginsels gegrond is en wat
deurgevoer word om ’n klein elite minderheid te bevoordeel.

Ons samelewing is té ongelyk vir hierdie tipe wette en die Parlement, as
die oorsigliggaam van die regering, moet seker maak dat die vrymaak nie die
sosio-ekonomiese beginsels van die staat oorskry nie.

Verder is die Parlement al telkemale gekritiseer omdat die publiek voel dat
hulle nie behoorlik hul menings oor sekere kwessies en wetsontwerpe kan lug
nie. Hierdie kwessies het gewoonlik direk betrekking op gemarginaliseerde
groepe wat voel dat die LP wat verantwoordelik is vir hul kiesafdeling niks
doen om hul lewenstandaard te verbeter nie. Soms weet hulle nie eers wie
hierdie persoon is nie.

Die OD doen dus ’n beroep op alle LP’s om gehoor te gee aan alle kiesers in
hul kiesafdelings ten einde werklik die debatte in die Parlement te verdiep
en demokrasie vir almal te laat werk, anders gaan hierdie Huis werklik in
’n “talk shop” ontaard. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Ms F BATYI: Chairperson, a survey was conducted not too long ago in which
members of the public were asked whether they knew exactly what the aim and
function of Parliament was. Many answered that they were unsure and one
individual even went so far as to say that Parliament was just a “talk
shop”.

This is a perception that we shall have to change soon. One way of doing it
is to ensure that Bills debated here should as far as possible take the
interests of the underprivileged in our country into account. We must guard
against laws which are based on new liberalistic principles and that are
proceeded with in order to benefit an elite minority.

Our society is too unequal for these kinds of laws and Parliament, as the
oversight body of government, must ensure that liberation does not exceed
the socioeconomic principles of the state.

Furthermore, Parliament has been criticised time and time again because the
public feel that they cannot air their views properly on certain issues and
Bills. Usually these issues directly concern marginalised groups who feel
that the MP responsible for their constituency is not doing anything to
improve their standard of living. Sometimes they don’t even know who this
person is.
The ID calls on all MPs to listen to all voters in their constituencies in
order to really deepen the debates in Parliament and to let democracy work
for all, otherwise this House will really deteriorate into a “talk shop”. I
thank you.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the South African experience with regard to
poverty and wealth is not entirely unique as basic realities can be
observed in global trends. There are two major challenges, how to share the
cake more fairly and how to expand it more vigorously so that more people
might benefit, especially the poor and the marginalised.

An internationally respected Christian leader, Michael Cassidy, recognised
for his enormous contribution to reconciliation and aid development in
Africa, in his new book, What on Earth are you thinking For Heaven’s sake,
observes that people are often poor because events of history have brought
them to that point. South African poor, he says, especially victims of
apartheid, are accordingly on a journey of social, cultural and economic
repair that could take generations. He recalls an article by Professor
James Moulder which called for a paradigm shift which can be summed up as
follows:

   Anyone who wants to increase wealth must tell us how to distribute it
   more fairly. Well, anyone who wants to distribute wealth more fairly must
   tell us how to generate it more efficiently and effectively.

The ACDP believes that we need to create a form of mixed economy geared
specifically to the needs of our nation at this time. Parliament’s role is
to facilitate an environment in which opportunities for everyone and anyone
to be productive are created and at the same time to provide a safety net
for the unemployed and those in crisis situations. We must do everything
necessary to ensure that every family has a home and every child has a
family, love, discipline and a good education.

We will need competent social workers and teachers working hand in glove
with police and providers of other basic services to do this. Well-
structured, capacitated and adequately funded social welfare services are
essential. Issues of poverty are massive and complex at both a personal
level and at a macro one. A two-minute input in a debate cannot begin to
address such issues.

The ACDP acknowledges that breakthrough in the struggle against poverty
will require every one of us to challenge our mind-sets. Justice must be
the goal of all policies and initiatives aimed at poverty alleviation. True
justice will sacrifice neither productivity nor fair distribution of
wealth. I thank you.

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. Ngiyajabula namhlanje siyavumelana
kulesi sihloko esikhuluma ngaso namuhla. Kusho ukuthi kule Ndlu
yesiShayamthetho namhlanje kwehle umoya ongcwele. [Thank you, Chairperson,
I am happy today because we are all on the same page regarding the subject
we are discussing at the moment. This implies that there is a holy spirit
that descended upon this House today.]

Chairperson, on 22 December 1992, the United Nations General Assembly
declared 17 October as the International Day for the Eradication of
Poverty, to be observed from the beginning of 1993. The purpose of this day
was to promote and increase awareness of the need to eradicate poverty and
destitution in all countries.

It also serves to remind us that concerted efforts are vital to achieve the
Millennium Development Goal of halving the number of people living in
poverty by 2015. During this day, governments from all over the world,
together with nongovernmental organisations, organised activities to
commemorate the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, paying
particular attention to the plight of victims of extreme poverty.

The International Day for the Eradication of Poverty follows World Food
Day, which is on 16 October, which was proclaimed in 1979 by the Conference
of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation. The aim of World
Food Day is to heighten public awareness of the world food problem, and to
strengthen solidarity in the struggle against hunger, malnutrition and
poverty. The day marks the date of the founding of the Food and Agriculture
Organisation in 1945. That’s why the International Day for the Eradication
of Poverty is observed following World Food Day, as this recognises the
close links between hunger and poverty.

Page 4, paragraph 51 of the ANC guiding document, the strategy and tactics
of which were developed in 1969 in Morogoro says:

    A national democratic state should continually implement integrated
    antipoverty programmes, ensuring that these programmes address not only
    social assistance but also the sustainable integration of all
    communities into an economic activity.

Thina balimi siye bese sithi asibuyele emasimini. [We, as farmers, would
then say “let us go back to the ploughing fields.”]

The government has introduced an integrated nutrition and food security
programme. The aim of this programme is not only to provide the most
vulnerable households with the most basic food requirements, but also to
strengthen the capacity of poor households and communities to contribute
directly to their food security through food gardens.

This includes intensification of the registration of social grants and also
acceleration of the school nutrition programme, and the provision of
agricultural starter packs so that households can provide food for
themselves.

In the South African Yearbook 2005-06, it is reported that agricultural
starter packs to the value of R31 million were delivered to 18 575
households in all provinces as a measure of encouraging the development of
sustainable food gardens.

I’ve been listening to Radio Ligwalagwala. They are calling upon all
schools in Mpumalanga to send two teachers from each school to attend a
workshop on food gardens. These workshops have been organised by the
Department of Education. This means that through the co-operation between
the Departments of Social Development, Agriculture, Health, Education,
Government Communication and Information Services, the National Development
Agency and community-based and faith-based organisations, as well as trade
unions and business, more than 200 000 families have already been
identified in all nine provinces, and the food parcels campaign has reached
more than 12 000 families to date.

Through the Msukaligwa/Ermelo constituency where I am deployed, we have
also managed, together with the management committee, the councillors, and
the community development workers to identify the poorest of the poor
families in each ward. Then we organised 30 food parcels at a cost of R300
each. Then the local supermarket, Grants, added 5kg of mielie meal to each
parcel as a donation. We distributed those parcels as Christmas presents to
all the families that we had identified.

In recognition of the critical role agriculture plays in poverty reduction
- as we know, agriculture is a driving force, the vehicle for eradicating
poverty - the New Partnership for Africa’s Development launched the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme. The intention of
this programme is to revive agriculture in Africa with a view to addressing
problems of food insecurity and eliminating poverty amongst millions of
Africans across the continent.

The CAADP sets the goal of improving agricultural productivity at an
average growth rate of 6% each year. To make this possible, the heads of
states of governments of the African Union made a commitment at the AU
summit in Maputo in July 2003 to increase government allocations to the
agricultural sector to at least 10% of an annual national budget within
five years.

Also, the Expanded Public Works Programme is regarded as an important
bridge between the first and the second economy. The integration of the
second economy with the first economy is of paramount importance in
ensuring that emerging contractors contribute to true Broad-based Economic
Empowerment programmes.
Moreover, skills training opportunities will be offered to disadvantaged
emerging contractors. Currently, R372 billion has been provided for this
set of programmes over the next three years.

It is envisaged that there will be an acceleration of shared growth
initiatives as South Africa will play a vital role in assuring job creation
through the Expanded Public Works Programme. Also, the 24th Conference of
Speakers of African National Assemblies in Africa, which took place in
Abuja, Nigeria in 2001, called on parliaments to take part in preparation,
monitoring and evaluation of poverty alleviation actions and programmes
which will strengthen transparency, accountability and guarantee an
equitable distribution of resources.

That is why we, as Members of Parliament, must do as public representatives
are supposed to do. Given the fact that poverty reduction choices must be
translated into government programmes, we must monitor very closely the
implementation of those programmes so that it can reduce poverty. We must
also make sure that budget allocations are in line with the priorities
identified by the people who again, in local government elections, stand in
long queues, renewing the mandate. That’s why we are here today.

As Members of Parliament, through our different committees, we have a well-
established tradition of scrutinising department budgets in line with the
strategic plans. In terms of the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of
1999, government departments must submit annual reports of financial
statements on an annual basis. This will ensure that budgets are adequately
spent. We also, in our committee programme, undertake provincial visits to
play an oversight role and to monitor that service development reaches the
intended beneficiaries that arm us to fight poverty, side-by-side.

In conclusion, we also play a vital role in providing platforms for debate
on issues of poverty and in ensuring that the voice of civil society is
heard at such platforms. I would add that allocations for committee budgets
must not be blanket budgets. We all have our different oversight roles to
play. We ask that each and every committee be allocated a budget which goes
according to the programme so that they do not need to throw a blanket
allocation for everyone.

Ngesintu sakithi ke ningasijikijeli ngengubo yomgaqambongolo silale ngayo
sonke. Okunye ngicela ukuthi ngengoba sithi silwa nobuphofu,
amaconstituency offices ethu sicela ukuthi abe equipped because yilapho la
sibona khona konke lokhu kuhlupheka okukhona. Singafika la nama school of
thoughts, sithi ama school of thoughts sithi i-poverty line is like this,
its like this but thina esihlala nabo laba bantu nala senza khona ama
oversight visits, siyakubona lokhu kuhlupheka kukhona. Ngiyacela-ke kulolu
hlangothi olungapha kwami ukuthi njengalokhu bekhulume ngokuvumelana
nenkulumo ngesihloko sendlala ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)
[In our culture, we say don’t treat us in the same way. The other thing
that I would like to request is that, as we say that we are fighting
poverty, our constituency offices must be well equipped because that is
where we see this poverty. We can come with a school of thought and say the
school of thought is saying the poverty line is like this, but we, who stay
with these people and where we do oversights visits, we see that poverty is
there. I would also like to request the opposition, as they debated
positively on this topic regarding poverty ...]

I am urging that on each and every oversight visit they mustn’t ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, according to the speakers’ list, the
languages of my speech will be Afrikaans and “Eglish”. Unfortunately I
don’t know “Eglish”, so I will stick to the Afrikaans part.

Vandag gaan ek u vertel van ’n klein seuntjie, Damian Botes. Hy is 5 jaar
oud, arm, onseker oor sy toekoms en wit – en onseker oor waar sy ma ’n
blyplek gaan kry, nadat hulle drie maande gelede kennis gekry het om hulle
blyplek in ’n karavaanpark in Johannesburg te verlaat.

Hierdie seuntjie is gebore drie jaar nadat President Mbeki reeds die
President van Suid-Afrika was. Hy het nie welvaart geken nie. Hy het nie
apartheid geken nie, trouens, in die betrokke karavaanpark waar hy gewoon
het, het hy saam met hawelose Suid-Afrikaners van alle rasse gewoon. Sy
huishouding is een van die meer as 400 000 wit huishoudings wat die
afgelope 13 jaar in hopelose armoede verval het.

Waarom diskrimineer u steeds teen kinders soos Damian Botes? Waarom moet hy
agter in die tou inval, wanneer hy eendag gaan werk soek? Omdat u wette en
beleidsdokumente hom gevonnis het tot die status van nie-aangewese,
voorheen bevoordeelde of ’n “colonialist of a special kind”. Solank u in
terme van ras gaan dink wanneer u oor armoede praat, gaan daar meer en meer
kinders soos Damian Botes na vore kom. Die Damian Botesse van Suid-Afrika
sal eendag lewende getuies wees dat u bloot een vorm van rassisme met ’n
nuwe een vervang het. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Today I’m going to tell you about a small boy, Damian Botes. He is 5 years
old, poor, uncertain about his future and white – and uncertain about where
his mother will find a place to stay since they received a notice three
months ago to evacuate their dwelling in a caravan park in Johannesburg.

This boy was born three years after President Mbeki became President of
South Africa. He did not know prosperity. He did not know apartheid; in
fact, he stayed with homeless South Africans of all races in the caravan
park concerned. His household is one of more than 400 000 white households
that have fallen into hopeless poverty in the past 13 years.

Why do you still discriminate against children such as Damian Botes? Why
must he stand at the back of the queue when he looks for a job one day?
Because your laws and policy documents have condemned him to the status of
nondesignated, previously advantaged or a colonialist of a special kind.
More and more children like Damian Botes will come to the fore as long as
you think in terms of race when you speak about poverty. One day the Damian
Boteses of South Africa will be living testimony that you have merely
replaced one form of racism with a new one. Thank you very much.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson and colleagues, the President’s state of the
nation address suggested that there was a need to define the poverty matrix
for South Africa. The speech briefly outlined that a data base was required
to determine how many households were living in poverty and to identify the
measures that would be taken for intervention. Furthermore, the President’s
discourse highlighted that poverty alleviation programmes have to be
properly implemented and evaluated.

We in Nadeco believe in implementing poverty alleviation strategies to
immediate raise the standard of living of people that live below poverty
lines. We also vigorously support the notion of poverty eradication to
secure the lasting impact of stability for the future generations still to
be born in our beloved country. We link poverty alleviation to the notion
of self-sustaining families that have liberated themselves from the
shackles of dependency.

Parliament can use local government to get to the root of intensifying the
struggle against poverty by prescribing activities and roles that will
ensure an impact on poverty. Nadeco believes that it is imperative to use
ward competitions to impact on poverty. There are a number of socioeconomic
factors, which if used would result in a decline in poverty.

Siyakholelwa ekutheni makube khona imincintiswano yezindawo ezihlanzekile
ezigcemeni kanye nomncintiswano wokutshala, owokuphila kangcono nowokwakha
imisebenzi yezandla. [We believe that there must be competitions for clean
areas in township wards, agricultural competitions for living a healthy
life and for craftwork.]

In the long run this could result in a culture of nondependency amongst our
people. Nadeco believes that it is critical to implement the values for
achieving excellence from a young age.

Abancane mabanikwe ithuba lokulolongeka, basebenze kangcono ukuze bajwayele
futhi bafunde ukunganciki ngabanye. [The youth must be given training
opportunities, and work better, so that they can get used to working and
learn to be independent.]
There is a need for public mobilisation of people ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr B E PULE: Madam Chairperson, it is an irrefutable fact that poverty is
the number one enemy in our country and if the struggle against it is not
intensified, the country will go down the precipice. Parliament must take a
leading role in intensifying the struggle, but it should be noted that it
alone without the private sectors, civil societies and nongovernmental
organisations cannot succeed. There has to be a whole range of concerted
efforts with Parliament as a facilitator.

Parliament has to ensure that the use of available resources is maximised.
While the question of land restitution is intensified, its use must be
equally intensified to produce enough food for the people of our country.
We also agree that with improvement of the economy, job opportunities will
be created, hence the alleviation of poverty.

Parliament must support, and of course monitor, the small, medium and micro
enterprises. These are self-help projects calculated to minimise the
dependency syndrome. Our people must really be encouraged to do something
for themselves to earn a living, that is to explore all avenues to gain
entrepreneurial skills.

The Basic Income Grant that is talked about within certain circles could be
looked at, after endeavouring at all cost, to explore the use of available
resources, be they human or material, because the number of beneficiaries
in any case in the form of poor people also intensifies.

South Africa is predominantly rural and as agriculture forms the backbone
of the economy of the country, Parliament must intensify the use of land to
its fullest potential by giving resettled people a start of some kind
otherwise they become a burden on government. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the advent of the expansion of the markets
founded by the rising commercial capital of Western Europe during the
fifteenth century and the discovery of new lands, are the root courses of
our misery and poverty in Africa, and Azania included. The land was robbed
and Africans were subjugated politically. The loss of sovereignty by the
indigenous people and the alienation of more and more portions of their
land worsened the plight of Africans up to this day and age.

Africans have become foreigners in their country of birth. They live in
squatter camps and are experiencing the worst hunger, homelessness,
unemployment, landlessness and diseases of this century. The 1913 Land Act
passed by the then capitalist apartheid minority settler regime was a last
nail in the coffin of Africa that landed us in this dire extreme poverty we
see and smell today.

Crime and violence that boomerangs on our citizens today, who are seen to
be crying foul, were shamelessly introduced by European colonisers in
Africa. This People’s Parliament’s primary mandate in fighting the scourge
of poverty is to pass legislation that will reverse the injustices of the
past. The legislations must directly zoom in on the equitable distribution
of the land and wealth and not let our former oppressors off the hook with
cosy legislations of willing-seller as appears in the Land Restitution Act
today.

Poverty must be regarded as a national disaster and be fought without any
form of compromise.

Ka sehaeso re re, “Tsa habo moshanyana ha di hatjwe.” Ke nnete polelong e
reng, “Mopheme o hlatsisitsweng tsa ona ka sehloho e ka kgona o phele.” [In
my language we say, “One defends one’s property by any means necessary”. It
is also true in the saying, “If something has been taken away from you, you
have to find other means to reclaim it.”]

In conclusion, let me quote Comrade Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe on measures to
combat poverty. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the MF acknowledges that since 2001 South
African households living below the poverty line were reduced from 4, 1
million to 3, 6 million in 2004. While this is encouraging to note, the MF,
however, has a need to change these statistics positively at a faster rate.

Parliament’s efforts to engage in effective poverty alleviation require
from us to look at the infrastructure loopholes that hinder delivery and
that may be creating an anticipation amongst the people of government on
promises made that may be undeliverable within their set frameworks.

If we have to deliver our people from the shackles of poverty, then
Parliament has to call in an audit of all departments and organs and assist
with the shortfalls. This will enable us to abandon lunatic emergency
tactics to address issues in the short-term. The bandage does not, however,
always fit the wound. We need to realise that constant reassessment and
effective enhancement shall deliver. The wound that poverty has left on the
nation has no easy solution, but certainly can and will be eradicated.

Parliament oversees and passes legislations that mowed our way to the
transformation of our nation. But we need to enhance this by endorsing more
vigorous methods of monitoring the progress for the effective utilisation
and implementation of policies and legislation. We may add this poverty,
unemployment and skill shortages by issuing a Gazette that will list
various skills shortages and contracting companies that would sincerely
source these skills.

The MF once again calls for the review of and a debate on the affirmative
action policy. We need to utilise this forum to put in motion the concerns
that we have brought to this House 13 years ago and that we are still
struggling to achieve. If we are to effectively represent our nation and
materialise delivery, then our words have to be cemented into action. Thank
you.

Mr F BEUKMAN: Madam Chairperson, hon members, on Friday, 9 February, during
his state of the nation address, President Mbeki said the following, and I
quote:

   ... we must among other things: Define clearly the poverty matrix of our
   country; develop a proper database of households living in poverty;
   identify and implement specific interventions relevant to these
   households and monitor progress in these households as the programmes
   take effect in graduating them out of poverty ...


We must take note of this approach.

Agb Voorsitter, die laaste punt wat deur die President in sy toespraak
geopper is, is dié van monitering, en spesifiek die mandaat van die
Nasionale Vergadering. [Hon Chairperson, the last point that was raised by
the President in his speech is about monitoring , and specifically the
mandate of the National Assembly.]

Our present Constitution makes the role of Parliament very clear. Section
42(1)(3) states that its role is that of “providing a national forum for
public consideration of issues, by passing legislation and by scrutinizing
and overseeing executive action.” The Chapter 4 provisions of the South
African Constitution therefore do not prescribe to the historic and static
meaning of a parliament, but support the notion of a parliament of
oversight and accountability. Monitoring, evaluating and contesting become
the key words.

Poverty can be defined in various ways: I just want to refer to two popular
ones. The first definition describes poverty as a state where people are
poor, have no savings, own very little and often have low living standards.
The second definition states that to be impoverished is to lack or be
denied adequate resources to participate meaningfully in society.

The 8 January Statement of the ANC’s National Executive Committee includes
the following, and I quote:

    ... no people can be truly free until they have cast aside the shackles
    of poverty and underdevelopment.

It is for this reason that the eradication of poverty has been at the
centre of our policies and programmes since the first democratic elections.
Drawing on the experience of the first ten years of freedom, and building
on the firm foundation laid by our people, in 2004 we identified the goal
of halving poverty in South Africa by 2014.

In 2007, we must do everything possible to make certain that we achieve
further advances towards the achievement of that goal.

Parliament should play the primary role in ensuring that the monitoring of
poverty alleviation is done effectively. In practice, it means the
following: firstly, ensuring that poverty diagnosis and analysis encompass
participation throughout the country, particularly from the poor; secondly,
oversight of the Public Service and the executive to see that poverty
reduction policy-making does lead to improved service delivery in the areas
relevant to poverty reduction; thirdly, on budget review and analysis, to
counter misallocation and misappropriation of funds to ensure best possible
use of resources, to ensure poverty-related priorities in budgets, and to
maintain financial transparency and macroeconomic stability; and lastly,
serious monitoring of outcomes and evaluation of impacts, and insisting on
explanations when goals are not met.

The well-known South African economist, Dr Iraj Abedian, highlighted in a
paper the following as the golden rules of parliamentary oversight:
promotion of fiscal discipline, improving efficiency, and enhancing
operational efficiency. This approach is embodied in the 8 January
Statement of the ANC’s National Executive Committee, and I quote:

    ... the steps we have taken to redirect state expenditure towards
    meeting the needs of the poor, and to free up resources previously used
    to service our inherited public debt for spending on service provision
    and infrastructure.


    ... the number of households living below the poverty line dropped from
    4,1 million to 3,6 million [between 2001 to 2004]. These and other gains
    in addressing poverty can be attributed to improving economic conditions
    and a wide range of government interventions specifically aimed at the
    various forms in which poverty is manifested.

The wide range of government interventions is an indication of appropriate
analysis and corrective measures implemented. In his paper Abedian lists
six requirements of parliamentary oversight, and maybe these are issues we
must debate during the coming year. They are: one, appropriate
infrastructure; two, the promotion of a positive accountability framework;
three, political leadership is the key catalyst; four, technical capacity
is vital; five, credible audit infrastructure; and six, effective
complementary social capabilities are needed.
Een van die belangrikste denkskole ten opsigte van armoedeverligting plaas
die klem op wyer gemeenskapsdeelname. [One of the most important schools of
thought in poverty alleviation emphasises broader community participation.]

The poor themselves need to help shape their own solution. Parliamentary
oversight of this public participation is especially important, because the
emphasis on public input is such a strong theme.

Secondly, in the case of an emerging government, Parliament has a special
duty to further extensive representation of the people. Thirdly, because
participation by the poor, especially the very poor, is essential to
incorporate their first-hand insights of those who experience the reality
of poverty, the 2001 World Bank parliamentary paper highlights the
following, and I quote:

   Participation of the poor should be a preoccupation of Parliament, given
   the good governance emphasis on furthering representation of all
   constituents and citizens.

Die Suid-Afrikaanse Parlement se uitreikprogram en vestiging van
provinsiale inligtingkantore is ’n uitstekende voorbeeld in dié verband.
Die interaksie tussen portefeuljekomitees en diegene wat as “arm” volgens
die tersaaklike definisie geklassifeer word, is krities noodsaaklik. Die
projek van die People’s Parliament sluit by hierdie benadering aan. Tydens
2006 se besoek aan Oudtshoorn en die omliggende gemeenskappe, waar die
dilemma en uitdagings van arm en landelike groepe deur die parlementslede
ervaar is, is die noodsaaklikheid om die debat in die Raad relevant en
tersaaklik te hou na vore gebring.

Dit is dan jammer – en ons het vanmiddag ook ’n voorbeeld van die VF Plus
hier gehad – dat sommige partye en lede aan dié kant van die Raad nie hul
weg oopsien om deel te neem aan die People’s Parliament nie, om eerstehands
te verneem wat aan die gang is. Om aan hierdie nasionale diskoers oor
armoede deel te neem, moet lede van die Parlement gereeld en direk die
uitdagings van ons kollektiewe situasie hanteer.

Die leier van die agb Spies het in die debat aan die President gesê: “We do
not know each other and we do not debate with each other.” Dit is baie
duidelik uit u inset hier vandag dat u nie die werklikhede van die oorgrote
meerderheid van die mense in Suid-Afrika ken nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The South African Parliament’s outreach programme and establishment of
provincial information offices is an excellent example in this regard. The
interaction between the portfolio committees and those who are classified
as “poor”, according to the relevant definitions, is critically important.
The People’s Parliament project complements this approach. During the 2006
visit to Oudtshoorn and the surrounding communities, when the dilemma and
challenges of poor and rural groups were experienced by members of
Parliament, the necessity to keep the debate in the Council relevant was
highlighted.

It is a pity then that – and we also had an example of the FF Plus here
this afternoon – some parties and members on this side of the Council
cannot see their way through to participate in the People’ s Parliament, to
gain first-hand insight into what is happening. In order to participate in
this national discourse on poverty, members of Parliament must regularly
and directly deal with the challenges of our collective situation.

The leader of the hon Spies said to the President in the debate: “We do not
know each other and we do not debate with each other.” It is very clear
from your input here today that you do not know the reality of the great
majority of people in South Africa.]

How can MPs build better links with the poor in their constituency areas?
How can they contribute to solving the many problems the poor seem to
identify in their dealings with local governments? How can MPs ensure that
the poor themselves have ongoing input into poverty reduction strategies?
Participation can and does have a crucial impact in both poverty diagnosis
and poverty policy priority determination.

The approach in the 8 January Statement of the ANC NEC also focuses on
participation by communities in eradicating poverty, for example, by
monitoring the availability of information on the Public Works Programme
and the accessibility of grants, and monitoring by ward committees and
communities of the roll-out of the free basic electricity programme.

Regarding the practical implications for Parliament, the Laurentian Seminar
on Poverty identified constituency work as an important tool to contribute
to the eradication of poverty. Parliamentarians should be agents of change,
striving to change attitudes, providing information and mobilising groups.
The document indicates that MPs often lack the basic tools needed to serve
their constituents effectively, such as properly staffed offices and
communications equipment – one of my colleagues already referred to that.
Parliament should pursue an active strategy of improving service to
constituents.

The Laurentian Seminar on Poverty suggests the following, and I just want
to mention a few – some of these issues have already been dealt with by our
Parliament, but I think others can also be addressed in the next year or
two.

The parliamentary budget should provide funds to cover constituency
offices’ staff, expenses associated with travel to the constituency and
meeting with constituents. MPs should use community organisations for focus
group discussions, as a source of information and advice on development
issues. Parliamentarians could carefully check the track record of
organisations representing the poor.

MPs should consult with their constituents when they discuss important
votes in Parliaments. To facilitate this, they should post their schedules
in public places in their constituencies and hold community forums in
various parts of their constituencies.

MPs should be given training in serving constituents, including on
methodologies of public consultation and citizen engagement. MPs should
work closely with other levels of government, and especially with local
government in their constituencies. In turn, they should help their
constituents find their way through the maze of modern government.

Dit is enkele voorbeelde van hoe die Parlement kan bydra om armoede
prakties te verlig. Baie dankie. [These are a few examples of how
Parliament can contribute to relieve poverty in a practical way. Thank you
very much. [Time expired.][Applause.]]

Ms N M MDAKA:  Madam Chairperson, our Parliament is the main institutional
link between the will of the citizen of this country and state
institutions. As parliamentarians, we have a standing obligation to
intensify the struggle for the total eradication of poverty in our
communities. Let me stress the importance of forging links with civil
society organisations and independent policy-advisory institutions on local
and national levels so as to strengthen information inputs as far as
poverty alleviation programmes are concerned.

The UIF calls on the government to design more pro-poor strategies to
deliver technical and craft skills to support formal employment and
facilitate self-employment ventures. Poor South Africans must be encouraged
to engage themselves in small individual and group equity formations in the
form of savings clubs and be able to have access to low interest credit.

Madam Chairperson, it is however important to mention in passing that the
South African Parliament has not been able to strengthen the links of
accountability with other stakeholders mainly due to constitutional
inelegance.

Parliament should establish a special standing committee to co-ordinate its
oversight responsibility of monitoring government and pro-poor policy
impact, and obligate the executive to provide clearly articulated
programmes for the poor. It is important for political constituency offices
and office bearers to work closely with regional representatives and
private sector leadership to review ... [Time expired.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, Parliament, especially if it refers to itself as
a People’s Parliament, must play a crucial role in reducing the impact of
poverty on the poorest of the poor.

Godfrey Dunkley writes in his book entitled That All May Live: Guidelines
Towards a Better Society on the issue of poverty:

  Sir Thomas More, in his concepts of Utopia set out long before the
  Industrial Revolution, visualised a society in which all men and women
  would need only to work six hours a day to provide for all the needs of
  everyone.

Does it not seem strange that, with all the modern scientific and technical
developments, even the advanced nations seem unable to solve the human
problem of poverty? Why do some countries actually pay farmers not to
produce while people starve in others? Some nations have an abundance of
good soil, good climate or mineral resources; some have little in the line
of natural resources. Yet it is often the countries which are well-endowed
where people live in poverty or starve to death, while other nations with
little resources are able to support their population at a reasonably good
level.

As South Africans, we are fortunate to have a country rich with natural
mineral resources. But our most valuable resource is our people. If
children in our country starve, how can we, with a clear conscience, enjoy
a well-balanced meal each and every day? As MPs, we must wrestle with the
real causes of poverty, and we must all contribute to eliminate, or at
least reduce poverty.

Poverty cannot be reduced by hand-outs alone; social relief should bring
relief to many people for a period of hardship, but it should not become a
lifestyle. Young able-bodied men and women should be given sufficient
opportunities for employment. They should not view the state as a source
for hand-outs.

As MPs, we must strive to promote the conditions to create sufficient
opportunities for everyone who wants to work, especially our youth.

There are many indigent people, amongst the aged, children, and the
physically disabled, who cannot survive without social grants. Finally,
poverty is a form of enslavement. As MPs, we should unite in our fight to
end poverty. I thank you.

Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, hon members, as my colleagues pointed out this
afternoon, a large number of South Africans are chronically unemployed, and
it is likely that this situation will continue if we do not respond
urgently.

As Members of Parliament, it is our duty and job to ensure that whatever
programmes government has in place to address this situation is implemented
properly and appropriately. One such programme is the Expanded Public Works
Programme. The government currently presents the EPWP as a primary tool for
creating jobs, which it is certainly not able to do.

In truth, the EPWP could be much better utilised to open up opportunities
to the unskilled chronically employed by focusing on helping them to
compete better for real jobs in the open labour market.

Traditionally, labour intensive public works programmes are employed by
governments to provide temporary working opportunities to labour during
natural cyclical unemployment or temporary unemployment that came about as
a result of temporary economic shock.

In South Africa, unemployment is a deep-seated, chronic phenomenon that
resulted because of how the structure of our economy evolved. In our view,
this does not obviate the EPWP as a meaningful intervention in our society.

We believe that it merely requires a shift in the focus of the programme.

Re le baDA, re šišinya le go thekga lenaneo la go thuša bahlaki, la basic
income grant ya R120 ka kgwedi. Re tshepha gore tšhelete yeo e ka thuša
ditšhiwana tšeo di hlokago mošomo, gagolo banna le basadi.
Banna le basadi ba merafe ka moka bao ba hlokago, ba swanetše go hwetša
dintlo tša RDP. Palamente e swanetše go dira bonnete bja gore dikgoba tša
mešomo mmušong di tlatšwa ka go thwala bašomi. Go kweša bohloko gakaakang
ge batho ba phela ka bodiidi etšwe go le dikgoba tše ntši tša mešomo
mafapheng a mmušo.

Re le baDA, re ka thaba ge Palamente e ka lebelela mathata ka moka a
ditirelo tša motheo mebasepaleng gomme ya gapelet ša balaodi le borametse
go dira mešomo ya bona ka tshwanelo. Setšhaba se lla ka tlhokego ya
mešsomo, meetse, dintlo, ditsela le mohlagase, eupša tšhelete e gomela mo
Palamenteng ka baka la go se šomišwe. Presidente o boletše gore dimilione
tše seswai tša batho di hloka mohlagase le meetse.

Bodiidi bo tloge bo iphile maatla gagolo bathong bao ba dulago dinageng-
magae tša go swana Ga-sekhukhune, Ga-Phasha, Luckau, Mmapela, Masodi,
Vaaltyn, Tshamahansi le Ga-Matlala ka porofenseng ya Limpopo. Ditšhaba tšeo
di sa nwa meetse a dinoka ao di a hlakanelago le diphoofolo. Batho ba hloka
kelelatšhila.

Re le baDA, re rata go bontšha Palamente le komiti ya phothofolio yeo e
šetšanego le merero ya bommasepala gore e etele dilete tšeo tša mebasepala
go thuša go lwantšha bodiidi le go dira gore mananeo a dihlabollo a
hlongwe, setšhaba se šome gomme bodiidi bo lwantšhwe.

Khomišene ya Ditokelo tša Botho e be e etetše Ga-Phasha moo e ilego ya
hwetša masetlapelo le tšhego. Batho ba bakišana meetse le diphofolo. Taba
ye e ile ya befediša khomišene ka ge e lemogile gore botho ga bo hlomphiwe.
Khomišene e ile ya fetša ka gore se e tloge e le kgatako ya ditokelo tša
botho. Taba yeo e ile ya gašwa go SABC2 ka la lesomepedi Fepereware. Ke a
leboga. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[We, as the DA, support the programme of poverty alleviation, and that of a
monthly R120 basic income grant. We believe that the grant will help the
poor unemployed people, especially men and women. All women and men of
different races who are unemployed are entitled to RDP houses. Parliament
must ensure that the vacant posts in various government departments are
filled. It is extremely painful when people are struggling whereas there
are a lot of vacant posts in the government departments.

We, as the DA, would appreciate it if Parliament would look into all the
challenges pertaining to basic services at the municipal level and insist
that the councillors and other leaders in local government do their jobs
properly. People are complaining about unemployment, shortage of water,
houses, roads and electricity whereas unused allocated funds are returned
to Parliament. The President said himself that there are eight million
people without water and electricity.

There is a lot of poverty in the rural areas in the Limpopo province such
as ga-Sekhukhune, ga-Phasha, Luckau, Mmapela, Masodi, Vaaltyn, Tshamahansi
and ga-Matlala. Those people are still sharing water from the rivers with
the animals. People desperately need sewerage systems.

We, as the DA, would like to propose that Parliament and the Portfolio
Committee on Local Government go on a site visit to the municipal regions
so as to help alleviate poverty there and to establish developmental
programmes that will create jobs for the people in the areas.

The Human Rights Commission visited ga-Phasha and encountered poverty and
distress. People there are sharing water with animals. This upset the
Commission as they realised that there is no respect for humanity. The
Commission concluded that was an infringement on human rights. This was
further broadcasted on SABC 2 on the 12 February. Thank you. [Time
expired.]]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, let me start off by thanking all the members
who have participated in this debate. Indeed, the debate here this
afternoon has yet again demonstrated why we need to deepen the debate, as
Parliament has stated this year that we need to deepen the debate in South
Africa around a range of different topics.

One of the topics is around the issue of poverty alleviation and the debate
this afternoon has yet again reminded one that unless we inquire and unless
we seek consensus in this House around major issues, we are unable to
provide hope to our people out there. It is important that this Parliament
is seen as a Parliament that leads, a Parliament that provides hope, a
Parliament that is able to say to the people in South Africa: This is what
we can do. Can you come with us as South Africans?

It is important for this Parliament to give leadership around the fact that
it is important to rather establish a broad front out there in South
Africa; a broad front that could be developed around poverty alleviation.
It is not going to help that if we want to find some quick-fix solution and
think that the deep-seated problem for over 300 years will go away by some
of the quick-fix solutions that have been offered by some here this
afternoon.

The key question that we must answer today is: Did this debate provide the
citizens of South Africa with the guidance and leadership and hope that
indeed Parliament is living up to what the Constitution requires us to do?
It is our constitutional obligation to ensure that what is being said in
the Bill of Rights are being done in this country.

The hon member from the DA asked: Is this debate being taken seriously?
Well, of course, any debate will be taken seriously on the basis of what
you say. This depends on the contents of what you offer as solutions to the
country. I think this was probably summed up by the hon member from the MF
who said that it is not going to help to have band-aid solutions to some
issues.

So, I think we must understand the debate as a continuation of saying that
we should not be vultures in the country and so on. Don’t you think that
that will take us back to where we have come from by providing a solution
yet again that is a band-aid instead of really completely making sure that
we do away with the real problem that we do have in this country?

With regard to the hon member who spoke about the EPWP principles, I think
it will be good to go to those programmes and see what happens. Let me cite
an example. We see many fires around the country. Who are attending to
them? They are being attended to by people that are called Working for
Fire. To which programme do they belong? It is part of the EPWP programme.
How many young people are involved in these programmes? So, I think it
would be important to understand what is happening in the EPWP programmes
instead of just writing them off.

Indeed, there are areas where the member says people are sharing drinking
water with animals. Of course, those committees have been visited and we
have seen them in places like KwaZulu-Natal where human beings are sharing
drinking water with animals. And of course interventions have been brought
about. But I think the important thing that this Parliament must realise
about this debate is: Are we able to give leadership? Are we able to
develop a broad front out there in our constituencies? Are we able to live
up to our obligation that is enshrined in the Constitution? Can we live up
to finding consensus on very important issues such as these? Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:37.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                          MONDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2007


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

      Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2005-2006,
      including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements for 2005-2006.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T070219E-insert – PAGES - 130-149




National Assembly


1.    First Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Review of Chapter 9 and
      Associated Institutions to the Speaker of the National Assembly, dated
      28 November 2006:

      1.    Background

On 21 September 2006, the National Assembly adopted a motion establishing
an ad hoc committee to review State institutions supporting constitutional
democracy (the so-called “Chapter 9” institutions) and the Public Service
Commission.  Members assigned to the Committee by the respective political
parties are listed in Table 1.  The main purpose of the Committee is to
review the effectiveness, efficiency and appropriateness of the
institutions with a particular focus on recommendations for further
development and improvement.  The Committee must report its findings and
recommendations to the National Assembly no later than 30 June 2007.

The Committee will examine operational and functional systems and processes
of the various institutions highlighting areas for improvement.  This will
include reviewing amongst others, the mandates, mechanisms for public
involvement, reporting, coordination, management, governance structures,
interactions with the Executive and with Parliament, and financial and
operational efficiency.
Table 1:    Members of the ad hoc Committee on Review of Chapter 9 and
Associated Institutions

|Political Party                |Member of Parliament            |
|African National Congress      |Prof A K Asmal (Chairperson)    |
|                               |Mr S L Dithebe                  |
|                               |Ms C Johnson                    |
|                               |Adv M Masutha                   |
|                               |Mrs M J J Matsomela             |
|Democratic Alliance            |Dr J T Delport                  |
|                               |Ms M Smuts                      |
|Inkatha Freedom Party          |Mr J H van der Merwe            |
|Minority Front                 |Mrs S Rajbally                  |
|United Party of South Africa   |Mr S Simmons                    |


      2.    Progress

   1. Meetings

The Committee held its first meeting on 10 October 2006 followed by a media
conference.  The Committee discussed its Terms of Reference and agreed that
in addition to the Chapter 9 Institutions and the Public Service
Commission, the following institutions should be included in the review:

    • The Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Chapter 9,
      Section 192)
    • The Financial and Fiscal Commission
    • The Youth Commission
    • The Pan South African Language Board

On 20 October 2006, the Committee held a joint meeting with all
institutions included in the review.  Their Chairpersons and/or Chief
Executive Officers or other designated officials or Commissioners
represented the institutions.  This meeting offered the institutions an
opportunity for engagement with the Committee on the content of the Terms
of Reference of the Committee.  The Chairperson also indicated the intended
method of work and work programme of the Committee.

This meeting was followed up with the distribution of a questionnaire to
all institutions under review, adopted by the Committee at its meeting on
25 October 2006 (Annexure A).  The Institutions are required to respond to
the questionnaire no later than 10 January 2007.  During this meeting, the
Committee heard presentations from research institutes and non-governmental
organisations conducting or planning to conduct research on Chapter 9
institutions.  These included the Human Sciences Research Council,
University of Cape Town and Idasa.

The Committee discussed the constitutional and legal implications of its
Terms of Reference (a paper prepared for the Committee by Prof. Pierre de
Vos, professor of Law at the University of the Western Cape) in a closed
meeting on 8 November 2006. This discussion was intended to serve as a
capacity-building exercise for Members and staff of the Committee.

      2.2   Communication

A detailed media and communications strategy was developed.  The Committee
issued three media statements and the Chairperson held two media briefings.
Letters were sent to all institutions under review prior to meeting with
them on 20 October 2006.

Newspaper advertisements were placed in national and provincial newspapers
introducing the Committee and its work and calling for public input into
the review process.

Letters were sent to the relevant Ministers informing them of the Committee
and its work and requesting any input from the Ministries and their
respective Departments.

Letters were drafted to the relevant Portfolio and Select Committee
Chairpersons informing them of the Committee and its work and inviting
their input on specific matters.

      2.3   Planning and organisation of Committee work

To ensure effective planning of Committee activities and effective internal
and external communication, the Chairperson of the Committee established an
administrative working group comprising the following parliamentary staff:

    • Dr Leon Gabriel, Manager: Information Services Section;
    • Adv Anthea Gordon: Legal Services Office
    • Mr Tshiliso Molukanele, Procedural Officer: National Assembly Table;
    • Mr Marc Philander, Control Committee Secretary: Committee Section;
    • Ms Teboho Sepanya, Committee Secretary: Committee Section;
    • Ms Christine Silkstone, Researcher: Research Unit;
    • Mr Mmuso Pelesa, Media Officer: Media Management Office
    • Ms Lerato Monethi, Media Officer: Media Management Office
    • Ms Pumla Qambela: Researcher (ANC)
    • Mr E Nevondo, Researcher: Office of the Speaker.

In addition, the Chairperson procured the professional services of Prof
Pierre de Vos, professor of Law at the University of the Western Cape.

Given the short deadline by which the Committee must report to the National
Assembly, the Committee agreed that the Members should prioritise the work
of the Committee and also on the organisation of work as indicated in Table
2.  It is important to note that Members would not be confined to the
institutions to which they have agreed to be assigned.

Table 2:    Organisation of work

|Allocation of functions                                                  |
|Institutions under review  |Member assigned           |Staff assigned     |
|ICASA,                     |Hon Prof AK Asmal         |Ms C Silkstone     |
|Auditor General,           |Hon Ms M Smuts            |Ms P Qambela       |
|Financial and Fiscal       |                          |                   |
|Commission                 |                          |                   |
|Human Rights Commission    |Hon Adv M Masutha         |Adv A Gordon       |
|Commission on Gender       |Hon Ms C Johnson          |Dr L Gabriel       |
|Equality                   |                          |                   |
|Youth Commission           |                          |                   |
|Public Protector           |Hon Ms C Johnson          |Mr M Philander     |
|                           |Hon Mr S Simmons          |Ms L Monethi       |
|Commission on Religious,   |Hon Mr SL Dithebe         |Ms T Sepanya       |
|Linguistic and Cultural    |Hon Mr JH van der Merwe   |Mr T Molukanele    |
|Rights,                    |Hon Ms S Rajbally         |                   |
|Pan South African Language |                          |                   |
|Board                      |                          |                   |
|Public Service Commission, |Hon Ms MJJ Matsomela      |Mr E Nevondo       |
|Electoral Commission       |Hon Dr JT Delport         |Mr M Pelesa        |

      2.4   Research and documentation

To ensure that Members have ready access to a central repository of
documentation relevant to the work of the Committee a resource centre was
established in the Library of Parliament.  The centre will contain relevant
legislation, research papers, five-year retrospective annual reports,
Auditor General’s reports and special reports of all institutions under
review, provide a news clippings service, and keep all public records of
the Committee’s work.

The working group also conducts research as required by the Committee. The
following documents have been produced:

    • Rationale for the inclusion of Chapter 9 in the Constitution
    • Composition, terms, appointment and removal from office of the
      different institutions
    • Legal basis for institutions supporting democracy
    • Profile of State institutions supporting democracy in South Africa
    • Budgets and expenditures of institutions supporting democracy 2003 –
      2006
    • Bodies appointed by Parliament or the National Assembly

      3.    Planned Activities

The Committee will hold regular meetings early in 2007 to process responses
to the questionnaire administered to the institutions under review.  The
Committee intends conducting individual meetings with each institution.

The Committee intends conducting a public opinion survey in 2007.  This
might require the services of a research institute or an appropriate
nongovernmental organisation.

      4.    Reporting

The Committee plans to consider its draft report by April 2007 and report
to the National Assembly by end June 2007 as required by the Terms of
Reference.

      5.    Preliminary Recommendations

The Committee unanimously agreed to formulate a recommendation on the
establishment of a special Unit (at the level of Chief Directorate) in the
Office of the Speaker that would focus on liaison and interaction between
Parliament and Chapter 9 and related institutions.


AK Asmal, MP

Chairperson: Ad hoc Committee on Chapter 9 and Associated Institutions


                          TUESDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

      (1)   The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 19 February 2007 in terms of
           Joint Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section
           75 Bill:

           (a)   South African Airways Bill [B 35 – 2006] (National
           Assembly – sec 75).


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

      (1)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration and the Portfolio Committee on
           Social Development:

           (a)   Report of the Auditor-General on the Findings identified
                 during an Investigation into Alleged Misappropriation of
                 Funds at the National Development Agency [RP 262-2006].

      (2)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
      Education:

           (a)   Government Notice No 1491 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29317 dated 23 October 2006: Call for comment on
                 the Draft National Policy Framework for Teacher Education
                 and Development in South Africa, made in terms of section
                 3(4)(f) of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No
                 27 of 1996).
           (b)   Government Notice No R 1052 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29311 dated 18 October 2006: Regulations
                 relating to the exemption of parents from payment of school
                 fees in Public Schools, made in terms of sections 39(4) and
                 61 of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of
                 1996).

           (c)   Government Notice No 1205 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29438 dated 1 December 2006: Publication of List
                 of No Fees Schools per province – Declaring No Fees Schools
                 in 2007 for all nine provinces, made in terms of section
                 39(10) of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of
                 1996).

      (3)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
      Transport:

           (a)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
                 Africa and the Government of the Argentine Republic for the
                 Co-ordination of heir Maritime and Aeronautical Search and
                 Rescue Services, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
                 Constitution, 1996.

           (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
                 Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
                 Government of the Argentine Republic for the Co-ordination
                 of heir Maritime and Aeronautical Search and Rescue
                 Services.
      (4)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Minerals and Energy for consideration and report:

           (a)   Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material,
                 tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
                 1996.

           (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on the Physical
                 Protection of Nuclear Material.

      (5)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry:

           (a)   Government Notice No 1197 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29426 dated 28 November 2006: Prohibition in the
                 making of fires in the open air in the districts of
                 Clanwilliam, Piketberg, Ceres, Tulbagh, Worcester, Caledon,
                 Paarl, Stellenbosch, Strand and Somerset West, made in
                 terms of section 25(1) of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122
                 of 1984).

           (b)   Government Notice No 1198 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29426 dated 28 November 2006: Prohibition in the
                 making of fires in the open air in the districts of
                 Caledon, Worcester, Robertson and Swellendam. (The
                 Riviersonderend Mountain Range), made in terms of section
                 25(1) of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

           (c)   Government Notice No 1199 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29426 dated 28 November 2006: Prohibition in the
                 making of fires in the Western Cape, made in terms of
                 section 25(1) of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).
           (d)   Government Notice No 1200 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29426 dated 28 November 2006: Prohibition in the
                 making of fires in the open air in the districts of
                 Swellendam, Montagu, Worcester and Robertson (The Western
                 Langeberg Mountain range), made in terms of section 25(1)
                 of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

           (e)   Government Notice No 991 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29277 dated 13 October 2006: Establishment of
                 the eDikeni Water User Association in the Magisterial
                 District of Victoria East, Province of the Eastern Cape,
                 Water Management Number 12, made in terms of section 92(1)
                 of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

           (f)   Government Notice No 998 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29277 dated 13 October 2006: Withdrawal of
                 restrictions on the use of water for agricultural purposes
                 from the Bronkhorstspruit River and its tributaries
                 (Tertiary Catchments 820A, 820B, 820C, and 820D and the
                 withdrawal of restrictions on the use of water for urban
                 and industrial purpose from Bronkhorstspruit Dam and
                 Village Dam[Premier Mine Dam]), made in terms of section 63
                 read with section 72 of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
                 No 36 of 1998).

           (g)   Government Notice No 999 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29277 dated 13 October 2006: Withdrawal of
                 restrictions on the use of water for agricultural purposes
                 in the Inkomati Water Management Area, made in terms of
                 section 63 read with section 72 of the National Water Act,
                 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

           (h)   Government Notice No 857 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29154 dated 1 September 2006: Transformation of
                 the Keurbos River Irrigation Board in the Magisterial
                 District of George, Western Cape Province into Maalgate
                 Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 16,
                 Western Cape Province, made in terms of section 98(6) of
                 the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

           (i)   Government Notice No 897 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29062 dated 8 September 2006: Notice of List of
                 Protected Tree Species, made in terms of 12(1)(d) of the
                 National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

           (j)   Government Notice No 900 published in the Government
                 Gazette No 29205 dated 15 September 2006: Establishment of
                 the Thukela Catchment Management Agency (Water Management
                 Area Number 7) in the Province of KwaZulu-Natal, made in
                 terms of section 78(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
                 No 36 of 1998).

      (6)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:
           (a)   The Acting President of the Republic submitted the
                 following letter dated 20 December 2006 to the Speaker of
                 the National Assembly informing Members of the Assembly of
                 the employment of the South African National Defence Force
                 in Burundi:

      (7)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance for consideration and report:

           (a)   Protocol on Finance and Investment of the Southern African
                 Development Community, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
                 the Constitution, 1996.

           (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol on Finance and
                 Investment of the Southern African Development Community.

      (8)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the
           Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
                 Board on the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for
                 the year ended 31 December 2005 [RP 94-2006].

           (b)   Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
                 Deposits for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
                 Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the
                 2005-2006.
           (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Public Accountants’
                 and Auditors’ Board for the 15 month period ending 31 March
                 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
                 the Financial Statements for the 15 month period ending 31
                 March 2006.

      (9)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance for consideration:

           (a)   Draft Regulations issued under Section 91A of the Income
                 Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962), prescribing the
                 circumstances under which the Commissioner may write off or
                 comprise any amount of Tax, Duty, Levy, Charge, Interest,
                 Penalty or other amount.

           (b)   General Notice No 59 published in Government Gazette No
                 29556 dated 24 January 2007: Draft Regulations issued under
                 section 13, tabled in terms of section 13(3) of the Small
                 Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Act,
                 2006 (Act No 6 of 2006).

      (10)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
           report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Criminal Assets
                 Recovery Account for 1999-2005, including the Report of the
                 Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1999-2005
                 [RP 249-2006].

           (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Criminal Assets
                 Recovery Account for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
                 Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
                 [RP 248-2006].

           (c)   Report of the Master of the High Court of South Africa on
                 Moneys in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2002-2003,
                 including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Summary
                 of Statements of Moneys in Trust kept in the Guardian’s
                 Fund for 2002-2003.

           (d)   Report on Monies in Trust for 2003-2004, including the
                Report of the Auditor-General issued in the absence of
                Financial Statements for the Monies in Trust for 2003-2004.

           (e)   Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for
                2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
                the Summary of Statements of Monies in Trust kept in the
                Guardian’s Fund for 2003-2004.

           (f)   Report and Financial Statements of Monies in Trust for
                2002-2003, including the Report of the Auditor-General
                issued in the absence of Financial Statements for the Monies
                in Trust for 2002-2003.

           (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the Guardian’s Fund for
                 2005-2006 including the Report of the Auditor-General on
                 the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 263-2006].

           (h)   Report and Financial Statements of Monies in Trust for
                 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
                 issued in the absence of Financial Statements for the
                 Monies in Trust for 2004-2005 [RP 255-2006].

      (11)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Report of
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to
           the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme
                 for Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2005-2006, including
                 the Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
                 Statements for 2005-2006.

           (b)   Annual Report of The Office of the Consumer Protection for
           2005-2006.

      (12)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
           Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
           Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
                 Language Board (PANSALB) 2005-2006, including the Report of
                 the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-
                 2006 [RP 264-2006].
      (13)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

           (a)   Proclamation No R49 published in Government Gazette No
                 29456 dated 7 December 2007: Amendment of Proclamation, in
                 terms of the Special Investigating Units and Special
                 Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

           (b)   Proclamation No R50 published in Government Gazette No
                 29456 dated 7 December 2007: Referral of matter to existing
                 Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms
                 of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals
                 Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

           (c)   Government Notice No R990 published in Government Gazette
                 No 29278 dated 13 October 2007: Regulations regarding the
                 Promotion of Access to Information, made in terms of the
                 Promotion of Access to Information Act, 1996 (Act No 2 of
                 2000).

      (14)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
           Reports of the Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
           Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

           (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Bloem Water for the
                 year ended 2006, including the Report of the Independent
                 Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
                 June 2006.

           (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the
                 year ended 2006, including the Report of the Independent
                 Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
                 June 2006.

           (c)   Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle Northern Water
                 for the year ended 2006, including the Report of the
                 Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the
                 year ended June 2006.

           (d)   Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for the
                 year ended 2006, including the Report of the Independent
                 Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
                 June 2006.


