---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 October 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-10-16
---

TUESDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

House Chairperson Mr K O Bapela took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

  WELCOMING TO HOUSE OF DELEGATION LED BY LEADER OF HOUSE OF CHIEFS OF THE
                            REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome in the Speaker’s bay a delegation from Botswana. The
delegation is led by Kgosi Mothibe Linchwe, leader of the House of Chiefs
of the Republic of Botswana. Welcome. [Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I hereby shall move at the next
sitting day of the House:
   That the House debate what implications it has for South Africa’s
   international standing that the National Police Commissioner, Jackie
   Selebi, has been in the past, and may well continue to be in the future,
   the subject of a criminal investigation.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, on behalf of the ACDP I give notice that at the
next sitting day of the house I shall move that:

  That the House –

     1) discuss the public outcry surrounding the manner in which the
        Judicial Service Commission has dealt with various complaints,
        including that of the ACDP against Cape Judge President John Hlophe
        and in particular its failure to give sufficient reasons for not
        holding a full inquiry and, consequently;


     2) debates the negative impact that the JSC’s approach has had on its
        reputation and good standing in the eyes of the general public,
        including eminent lawyers and legal academics.

Mr T J LOUW: Chair, I hereby move on behalf of the DA that the House:

   debates the relationship between mining and the protection of the
   environment, with particular reference to the effects of acid mine
   drainage on water quality.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): You can’t move that. It is just a
notice, right.

 CONGRATULATIONS TO SPRINGBOKS ON BEATING ARGENTINA, AND WISHES FOR SUCCESS
                          IN FINAL AGAINST ENGLAND

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House -

     1) congratulates the Springboks on beating Argentina 37-13 in the
        semifinal of the 2007 Rugby World Cup on Sunday, 14 October 2007;


     2) further congratulates Bryan Habana on scoring his eighth try of the
        tournament, thereby equalling Jonah Lomu’s World Cup record;

     3) recalls how the Springbok’s 1995 Rugby World Cup victory united the
        country, bringing South Africans of all colours together shortly
        after the 1994 elections; and

     4) wishes them well for the final against England on Saturday, 20
        October 2007.

Agreed to.

           AUTHOR DORIS LESSING AWARDED NOBEL PRIZE FOR LITERATURE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:

  That the House -


     1) notes that author Doris Lessing was awarded the Nobel Prize for
        Literature on Thursday, 11 October 2007;


     2) further notes that she is only the eleventh woman to have won the
        prize since it was first awarded in 1901 and only the third since
        1996;


     3) recognises the fundamental role her work has played in speaking out
        against racial and gender inequality on the African continent;


     4) acknowledges the statement made by the Swedish Nobel Academy that
        described Lessing as “that epicist of the female experience who with
        scepticism, fire and visionary power has subjected a divided
        civilisation to scrutiny.”; and


     5) congratulates her on this great honour that has been bestowed on
        her.


Agreed to.

 SHOCKING ACCIDENT AT ARMY COMBAT TRAINING CENTRE IN LOHATHLA, NORTHERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chair, I move without notice:


  That the House –


     1) notes with shock the accident that happened at the Army Combat
        Training Centre in Lohathla in the Northern Cape on Friday, 12
        October 2007;
     2) recalls that the accident happened during the annual training
        exercise, Operation Seboka, that involved 5 000 soldiers and
        claimed the lives of nine national service persons, while 15 others
        sustained injuries and had to be admitted to various hospitals in
        Bloemfontein;


     3) welcomes the South African National Defence Force’s investigation
        into the cause of the accident and expresses the hope that
        appropriate preventative measures will be taken; and


     4) conveys its condolences to the families of the deceased, and wishes
        the injured a speedy recovery.


Agreed to.

     BEST WISHES EXTENDED TO ALL MUSLIMS AT END OF HOLY MONTH OF RAMADAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move without notice:

  That this House -

     1) notes that Saturday, 13 October 2007, marked the end of the holy
        month of fasting known as Ramadaan;
     2) further notes that during this day, Muslims across the globe wish
        one another Eid Mubarak and families and relatives get together to
        build a feeling of unity among each other, neighbours and fellow
        South Africans;

     3) believes that Muslims in this country have made a great contribution
        to the defeat of apartheid colonialism and to the creation of our
        democracy and that the holy month of Ramadaan affords Muslims a
        unique opportunity to deepen their consciousness about the plight of
        the poor in our society;


     4) remembers that the religion of Islam preaches, among other things,
        concern for the poor and needy and respect for humanity and
        encourages peace and justice; and

     5) extends its best wishes to all Muslims in our country and around the
        world.

Agreed to.

                  GOOD WISHES TO SOUTH AFRICAN MATRICULANTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the House –

     1) notes that on 8 October 2007 Grade 12 learners in our country
        started sitting for their final examinations;


     2) believes that the learners represent our vital investment in the
        future of our country as we work to realise the goal of a better
        life for all;


     3) recalls that each year growing numbers of young South Africans write
        the Senior Certificate examinations and more and more learners
        succeed, demonstrating the success we continue to make in opening
        the doors of learning to all; and


     4) wishes all Grade 12 learners success in their 2007 examinations.

Agreed to.

    STATEMENT TO BE MADE BY MINISTER OF DEFENCE ON SANDF ACCIDENT DURING
                              OPERATION SEBOKA

                               (Announcement)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Hon members, I wish to advise
the House that the Speaker has agreed to a request by the Minister of
Defence to make a statement today in the House on the circumstances
surrounding the deaths and injuries of members of the SA National Defence
Force. By agreement, party responses to the statement will be given on
Thursday.

  CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING DEATHS AND INJURIES SUSTAINED BY MEMBERS OF SA
               NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE DURING OPERATION SEBOKA

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members, on Friday, 12
October, the usual hustle and bustle of our national life was shattered by
the shocking news of the tragic loss of the lives of some of our youthful
troops, while on Operation Seboka at the Lohatla Combat Training Centre in
the Northern Cape.

It is therefore with a deep sense of loss that I share with you the
circumstances of this tragedy. Corps training is conducted at different
corps training schools. On completion of corps training, companies,
batteries and squadrons are allocated to operational units. Operational
units conduct training at their units and at the combat training centre.

On 10 September 2007, the 10 Air Defence Artillery Regiment arrived at the
Lohatla Combat Training Centre and commenced corps training, using dry
firing only. On 27 September, the regiment joined other corps for
integrated training. On 11 October, Battery 101 – the unit which was
affected in this accident - prepared for firing exercises the following
day. The equipment to be used was 35mm Mark V guns. The Mark V gun has two
barrels that fire high explosives and practice ammunition. Each magazine
can be loaded with 137 rounds. The exercise was to be conducted using eight
guns in all.

On 10 October, two days before the accident, Battery 102 had done the same
exercise and all eight guns had successfully fired between 500 and 800
rounds each. At 7h00 on Friday, 12 October, 101 Battery commenced with
their firing exercise, with Captain Mpele as a safety officer. I may add
that Captain Mpele is an experienced officer in these matters.

All eight guns were facing in the same direction, in this case the
northerly direction; and they were positioned 20 metres apart for
instructional purposes. The gun that caused the incident was on the far
right – it was the furthest. In other words, it was number one from the
east of the line. On this day, it was the first time live ammunition was to
be used. Only ground targets of between 1 500m and 2 000 metres away were
to be hit.

The gun can be set on manual or electric firing mode. But on this day, they
were all set on manual. When on manual, the guns are sighted on target and
thereafter the barrel is clamped into position so that the barrel should
not move from side to side. When firing in electric mode, safety boundaries
are computerised and the barrels are not clamped, but move within the
boundaries set in advance. For each one of them, a gun crew consists of
four members.

As all guns commenced firing, the gun on the far right-hand side had a
stoppage. This is something that happens from time to time.

Technicians repaired this gun, while all the other guns continued firing.
This is a very normal drill. As they continued firing and after the gun had
been fixed, it swung completely to the left and one barrel fired off a
burst of 15 to 20 shots in one eighth of a second.

The first gun immediately to the left was hit. This fatal burst then killed
or injured members of all the guns to the left. The effect is, therefore,
that all of those who either died or were injured, got fired at from their
right and they either lost their right hands or right legs or otherwise, of
course, lost their lives. The total number of fatalities is nine to date. I
am aware that some media have reported that the figure went up to 10. That
is wrong. The figure stands at nine to date. The total number of injured
people is 15, bringing the total number of people affected to 24.

The sequence of events following the accident is that case evacuation
drills commenced after the incident and incident reports were forwarded to
the relevant stations. Acting General Officer, Commanding Air Defence
Artillery Formation immediately left an army planning session at 8h00 for
Lohatla. Chaplains from Pretoria were sent to visit the injured in
hospitals in Bloemfontein.

The Chief of the Army sent Major-General Nkabinde to the Lohatla Combat
Training Centre and Bloemfontein. Major-General Anderson established a
funeral fund, which immediately gathered R25 000, which has now grown to
more than R40 000. The Combat Training Centre established a nodal point
with chaplains, the Chief of Services and army headquarters and placed the
brigadier-general in the ops room, in addition to the duty officer.

The air defence artillery formation chaplain, in conjunction with the
Combat Training Centre chaplain, arranged for the next of kin to be
informed. This was completed by Saturday evening. The total number of
fatalities, as I have already said, is nine. The total number of injured
people is 15, bringing the total number of people affected to 24. I think
that is a repetition.

On behalf of the Ministry and the Department of Defence, I would like to
express our sincere shock and regret at what happened. Whilst we do accept
that it is a highly dangerous environment in which Defence operates, we can
underline that care is always taken to avoid such incidents.

We sincerely regret the loss of life and the injuries and wish to convey
our deepest condolences to the affected families. I can now confirm that
all the affected families have been informed and that the department is
doing everything possible to assist them to go through this trauma.

A memorial service will be held in Kimberley next Wednesday, 24 October
2007, in the morning. High-ranking officials from the Department of Defence
will attend. The next of kin will be taken to Lohatla to visit the site of
the incident, after which they will depart.

Separate full military funerals for the nine deceased soldiers will take
place from this Saturday onwards. However, most of the deceased will be
buried next Saturday.

Before I complete the statement, I would like to take this opportunity to
place on record the names of those who lost their lives in this tragedy. Of
the nine who passed on, four were females and five were males.

They included Staff Sergeant J V Bezuidenhoudt; K L Malaza, a female; E T
Mthimunye, a female; R M Mtileni, a female; S V Nhlabati, a female; T J
Nkwana, a male; S V Nyembe, a male; R C Siphuma, a male; and B R Seipato, a
male.

The following people received injuries of varying kinds, some of whom are
receiving treatment: Captain M D Ndlovu, who is a male and has been booked
off sick at the training centre; Staff Sergeant P Badenhorst, who is booked
off sick at the training centre; Sergeant D M Mothibe, who is a male and is
booked off sick at the training centre. S Hayes is in the Pelonomi Hospital
with a lacerated right leg and right arm. He was operated on and his
condition is stable. M M Myaka is booked off sick at the training centre.
B Mabaso is at 3 Military Hospital with a wounded lower left leg. His
condition is stable. M P Nkadimeng is at 3 Military Hospital in a stable
condition after receiving a scapular wound. R M Nkga, who is in the
Pelonomi Hospital, had her right forearm amputated and is currently stable.
M S Nkogatse is a female who was admitted to the training centre’s sickbay.
E L Ntlwana is in the Pelonomi Hospital after an operation on his right
arm, and might possibly have to undergo another operation in the future.
C F Pale whose right forearm was amputated is in the Pelonomi Hospital in a
stable condition and will undergo investigative surgery.

I need only add here that the doctors do preliminary operations to see
whether they can save a limb. If a limb cannot be saved, then of course
they proceed to amputation or other procedures.

K M Pitso, the gunner on the gun that caused the injuries, is still at the
training centre sickbay and is receiving intensive treatment for the trauma
that she suffered. L A Seatlholo has been booked off sick at the training
centre. A Shezi is still admitted at the training centre sickbay. H
Simelela is a female who has had her right arm operated on at Pelonomi
Hospital, and an investigative operation is to follow. That is the list of
those who either lost their lives or were injured.

The SA National Defence Force has also despatched chaplains to the area so
that they can assist the affected members. Training is continuing at the
combat training centre.

Investigations as to the cause of the accident are being conducted by the
SA Police Service assisted by forensic experts. Over and above this, the
SANDF will hold a board of inquiry into the matter. The Chief of the Army
has already appointed two retired generals to head the board of inquiry.

The Air Defence Artillery Formation, has commenced with its own
investigation that will be used to supplement the board of inquiry
instituted by the Chief of the Army. The results of the investigation will
be made public as soon as possible after the investigation has been
completed.

In this regard, we have observed that some persons have been pronouncing on
the cause of the accident. Firstly, I would appeal to the media to avoid
speculative reports on the causes of the accident. Secondly, I appeal to
the public, especially those whose loved ones were affected in the
incident, to ignore these speculations until the report is out.

We observe that there has been a public outpouring of sympathy and support
from people from all walks of life. This fervour of patriotism is very
highly appreciated by the government, the SA National Defence Force and the
people of South Africa.

The Chief of the Defence Reserve Forces, Major General Roy Anderson, in his
capacity as the patron of the gunners, has already set up a fund that is
aimed at assisting with the necessary logistics, particularly the support
of the families. Chairperson, I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Minister. It is
indeed a tragic and sad moment for the nation. On behalf of the Speaker and
all presiding officers, we would like to send our condolences to the
families and wish those who are still in hospital a speedy recovery.

Could we please rise to observe a moment of silence in memory of those
members of the Defence Force who lost their lives. Thank you.

                                MYANMAR RIOTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv Z L MADASA (ANC): Chair, the ANC wishes to express its concern about
the recent violence in Myanmar that has led to the loss of lives. The ANC
believes in the inalienable right of the people of Myanmar to engage in
peaceful protest action in order to highlight issues of concern to them.

We call on the authorities in Myanmar to respect this fundamental right of
the people of Myanmar and to handle the situation in a manner consistent
with the observance of fundamental human rights, including the right to
life, freedom of expression and association, and the right to peaceful
demonstration, picketing and petitioning.

The ANC welcomes the fact that the United Nations Security Council has
mandated a special envoy, Prof Ibrahim Gambari, to travel to Myanmar to
evaluate the situation.

The ANC urges the government of Myanmar and the opposition parties there to
work towards a negotiated settlement aimed at finding a lasting solution to
the challenges facing Myanmar. Thank you.

   SUSPENSION OF ADVOCATE VUSI PIKOLI AND INVESTIGATION OF NATIONAL POLICE
                         COMMISSIONER JACKIE SELEBI

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Chairperson, the DA, along with all
reasonable South Africans, is deeply concerned about recent developments
relating to the National Director of Public Prosecutions, Advocate Vusi
Pikoli, as well as to the National Police Commissioner, Jackie Selebi.

Firstly, the President’s decision to suspend Advocate Pikoli and the
subsequent revelation that a warrant of arrest had been issued for
Commissioner Selebi, raises serious questions about a possible violation of
the constitutionally entrenched principle of separation of powers and the
independence of the judicial process, in the sense that the executive may
have undermined the independence of the NDPP.

Secondly, the mere fact that the national commissioner has in the past
been, and may well continue to be, the subject of a criminal investigation
has grave implications for South Africa’s international reputation as well
as the credibility of the national commissioner in leading the fight
against crime.

Consequently, the DA repeats its call for the national commissioner to be
suspended from office until this matter is resolved, and for the President
to take the nation into his confidence as to the reasons for his decision
to suspend Advocate Pikoli.

As these issues are of profound national importance, this House should
debate them as a matter of urgency. Thank you. [Applause.]
                    CIVILIANS SUING THE SA POLICE SERVICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP notes with shock that civilians
are suing the SA Police Service for about R6 billion in damages for
shootings, rapes, assaults, damage to property, accidents, wrongful arrests
and other official actions.

We have to understand that the crime situation in our country is so dire
that police officials are under constant pressure in the line of duty. But
the extent of civil claims against the police is staggering.

What this clearly shows is that police officers are not adequately trained
to deal with certain situations, and their illegal actions then lead to
civil claims. Furthermore, this shows that police officers are not applying
the correct duty of care and minimum force when carrying out some of their
functions. It also shows a wanton disregard for public safety and, in many
instances, officers’ negligence can be blamed.

It is obvious to the IFP that a massive retraining programme is necessary
for police officers to teach each other how properly to interact with the
public and suspected criminals.

We would also like to see the more experienced officers being used as
mentors for the inexperienced ones to ensure that the police actually
protect and serve the public, rather than being a danger to public safety.
I thank you.

                        DEATH OF MR NORMAN MASHABANE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B L MASHILE (ANC): Chair, the ANC would like to express its shock and
deep sense of hurt at the passing of Comrade Norman Mashabane.

Comrade Mashabane died with his son in a car accident on 10 October 2007.
Comrade Mashabane was a selfless revolutionary who still had a lot to
contribute to the national effort to reconstruct and develop our country.

His death is a painful loss to the Mashabane family. Comrade Norman has
served our movement well and his passing is also an enormous loss to the
ANC, the tripartite alliance and government.

Comrade Mashabane served our people and our movement in many capacities,
including as part of a collective leadership of the SA Youth Congress, as
an MEC for local government and traditional affairs in Limpopo, as an
ambassador to Indonesia, as a member of the Limpopo provincial legislature,
and in many other ways.
We wish his family strength at this very painful time. I thank you.

 INVESTIGATION OF REMOVAL INTO MINISTER OF HEALTH’S MEDICAL RECORDS AND NEED
                TO PRIORITISE INVESTIGATION OF SERIOUS CRIMES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Chairperson, whilst the ACDP appreciates that no
one is above the law, it is deplorable that in view of thousands of
murders, rapes and other serious crimes that go unresolved in this country,
a top police detective, Director Brand, has been tasked with investigating
the removal of the Minister of Health’s medical records.

We question why a top police officer has been appointed to investigate a
case that is a relatively minor offence in comparison to the thousands of
murder and rape cases that go unresolved. Furthermore, we see daily the
significant impact drugs and alcohol have on mortality, public health,
family welfare, crime and the community and even on economic development.
Surely the urgent reduction of the impact of these ills should be a key
priority for government.

Of even greater concern are the allegations of some community members who
say there are some police officers who are known to be on the payroll of
drug merchants for their protection. This is a serious allegation that
should be investigated by top detectives but that is not happening. Is this
because government does not care about the devastating impact that drugs
are having on our communities?

The ACDP calls on government to urgently prioritise the investigation of
serious crimes such as murder, rape and drug trafficking by assigning top
detectives to these cases, as opposed to using such detectives to
investigate relatively minor cases such as the investigation into the
removal of the Minister of Health’s medical records. I thank you.

                        SUSPENSION OF ADVOCATE PIKOLI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Chairperson, it is lies and lies and spin all the
time. Today the ID will speak truth to power.

The truth is this: The reason given by the Presidency for what it calls the
“breakdown in the relationship between Advocate Pikoli and Minister
Mabandla” is that Advocate Pikoli’s submission to the Khampepe commission
was unacceptable.

I have two problems with this reason. Firstly, why is this difference in
the Khampepe commission raised more than a year later, when Advocate Pikoli
has been suspended and Selebi’s arrest is imminent?

Secondly, according to the Constitution, a breakdown in the relationship
between the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development and Pikoli
is not misconduct. Pikoli can only be dismissed for misconduct or being
unfit for office.

The summarised version of the Khampepe commission findings released by the
Presidency said, and I quote:

  It is the firm resolve of Cabinet that all anticrime agencies of the
  state should redouble their efforts to make South Africa safer and more
  secure for all its citizens ... without fear, favour or prejudice, they
  will ensure that criminals meet their just desserts.

Instead, the ANC’s party divisions are manifesting themselves in the
state’s security apparatus to the detriment of the safety of all our people
in South Africa. I thank you.

       TRANSFORMATION CONTROVERSY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF THE FREE STATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B G MOSALA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the controversy surrounding
transformation at the University of the Free State has been raging for
quite a while without any end in sight. Statements issued and ascribed to
the University Council and the Vice Chancellor always create an impression
of positive movement and hope for those who are yearning for change at this
institution.

The Rector and Vice Chancellor of this institution once remarked:

   On the main campus, in effect, we have two campuses, one white and one
   black, separated in the classrooms and in the residences.

Since that policy statement was made in 2005, change has been lamentably
slow, because there are very strong forces militating against change in the
overall governance structures of the university. The role played by the
resident diversity implementation committee chaired by Dr Moraka, as well
as a myriad of supporting structures led by capable stakeholders, is
commendable but we need movement.

The university council must never waver from its resolution to reform the
hostel placement policy, even in the face of a pending  FF Plus-instigated
court case to challenge the integration of hostels. Why go to court when
policy that is obviously in the interests of nation-building is being
implemented? There is currently so much at stake in higher education for
people not to quibble about integration of hostels at this point in time.

All stakeholders of this institution, namely the council, the alumni, the
convocation, progressive students and political formations, parents and
private-sector partners must resist misplaced efforts to derail change at
the University of the Free State. Thank you. [Applause.]

    SERVICE DELIVERY DISCUSSED ON SABC WITHOUT GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Madam Speaker, on the SABC 2’s Morning Live programme
today, the TV presenter informed the public that the Minister for
Provincial and Local Government, the hon Mufamadi, declined to appear on
the programme that dealt with issues around service delivery. We are all
aware that participatory democracy is about government engagement with the
public and the citizens must enjoy the first right to attain information on
the progress of government affairs.

The FD wishes to express its dismay that there was no government official
present this morning to answer questions raised around the current
challenges facing service delivery. Service delivery requires taking the
public into our trust and tackling head-on the failures which exist in the
system, while also indicating the successes achieved. Failures that do
exist, of course, are well known, such as municipal indebtedness, fraud and
corruption, skills challenges and councillors who do not subscribe to the
Batho Pele principles.

The problems surrounding free basic services add to further disgruntlement
among the people. As much as government is rolling out funds to provide
free water, electricity and proposed sanitation services to the public, the
effects thereof are not adding basic economic value to the public.

The debate on these matters must continue in the public domain as such and
the Minister missed a good opportunity this morning on SABC 2 to take the
public into his confidence in fighting the problems around service
delivery, and his failure to do so may have further marginalised affected
people critical of government’s record thus far. I thank you.

           INCORRECT MESSAGE SENT IN RESPECT OF CONDUCT OF JUDGES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, the DA wishes to express its
disappointment in the decision of the Judicial Service Commission not to
proceed with an open inquiry that could lead to the possible impeachment of
Cape Judge President John Hlophe.

While the DA respects the constitutional mandate of the Judicial Service
Commission, we nevertheless feel obliged to express our concern at the
incorrect message being sent out regarding the acceptable conduct of
judges. Free and fair comment is a vital part of any genuine democracy, and
respect for institutions should not be used to shield them from public
opinion especially where so great a public interest is at stake.

The Judicial Service Commission’s decision has, as retired Judge Kriegler
has eloquently commented, raised serious questions around judges and their
integrity. These questions have, however, not been answered as the JSC has
failed to give reasons for its decisions even to Members of Parliament who
are also members of the commission.

There is clearly a need for a more transparent process in dealing with
complaints against judges, which is provided for in the Judicial Service
Commission Amendment Bill before Parliament. This legislation must be
expedited. Thank you.

     MURRAY & ROBERTS AWARD FOR KWANOBUHLE HOCKEY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr B M SOLO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Kwanobuhle Hockey development
programme in the Eastern Cape is the winner of this year’s Murray & Roberts
Jack Cheetham Memorial Award. The award of a floating trophy and R500 000
over five years was presented by the Springbok rugby star Number 8, Pierre
Spies.

In partnership with the SA Sports Confederation, the Olympic Committee and
the Sowetan newspaper, Murray & Roberts selected the Kwanobuhle programme
in recognition of its excellence and significant community impact.
Kwanobuhle Hockey operates from the impoverished area of Kwanobuhle near
Port Elizabeth. Unemployment at Kwanobuhle is estimated at 50% and the
community has a high incidence of HIV and Aids.

Under the leadership of teacher Gary Dolley and a team of dedicated
volunteers, the Kwanobuhle multipurpose sports facility has been revived
into a thriving hub of sports development and community participation. The
programme has developed partnerships with 25 primary schools in the area,
enabling 750 children to receive professional hockey coaching and to
participate in regional leagues.

To ensure sustainability, the under-16 players coach younger players and
provide umpiring services. Former provincial players work as volunteers.
Six teams participated in the Eastern Province schools league where they
competed against more privileged schools. The girls under-11 team is
currently unbeaten and the boys under-13 team is also unbeaten in the local
LoveLife Games.

Fifty top performers are in a high-performance programme to receive
intensive coaching and mentoring. The ANC, therefore, congratulates the
Kwanobuhle development programme on achieving excellence in hockey, whilst
also using hockey as a vehicle to transform the lives of hundreds of young
people in that community. I thank you. [Applause.]

         PROTESTS AT UNIVERSITY OF JOHANNESBURG ABOUT FEE INCREASES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Speaker, the ongoing violent protests at the
University of Johannesburg campuses over primarily fee increases have
become a cause for concern. It is of vital importance that the Department
of Education intervene to prevent the crisis spiralling out to other
institutions of higher learning and disturbing exam processes.

The funding of higher education in South Africa has become problematic and
apparently difficult to manage. South Africa has failed to develop a well-
funded tertiary education system. The excess of R1 billion, which
government has made available in financial aid through the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme, is not sufficient to meet the financial needs of
students.

The funding of higher education by government has, to a large extent, been
based on the hope that higher institutions would provide for the rest of
their costs through private-income sources, such as tuition fees. There is
no doubt that a number of parents look to the university to provide higher
education for their children, but a number of parents are poor and
therefore unable to cope with the ever-rising cost of higher education.

The IFP has repeatedly called on the government to review its funding
formula. The IFP has not only called for an increase in the Education
budget, but also for a redress fund, private-sector involvement and other
innovative measures to assist historically disadvantaged and deserving
students, but this has not happened. I thank you.

                IMPOUNDED TRESPASSING CATTLE SOLD BY FARMERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mopišopo L J TOLO (ANC): Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo wa Ngwako wa Lekgotla la
Setšhaba, moo re tšwago gona tikolong ya Gasekhukhune, re na le mathata ao
a tseneletšego ao re le ba mokgatlo wa ANC, re bonago gore a dira gore
bodiidi bo tšwele pele. Dikgomo tša batho bao ba lego kgauswi le dipolasa
kua dinageng-magae, ka gona go hloka phulo, di taboga diterata tša
boradipolasa gomme tša tsena ka dipolaseng. Ka fao, beng ba dipolase ba a
di swara.

Ke gopola gabotse gore Morena Masalane o lobile dikgomo tše lesome le metšo
ye senyane gomme go ile gwa laetšwa gore pele a ka di hwetša o swanetše go
ntšha R21 000. Ka gona, ke gona ge a paletšwe ke go di hwetša gomme di
feleleditše di rekišitšwe ka moka ga tšona.

Go na le mosadi yo mongwe gape yoo monna wa gagwe a hlokafetšego, gomme o
hlaka e le ruri. O be a na le dikgomo tše lesome. Le tšona go bile fela
bjalo - di tšeerwe.

Morena Mohlala le yena o be a na le dikgomo tše lesome le motšo o tee. Ka
gona, ba tsoma R19 000 mola batho ba ka bobona le pene ya lešidi e se gona.
Ka gona, dikgomo tšeo di rekišitšwe.

Re dira boipiletšo, re le ba mokgatlo wa ANC, gore hle kgoro e lebelele
taba ye bakeng sa go thuša kudu batho bao ba se nago mafelo a go fudiša
maruo a bona kua magaeng. Anke kgoro e bone gore maruo a bona a kgona go
bolokega ka ge a na le mohola wa go tšwetša moruo wa naga ya gaborena pele.


Re dira boipiletšo beng baka gore kgoro e lebelele gore le bao ba filwego
maatla a go swara dikgomo ge di tabogetše mafelong a bona ba bitše tšhelete
yeo e kwagalago ka gore go bolela nnete batho ba gaborena ba bangwe ke
badiidi ba batala. Ka gona, re le ba mokgatlo wa ANC, re re kgoro ga e
tsene taba ye ka bogare hle. Re a leboga. [Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi
member’s statement follows.)

[Bishop L J TOLO (ANC): Hon Chairperson of the NA, in the Sekhukhune area
we are faced with deeply entrenched problems which we, as a party, think
perpetuate poverty. The cattle of those people who live next to the farms
in the rural areas illegally entered the grazing fields of the farm owners
due to a lack of grazing fields. The farm owners seized them.

If my memory still serves me well, I think that Mr Masalane lost 19 head of
cattle. Before he could get them back he was told to pay R21 000. He could
not pay that amount and he ended up selling them.

There is a widow who is really impoverished. She had 10 cattle but they
were also sold.

Mr Mohlala had 11 head of cattle which were seized. He was given a fine of
about R19 000 which he could not pay because he could not afford it. At the
end he had to sell the cattle.

We are appealing to the department to assist the people who do not have
grazing land in the rural areas. Could the department make sure that their
livestock is protected since it plays a vital role in the growth of our
country’s economy.
We are appealing to the department to ensure that those people, who have
the authority to fine the cattle owners if their cattle graze in other
people’s fields, must charge a reasonable amount taking into consideration
the fact that some people are very poor. We, the ANC, request that the
department intervene in this issue. I thank you. [Applause.]]

                                POWER OUTAGES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Speaker, Eskom se aankondiging dat Suid-Afrika gewoond
moet raak aan kragonderbrekings is nie net ’n verleentheid vir Suid-Afrika
nie, maar ook vir die regering, wat ondermyn word deur sy eie openbare
onderneming in die bereiking van Asgisa se 6%-groeikoers.

Kragonderbrekings saai tans groot ontwrigting in die land en kos die Suid-
Afrikaanse ekonomie ongeveer R8 miljard per jaar. Die blatante arrogansie
van Eskom om aan te voer dat die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie te vinnig groei
is onaanvaarbaar.

Die Wet op Openbare Finansiële Bestuur het reeds in 2000 in werking getree,
wat benewens effektiewe finansiële bestuur ook risiko- en batebestuur
duidelik uitspel. Eskom is en was ook daaraan onderworpe. Eskom behoort ook
sy eie langtermynbeplanning te doen soos enige ander onderneming.
Statistiek SA gee ook jaarliks groeisyfers in die vooruitskattings wat hy
maak terwyl minister Alec Erwin in die Kabinet sit en bewus is van
regeringsbeleid wat sy ekonomiese groeikoersbehoeftes betref.

Eskom moes daarop voorbereid gewees het dat die vraag na elektrisiteit van
2,3% ’n paar jaar gelede nou na 4,5% gegroei het. Ingenieurs het Eskom en
die regering reeds in 1996 gewaarsku dat indien bykomende kragsentrales nie
gebou word nie, Suid-Afrika teen 2006-07 ernstige kragonderbrekings sal
ondervind.

Die elektrisiteitsdilemma is dus te wyte aan ’n ondoeltreffende openbare
onderneming, swak regeringsbeplanning, ’n onbevoegde Minister en
agterlosige regerings- en Eskomamptenare, en dit is die feite. Die
instandhouding van bestaande infrastruktuur en die R204 miljard wat Eskom
tot 2017 gaan bestee om nuwe kragsentrales te bou moes reeds 10 jaar gelede
begin het. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Speaker, Eskom’s announcement that South Africa will
have to get used to power outages is not only an embarrassment to the
country, but also to the government, which is being undermined by its own
public enterprise in achieving the 6% growth rate envisaged by Asgisa.

Power outages are currently causing huge disruptions in the country and are
costing the economy an annual loss of approximately R8 billion. The blatant
arrogance of Eskom to assert that the economy is growing too fast, is
unacceptable.

The Public Finance Management Act already came into effect in 2000, and in
addition to effective financial management, it also clearly outlines risk
and asset management. Eskom is and was also subject to this. Eskom also
ought to do its own long-term planning like any other enterprise.
Statistics SA also provides annual growth figures in its projections,
whilst Minister Alec Erwin is in the Cabinet and is aware of government
policy insofar as its economic growth rate requirements are concerned.

Eskom should have been prepared for the fact that the demand for
electricity of 2,3% a few years ago would now have increased to 4,5%.
Engineers had already warned Eskom and the government as early as 1996 that
unless additional power stations were built, South Africa would experience
serious power outages by 2006-07.

The electricity dilemma is therefore due to an inefficient public
enterprise, poor planning on the part of the government, an incompetent
Minister and careless government and Eskom officials, and those are the
facts! The maintenance of existing infrastructure and the R204 billion that
Eskom will be spending up to 2017 to build new power stations should have
commenced ten years ago. Thank you.]
              40TH ANNIVERSARY OF DEATH OF ERNESTO CHE GUEVARA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J NJIKELANA (ANC): Madam Speaker, 9 October 2007 marked the 40th
anniversary of the death of Ernesto Che Guevara. The 1959 victory of the
Cuban revolution, led by, amongst others, Comrade Fidel Castro and Ernesto
Che Guevara, inspired millions amongst the oppressed and exploited to fight
for freedom and social justice.

Che dedicated his life to the genuine independence of all countries, the
true liberation of each people in all countries, social progress, and the
emancipation of working people from the scourges of poverty, hunger and
underdevelopment.

Even after 40 years we wish to express our gratitude to this exceptional
combatant as we advance the struggle for the birth of a better and more
humane world order and the defeat of poverty.

His bravery, courage, selflessness and heroism continue to inspire us to
realise the goals of a truly nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and
prosperous South Africa. I thank you.

                    TOURISM INDUSTRY IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mnu M JOHNSON (ANC): Somlomo, umbutho wesizwe i-ANC, uthe gqolo
ukusebenzisana nabantu bakuthi ekwakheni ubomi obungcono kunye namathuba
okuba abantu baziphilise ngokwabo. Kwingingqi yaseTsitsikama, kumzantsi
weMpuma Koloni, usomashishini okushishino lokhenketho uphumelele imbasa
yokuba ngoyena somashishini ubaphatha kakuhle abasebenzi bakhe. Uphumelele
kwakhona kwinqanaba lokuba nesisa kwiintsapho zasekuhlaleni ezingathathi
ntweni.

UMnu uAshley Wentworth, ongusomaqhuzu wale nkampani, uthathe uxanduva
lokuthwala umceli-mngeni wokungabi nalwazi luphangaleleyo lokujongana
neencwadi zooshishino abajongene nalo oomama abakolu shishino, nto leyo
ebangele ukuqwalaselwa kokusilela kumanqanaba athile oshishino. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M JOHNSON (ANC): Madam Speaker, The African National Congress is
constantly working with people to improve their lives and create job
opportunities to develop themselves. In the Tsitsikamma area, the southern
part of the Eastern Cape, a businessman in the tourism industry won an
award for being the best businessman who looked well after his staff. He
won again in the category of being supportive to the poor children in the
community.

Mr Ashley Wentworth, the head of this company, on realising that women in
this industry do not have enough bookkeeping skills, took up the challenge
to educate them. This led to monitoring the lack of certain levels in the
business. [Applause.]]

             Members’ responsibility of strengthening democracy

   SUSPENSION OF ADVOCATE VUSI PIKOLI AND INVESTIGATION OF NATIONAL POLICE
                         COMMISSIONER JACKIE SELEBI

         PROTESTS AT UNIVERSITY OF HOHANNESBURG ABOUT FEE INCREASES

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, I have a number of issues that I
would like to respond to. Let me start with the first issue. I think it is
very important that members of the House understand that they carry a
responsibility towards strengthening democracy. I do not think that any of
us contribute to the strengthening of our democracy when an individual is
either arrested or charged for any crime, or even investigated by the
police, and then there are claims of abuse of state power or that there is
a conspiracy against them. If it’s like that, all of us can commit crimes
and then say, “There is a plot against me; there is a conspiracy against
me.” We will no longer be able to investigate anybody.

Therefore when people are faced with possible litigation by the state -
matters that will appear before the courts – them to attack the policing
agencies is to become the instruments of criminals. I think that that can
only undermine our democracy. If any individual is innocent, let him go to
court and prove his innocence in the courts. [Interjections.] Let him go to
the courts and then go and prove it there.

And if there is anyone who knows of any abuse of state power by the
executive, why don’t we get people to report to the Chapter 9 institutions
to say, “I know that Minister Lekota is busy with this and that and the
other” so that these matters also come before the scrutiny of the nation. I
cannot accept that people can so glibly and easily accuse this government
of abusing power or manipulating the instruments of power to arrest
innocent people. [Interjections.] We cannot accept that. [Interjections.]

Secondly, it is strange logic to say that when a crime is reported at a
police station, the police must investigate that crime on the basis of
whether they thought it a big or important crime or not. Any crime reported
to the police, if they have the ability to investigate it immediately, must
be investigated, and whoever is guilty must be brought to book. We cannot
say, “But why do you arrest this criminal so quickly? You should arrest the
other criminals first.” What is the meaning of that?

I would also like to say that it is important that we keep in mind the
parameters of where legislature begins and ends and where the executive
begins and ends. At the present time the National Director of Public
Prosecutions has been suspended. [Interjections.]

HON MEMBERS: Why?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Listen! This is not a tavern; it’s a noble House.
[Laughter.] At the present time the National Director of Public
Prosecutions has been suspended. The executive has decided that it has to
be established whether this individual is fit for the office in which he is
serving. [Interjections.] If there is someone who wants to ask a question
in the opposition, why doesn’t he rise and ask the Chair? I will give him a
chance ... I want to hear so that I can respond to the question ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, order!

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, is the hon Minister not prepared to answer a
question? May I ask him a question?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Yes.

The SPEAKER: Sure. Ask him a question.

Dr C P MULDER: When Mr Pikoli was appointed to the position of National
Director of Public Prosecutions he was a very fit and proper person. What
happened that he suddenly became unfit, allegedly? And, if you are saying
that the relationship broke down, why do you investigate only one part of
the relationship?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: What the government has said is that there has to
be a check as to whether he is fit and proper for office. Whether he is fit
or not fit will be decided by – let me finish this answer ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

Mr M J ELLIS: The Minster knows as well as we do that he has two minutes to
respond. This response has been going on for about five minutes and he has
said nothing worth listening to. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: No, hon member, leave the hon Minister to respond. He did
indicate that he was going to respond to a few questions. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: But this is the same issue, Madam Speaker. He has been going
on for five minutes about one issue.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please let the Minister finish. Hon Minister,
please proceed.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker and members of the House, whether
the National Director of Prosecutions is fit or not will be decided by the
inquiry. It can’t be decided by me standing here, and it can’t be decided
by you sitting down there. [Interjections.]

No, please, let me make the point. Very many times I have heard the
opposition say that the executive has made inappropriate appointments. Very
many times you say that. Why, in this case, don’t you want the executive to
examine whether that appointment is appropriate or not? Why don’t you want
that? You always say that. You have said times without number that the
people we have appointed are not appropriate. [Interjections.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

Mrs P DE LILLE: Is the hon Minister of Defence now the spokesperson for the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development? She can speak for
herself. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I am sure you know how the executive operates.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Well, the hon De Lille is just trying to interrupt
my reasoning. She will not succeed. The executive operates as a corporate
body, so I can answer. If other Ministers are not here, we often answer on
their behalf. We work in the same cluster and I can answer any question
that she can. So, please, don’t try to disrupt ... [Inaudible.] ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, please wrap up your answer to the second
question. [Interjections.]

The Minister of defence: Madam Speaker, the last issue that I want to deal
with relates to the matter of education.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, may I also ask a question? It is a
very easy question.

The SPEAKER: In which connection?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: It is in connection with what the Minister has been
replying to. I just want to know from the Minister if he thinks it is just
and fair for an ANC political activist to lead the investigation instead of
a High Court judge?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: I am quite satisfied that the person who has been
appointed, Madam Ginwala, who was the Speaker of this House, is a very
appropriate person. Thank you, sir. [Applause.] [Interjections.] I have
answered your question. Don’t complain now. I have given you an answer.

With regard to the issue of education, I think our country’s leaders and
people must come to terms with the challenges that our nation faces. This
government has not failed to work to address the needs of our people. But
what we have done as this government has been to avoid spending money that
South Africans don’t have. Year after year we have sought to make sure that
South Africans do not live beyond their means, and that we address the
needs of the people of this country with the resources that South Africa
has.

The reason that today South Africa can stand in any forum and make its
voice heard without being controlled by some of the powerful nations is
because we have respected this principle to make sure that our country
lives on what it owns, and it owes nobody and can therefore not be dictated
to by anybody.

We are addressing the issues of education. Year after year you have seen
how the budget has increased in terms of addressing education issues, in
terms of addressing social welfare, in terms of addressing housing and so
on. [Interjections.]

It is only those who do not confront the realities of their lives that
expect us to finance consumption with money that we don’t have so that this
country will be very deeply indebted tomorrow, and after that it will not
even be able to pay the interest on the money it owes. We will not go that
route.

We will spend on what South Africans have steadily, so that this country
remains free and not dependent on anybody. I thank you. [Applause.]

                            SITUATION IN MYANMAR

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Thank you
very much, Madam Speaker. I’d like to address myself to the statement made
by the hon Madasa, and to say that I’d like to support his statement
regarding the situation in Myanmar.

Our ambassador to the United Nations, on behalf of the South African
government, also supported the presidential statement issued by the
Security Council last week, under the presidency of Ghana, which introduced
the statement. In that presidential statement, support was also expressed
for the resolution of the Human Right’s Council some two weeks earlier
condemning the violence in Myanmar, and affirming our confidence in the
United Nations special envoy to the region, Professor Gambari.

So what we would also like to say is that we would like to continue in our
support for the government of Myanmar to get the opposition parties
together, to talk and to resolve the issues and conflicts which confront
that country. Thank you very much.

       TRANSFORMATION CONTROVERSY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF THE FREE STATE

         PROTESTS AT UNIVERSITY OF JOHANNESBURG ABOUT FEE INCREASES

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There
have been two issues in relation to education - one from the ANC and one
from the IFP.

The first dealt with the issue of transformation and the need to ensure
that councils support the vice chancellors when they make good efforts in
terms of transforming institutions. The reality is that all our
institutions of higher learning must create an institutional culture that
is consistent with and conducive to the ethos of our democracy. That would
mean creating a nonracial and nonsexist environment in which there is
opportunity, equity and greater access.

We must commend the vice chancellor for the objective assessment of the
institution itself, and the attempts that he has made. We certainly urge
councillors – as the hon member has indeed correctly pointed out - to
support him in these efforts. We cannot, on the basis of the information
that has been provided, perpetuate a situation in which accommodation, in
which hostels, are occupied by blacks on the one side separately and whites
on the other. That would mean perpetuating a legacy of the past and really
fighting against what we seek to change in our country.

With regard to the issue of access, I certainly share the sentiments of the
hon Mpontshane. We too are committed, as he is, to the fact that we should
create better opportunities, greater access and greater equity.

Yet we must recognise that we have done enormously well. In 1996 the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme was established with small, humble
beginnings. The amount of R25 million was set aside for bursaries. Some 10
years thereafter - this year alone - we have spent R1,5 billion on
bursaries for universities and institutions of higher learning. In
addition, we have spent R100 million on FET colleges. Next year, the
projected amount is R1,8 billion. That means that there is a significant
improvement in opportunities for access to institutions of higher learning.


However, the reality is that we also have to confront the challenge of
accommodation of education. Many times, universities that are autonomous,
tend to forget the social dimension and their responsibility to manage the
increments in fees. If you look at the fees of various institutions, you
would find that the fees of the University of Cape Town and of the
University of the Witwatersrand, for example, are much higher than those of
the University of the Western Cape and other institutions. It is about time
that there was a measure of parity in terms of how fees are levied on
people and how fees are increased from time to time. This would certainly
enhance the opportunities and access for students.

With regard to the issue of the University of Johannesburg, certainly it’s
a matter of great concern for the department. The department is monitoring
it, and the Minister has made a statement to the fact that the allocation
to universities has indeed been increased. There is a reciprocal
responsibility on the part of vice chancellors and councils of universities
to ensure that increases are not dramatic, and that they are managed in a
way that enhances access rather than depriving especially the poor of the
opportunity to study at institutions.

Finally, in terms of our government and expenditure, education enjoys pre-
eminence. It is the largest item of expenditure in the Budget. I thank you,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: The Rules make it very
clear that a certain amount of time is set down for members of the
legislature of Parliament to make statements, and 12 minutes are set aside
for the Ministers to respond. I submit that that time has finished now,
Madam Speaker. You are very clear about making sure that Members of
Parliament do not have extra time. In this case, I would urge you to make
sure that the Ministers ...

The SPEAKER: Of course, you say that because you are sitting next to me and
you see what I’m doing from the Chair.

Mr M J ELLIS: I watch everything, Madam Speaker. You are quite right.

The SPEAKER: I don’t think you can be that certain about that particular
statement, because you don’t know how many minutes I’m giving you, using
the discretion of the Chair. I’d like you to leave the Chair to run the
business of the House. [Applause.] I also take it as very important for the
hon members to have the information that is necessary in response to the
statements that have been made.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, you cannot allow the Rules just to be abused
in that way. If the Ministers have got a set amount of time, they should be
kept to that, in the same way that we are kept to our time.

The Speaker: Hon Ellis, I’ve heard you. You can indeed take your seat now.

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: It seems to me that the
House is being abused by petty points of order when we are listening to
very serious matters. [Interjections.] I would ask that we ask the hon
members of the House to respect that this is a political body which
requires proper information, and pettiness should not be allowed to
intervene. Thank you. [Applause.]

     MURRAY & ROBERTS AWARD FOR KWANOBUHLE HOCKEY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, we rise in
support of the very positive statement by the ANC on the hockey academy in
KwaNobuhle. I think it’s important that the House notes that that was one
of the multipurpose sports facilities envisaged by the late Minister Steve
Tshwete when he was the Minister of Sport. We all know that there was some
controversy about the locality of this multipurpose facility, but we are
today very proud that this facility is there and has been utilised fully by
all the inhabitants of KwaNobuhle.

We are absolutely thrilled by the excellence of the hockey development
programme and by the youngsters who are taking part in the high-performance
programme of hockey and excelling in that wonderful sport. We are equally
touched by the gesture to invite one of the best loose forwards in the
world, Pierre Spies, who cannot be at the Rugby World Cup today, to present
the prize. We say thank you for inviting him and honouring him in that
regard.

Lastly, it is projects like KwaNobuhle and the things that are happening
there with hockey that are accelerating the transformation pace of sport in
this country and creating conditions in which all our children will,
hopefully, in the not too distant future, start from the same starting line
in sport in this country, taking this country to greater heights as a
sporting nation. I thank you. [Applause.]

 QUESTIONS BEING GIVEN PRECEDENCE NOTWITHSTANDING RULE 29(8) AND RULE 113(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move the motion printed in
my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That, notwithstanding Rule 29(8) and Rule 113 (1), Questions not be given
   precedence tomorrow.

Agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, we were told by the Whippery of the ANC that
the Local Government Laws Amendment Bill has, in fact, been withdrawn at
this stage and should not appear as this particular motion.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, if Mr Ellis
paid a bit of attention ...

The SPEAKER: I said we were on the first motion, hon Ellis. We are dealing
with the first motion on the Order Paper.

  SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) TO CONDUCT SECOND READING DEBATES ON THE SOUTH
        AFRICAN EXPRESS BILL AND THE BROADBAND INFRACO BILL TOMORROW

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you. I wish Mr Ellis would
listen and wait until he gets his chance. [Interjections.]

I amend my motion on the Order Paper and move as follows:

    That, Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the
    Second Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working
    days have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended
    for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debates on the South
    African Express Bill [B 14B - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75) and the
    Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26B – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75)
    tomorrow.

Agreed to.

                    FAREWELL TO HON MEMBER DOUGLAS GIBSON

                             (Draft Resolution)

The SPEAKER: The third item on the Order Paper is a draft resolution in the
name of the hon M J Ellis, as follows:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes that Mr Douglas Harvey Munro Gibson served as an adviser
         and participant at Codesa and at the World Trade Centre
         negotiations on the Constitution, with particular reference to the
         Bill of Rights, the Constitutional Court, the SANDF and the SA
         Police Service;


   (2)      further notes that Mr Gibson served as the Chief Whip of the
         official opposition from 1999 to 2007 and previously as the Chief
         Whip of the Democratic Party, from 1994 to 1999;

   (3)      acknowledges the important role Mr Gibson played during that
         period as a member of Parliament, a member of the Chief Whip’s
         Forum, member of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority and a member
         of many other parliamentary committees;

   (4)      recognises and appreciates his strongly held conviction that as
         a Member of Parliament it was his duty to serve and represent those
         who elected him to office, a duty he undertook with great
         dedication, dignity, efficiency and ability; and


      5) congratulates him on his appointment as South Africa’s ambassador
         to Thailand and wishes him every success in the task that lies
         ahead.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

I now call upon the Chief Whip of the largest opposition party, the hon
Davidson.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, today we are gathered to
bid farewell to a parliamentarian who has given distinguished service to
Parliament and the people of South Africa.

The hon Gibson is a proud South African, a committed South African, a South
African who is passionate about the politics of South Africa and, more
importantly, passionate about the people of South Africa. Indeed, it is
these qualities that, I am sure, compelled the government to appoint him as
ambassador to Thailand and as nonresident ambassador to Laos, Cambodia and
Myanmar, as well as to appoint him to the position of permanent observer to
the United Nations Economic and Social Council for Asia and the Pacific.

It was this passion that made him gravitate towards political office as
early as 1965, when he ran for political office in Brakpan. Although not
successful in that attempt to enter public life, it did highlight one of
the hon Gibson’s defining characteristics: his positiveness, his ability to
bounce back after defeat. Indeed, he epitomises the lines from Rudyard
Kipling’s famous poem, If:

  If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
  And treat those two impostors just the same; ...


The hon Gibson did bounce back and has given more or less 40 unbroken years
of commitment to the politics, people and public service of South Africa as
a councillor, chairperson and manager of the Benoni City Council, as a
member of the provincial council in the then Transvaal for 16 years, as
leader of the opposition in that council, as a Member of Parliament and as
Chief Whip of the DA since 1994. During those 40 years of service, the hon
Gibson clearly proved that political office is about honourable means and
worthy ends.

He has never regarded parliamentary service as a shortcut to riches or as a
way station to some other office of profit in the private sector. His
commitment has always been to democracy, the democratic process and the
effectiveness of this institution in exercising oversight and achieving
accountability.

He has always taken this institution, its substance, its rituals, its
rights, its privileges and its decorum very seriously. As Chief Whip of the
DA, he has helped mould its precedence, its protocols, its rules and its
conventions and provided this House with a lively, witty and yes, at times,
controversial, leading figure.

The hon Gibson has been made mampara of the week, a record he is fond of,
although he insists the reasons for it were all unfounded. He is banned
from visiting Zimbabwe and is a house inspector of note. [Laughter.] In
fact, he has been given an award for the worst publicity stunt possible.

Douglas has always been a colourful figure in an often colourless
institution. Yet through all this, we, in Parliament and in the DA, have
learnt never to underestimate his wise counsel and guidance. While this is
a parliamentary farewell, it would be remiss of me not to place on record
the DA’s deep gratitude for the dedication and commitment with which he has
served the cause of liberal democracy in our country.

His boundless energy, his infectious enthusiasm and hard work have been an
inspiration to us all. His eternal optimism has earned him the affectionate
title of the Pollaynna of our party. Today we take leave of the hon Gibson,
but our loss is South Africa’s gain, as we know that he will continue
proudly to serve both his country and the people of South Africa with the
passion and commitment we have come to expect of him. I have no doubt that
his service as an ambassador will be as distinguished as was his service to
this House.

Hon Gibson – Douglas - we are extremely proud of you. We pay tribute to you
and we wish you and your good wife, who is sitting in the gallery there
with your son, well in your endeavours and in your new position. Pam, you
have always been an integral part of Douglas’ life and, therefore, part of
his success. We wish you well. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I only have two minutes, but even if I
had had 20, I would not be able to do justice to the immense heritage left
by one Douglas Harvey Monro Gibson, MP - my political opponent, yes, but
what a master!

Douglas, without doubt, possesses remarkably outstanding skills and
talents: legal, political, ethical, loyalty, friendship, military and
camaraderie, and he uses them to better the lives of all in our land.

We are reminded of the DA’s rocketing growth in the 1999 election,
increasing their seven MPs here to an almost unbelievable 38 – that was a
500% growth. That unbelievable DA growth was largely caused by the
spectacular performances here in this Parliament by Douglas Gibson, Tony
Leon and, yes, you also, Mike. [Laughter.] Douglas personified the DA’s
famous poster with the words, “The guts to fight back”, because he
practically demonstrated those guts here in this House.

He ravaged his political opponents with exceptional debating skills and
became the “liefling” [darling] of hundreds of thousands of TV viewers.
Douglas, who has been in public life for almost 30 years, became the leader
of the opposition in the Transvaal provincial council as a youngster of
about 35, when Mr Sybrand van Niekerk was the then administrator.

Now, Douglas, we phoned Oom Sybrand yesterday. He is still alive and he is
now 94. We asked him if he remembered Douglas Gibson and he said:

   ``Natuurlik onthou ek die outjie. Hy was maar ’n jong outjie, maar baie
   deeglik. Hy’t hard gewerk en hy was baie verdraagsaam.’’

Douglas, oom Sybrand stuur sy groete en beste wense aan jou en Pam en
Donald. Ons gaan jou mis, ou maat. Jy’t moerse groot spore getrap hier in
die politiek! [Gelag.] Hierdie Parlement en die land is groot dank aan jou
verskuldig. Ek dink eerlikwaar president Mbeki behoort jou ’n toekenning te
gee. En jy word nou ’n ambassadeur, maar ek dink julle kort nog ’n
ambassadeurskap en dit is vir mnr Ellis – ek het dit vroeër ook al gesê –
op Robbeneiland! [Gelag.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[“Of course I remember the lad. He was only a youngster, but very thorough.
He worked very hard and he was very tolerant.’’

Douglas, Oom Sybrand sends his regards and best wishes to you, Pam and
Donald. We will miss you, my friend. You have left helluva big footprints
in the politics of this country! [Laughter.] This Parliament and the
country is greatly indebted to you. I honestly think president Mbeki should
give you an award. And you are now becoming an ambassador, but I think you
need another ambassadorship and that is for Mr Ellis – I have said this
before – on Robben Island! [Laughter.]]

In conclusion, Douglas, I am certainly not saying farewell to you, but only
goodbye, because a talented bastard like you will soon surface somewhere
with more guts than ever before.

Jy moet mooi loop, ou boet; en Pam en Donald, julle moet mooi na die ouman
kyk, hoor! [Applous.] [Go well, old chap, and Pam and Donald, you must take
good care of the old man, ok! [Applause.]]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon members, very few people can claim to
have seen so much of this institution as the hon Gibson has. He has been at
the coalface of this institution for such a long time and played a pivotal
role in developing and promoting the Rules and mechanisms of Parliament.

He will be remembered for his dedication and commitment not just to his
party, but also to the institution of parliamentary democracy as a whole.
He will also be remembered for being a vocal and colourful contributor to
debates within this House and its committees.

His knowledge and experience of parliamentary procedures and related
matters is beyond doubt, and he will be remembered for his ability to bring
this to bear even in the most heated of debates.

We salute the hon Gibson as a democrat and a true South African. One may
not always have agreed with him - indeed, many people have disagreed with
him over the years - but, as far as the UDM is concerned, there has never
been any doubt about the hon Gibson’s commitment to democracy and to this
country.

I would now like to take this opportunity to wish the hon member all the
best for the future. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, when I arrived at Parliament in 1994 I
always called on the hon Douglas Gibson to interpret the Rules of
Parliament for me and I used to call him my shop steward. But I must also
confess that at a time when I was almost chased out of Parliament, he also
advised me on how to manipulate the Rules! So, thank you for all that
assistance. I want to wish you and your wife, Pam, a great future and
success.

But I also want to give you your first assignment. When you arrive in
Thailand I think you need, like you normally used to do in Parliament, to
condemn the military junta in Burma – Myanmar - with the contempt it
deserves. I want to watch and see if you are going to do that because we
have fought long and hard for human rights and I think we must stand with
the people of Burma. I wish you well and everything of the best!
[Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, from the time the ACDP came to Parliament in
1994, we were aware of the hon Douglas Gibson’s unique manner and input in
the National Assembly. Initially, he was one of only seven MPs in the then
Democratic Party.

ACDP Members of Parliament have always found the hon Gibson to be a
friendly and courteous person, yet committed to plain-spoken democracy and
the dogged pursuance of issues. While the issues the hon Douglas Gibson has
pursued have not always been appreciated by all, the fact that he could be
relied on not to be intimidated or belittled into backing off has to be
admired. His legal background has been evident in his relentless arguments,
making him a worthy opponent in many debates.

As colleagues, we in the ACDP have respect and affection for the hon Gibson
and we are sure that parliamentary life will not be quite the same without
him.

We congratulate you, hon Gibson, on your appointment as ambassador to
Thailand. We hope you will manage somehow to have a well-deserved rest and
wish you a future filled with new and enriching opportunities. Our
sincerest prayer for you and your family is that the Lord Jesus Christ will
lead you, guide you and protect you in the days ahead. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Agb mevrou die Speaker, ons almal kry van tyd tot tyd die
geleentheid om toe te kyk wanneer daar nuwe lede by die Parlement ingebring
word om die eed af te lê en volwaardig lid van hierdie Huis te word. Op
dieselfde manier het mnr Gibson baie jare gelede - nie as ’n groentjie nie,
omdat hy reeds in die provinsiale raad gedien het - sy geleentheid gekry om
by die Parlement in te kom en ingesweer te word en sy ding te kom doen.

Dit is so dat hy oor die jare sy stempel afgedruk het. Ons het hom leer ken
as ’n bekwame politikus en debatteerder. Dit is so dat daar in elke party
mense is na wie, wanneer hulle die podium nader om aan ’n debat deel te
neem, mense regop sit en luister om te hoor wat daardie persoon gaan sê, en
ek kan sonder die geringste huiwering sê mnr Gibson was presies so ’n
persoon. As hy die podium betree het, het kollegas gesit en luister om te
hoor waarmee hy dié keer gaan vorendag kom. Die poppe het gedans!

Feit van die saak is, ek is jammer om te sê, dat dit wat hom ’n ster gemaak
het, sal hy aan moet werk, want as ambassadeur sal hy nie in Thailand ’n
punt van orde teen die President kan neem en ’n kommissie van ondersoek
teen hierdie en daardie een kan aanvra nie! [Gelag.] Hy sal hom baie
bekwaam en korrek moet gedra, maar ons weet hy kan dit ook doen.

Ek het in ’n politieke huis grootgeword waar ons geleer is ... (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, from time to time we all have the
opportunity to see new members being brought to Parliament to take the oath
and become fully-fledged members of the House. In this manner Mr Gibson,
many years ago, not as a novice as he had already served on the provincial
council, had his chance to become a member of Parliament, to be sworn in
and come and do his thing.

It is so that over the years he has made his mark. We got to know him as a
competent politician and debater. It is true that there are people in every
party to whom, when they approach the podium to take part in a debate,
people sit up and listen to hear what that person is going to say, and I
can say without the slightest hesitation that Mr Gibson was exactly such a
person. When he took to the podium, colleagues sat up and listened to what
he was going to come up with each time.  The sparks would fly!

The fact of the matter is, I am sorry to say, that he will have to work on
that which made him a star, because as ambassador in Thailand he won’t be
able to raise a point of order against the President and request a
commission of inquiry into this and that! [Laughter.] He will have to
behave in a very appropriate and correct manner, but we know that he can do
that as well.

I grew up in a political house where we were taught ... ]

... one person at the right time and at the right place can make a
difference. And I can say today that Douglas Gibson was such a person. He
made a difference on various occasions. I was personally present in
Parliament when he made very important inputs.

On behalf of the FF Plus, we say farewell and we hope you will have a
wonderful career as a diplomat, and when you come back to South Africa we
will be waiting to see you again. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker, judging by that new executive suit that the
hon Gibson is wearing I take it that his preparations for his new career
are well advanced and I’m sure he’s going to cut a good figure on the
Bangkok cocktail diplomatic circuit in that suit. [Laughter.]
I think as previous speakers have said, Douglas is worth a lot more than
the suit he wears. He is all the things that people have described him as.
In fact, in observing Douglas from a distance over the past from 1994 up
until quite recently, I always rated him as perhaps the most consummate
politician in the House. And I am sure the House will agree with me that we
can give him about an 8,5 out of 10.

Anyway, it was always at arm’s length that I watched Douglas perform in his
articulation and it was the properness with which he did everything that
really impressed me. But it is only in the last few months, when Douglas
and I both became members of the Portfolio Committee on Finance, that I got
to know him. One such occasion was in Pretoria recently where we spent a
few days on a study tour and where, over some fermenting grape juice in the
evenings, I got to know the more personal side of Douglas and realised what
a really nice and sensitive guy he is. [Laughter.]

I learnt a lot of things about him. The one thing I learnt, however, is
that you don’t ever call him “Dougie”. [Laughter.] On that note, “Dougie”
... [Laughter.] ... I do on behalf of my party wish you very well in your
new career at this twilight stage of your working life. We ask you to bear
in mind what you’ve learnt at the ambassador diplomat school of late: The
first rule is that once you arrive there you prepare the guest room.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kyk maar hierso, outjie! [Look
here, chap.] I must wait for him. Ok, thank you very much.

The African People’s Convention, the APC, wishes to add its voice to the
farewell tribute to one of our colleagues, Mr Douglas Gibson, known to me
since the days of the defunct Democratic Party. On my arrival here at
Parliament in April 2004, I found myself brushing shoulders with Mr Douglas
Gibson in this very House, the National Assembly, and thereafter in other
leading committees in Parliament, and in the Chief Whips’ Forum as the
Chief Whip of the DA.

Mr Douglas Gibson has served this country, representing his constituency
with distinction. He has been that character that kept this House alive at
all times to his foes and friends.

The APC wishes Mr Douglas Gibson the best and every success in his newly
appointed position as an ambassador of this country.

Lastly, we expect that you will hoist the flag of South Africa high in
Thailand and make us proud. Farewell, Mr Gibson. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Viva Azania! Madam Speaker, I have served with the hon Mr
Douglas Gibson on the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs. I have
listened to him carefully when he debated in this House as well as in other
forums.

I have not always agreed with everything he said, but I have always admired
the courage with which he said what he believes in. After all, there is an
African proverb that says: Moya kgotla ha a tsekiswe. [In a public forum
everyone has the right to be heard without being harassed.] We shall miss
his contributions in this hon House.

I would like to congratulate you, Mr Gibson, on your appointment as our
ambassador to Thailand. I know that you will represent our country with the
honour and dignity it deserves. All the best! Your success shall be our
success.

Maybe I should have the privilege today of being the first to call you
“Your Excellency”. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, it has been a great honour for me to have
known the hon Gibson for the past 13 years. In the Chief Whips’ Forum, the
hon Gibson and the hon Mike Ellis were humorously referred to as the
“terrible twins.” They were terrible not because they were bad; they were
terrible because they were so good. They defended the DA’s policy and they
were tough negotiators and, of course, they left a mark on the Chief Whips’
Forum.

The hon Gibson has had an outstanding political career. I will always
remember him as an excellent, hard-hitting, robust debater, and as the
former Chief Whip of the DA, who had a thorough understanding of the Rules
of Parliament.

On behalf of the FD, I wish to bid the hon Gibson farewell on a very well-
deserved retirement from Parliament. You leave a memorable legacy for all
of us at Parliament and we wish you well on your appointment as ambassador
to Thailand. We have no doubt that you will do a sterling job in Thailand.
May God bless you. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mnr Gibson, jy is ’n man wat sy man kan staan! [Applous.] [Mr Gibson, you
are a man who can stand his ground! [Applause.]]

We say this as the ANC. We want to acknowledge the type of person you have
been representing your party, sometimes making us laugh and sometimes
making us very angry, but you stood your ground. I want to say that, on the
other hand, you have had an impact in this House. But I also want to say
that when you were appointed as ambassador for South Africa to Thailand, it
showed that the Freedom Charter was being applied when it says: “South
Africa belongs to all those who live in it, black and white.” [Applause.]

This should be taken very seriously so that when we argue in this
Parliament, we argue for building this country. You argued, my man, you
argued yourself into becoming an ambassador! Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I would like everybody present to be the
first to hear that have I changed my mind. [Laughter.] I hadn’t realised
how kind my friends were and how they really wanted me to stay. So, I am
now seriously reconsidering and staying here for another 16 years.
[Laughter.]

I may say that this debate certainly beats the debate last year when I was
censured by the House for reprehensible conduct towards the President. I
said then and afterwards that politics in South Africa is so interesting.

President Mbeki, on the advice of the hon Minister of Foreign Affairs, has
nominated me as South Africa’s ambassador to Thailand. It says a lot for
both of them that they are prepared to honour a DA loyalist and a strong
Helen Zille supporter in this way. That they trust me to represent our
country sends out a strong message that our democracy includes us all -
exactly as the Chief Whip has just said. [Applause.]

I entered politics when I was eight years old in 1950. I disliked the
policies of that government and I fought them for the next 50 years. In
1965 I contested and lost the Brakpan constituency. A newspaper then
described me as “die politieke kuiken van die goudstad”. Some would say 42
years later the political chicken of the gold city that the political
chicken has become a rather tough old rooster.

I lost elections in 1967, 1977 and 1987, but won in 1970, 1972, 1974, 1977,
1981, 1991, 1994, 1999, and 2004. How’s that? [Laughter.] I had 16 years in
provincial government, five in local government and 16 in Parliament. I
have tried never to forget the words: Umuntu ungumuntu ngabantu - I am what
I am because of other people. [Applause.]

In 1970 I met a young woman called Pam Donald who honoured me by marrying
me on 16 October 1971. [Applause.] She is sitting in the gallery today, on
our 36th wedding anniversary. Next to her is our son, Donald. He inherited
my good looks and my hairdo. [Laughter.] The two people who mean the most
to me in the world are with me, as always. Pam has been my partner through
all the triumphs and all the setbacks, always there for me when I really
needed her. I thank her today for those 36 years. [Applause.]

Winning elections is nicer than losing them. I lost in 1977 partly because
my opponent claimed that if I won, black people would be allowed to swim in
the Benoni swimming pool. What a horrifying thought that was!

I spectacularly lost a parliamentary election in Bezuidenhout in 1987.
Happily that was my last loss. The Progressive Federal Party of those days
wanted a national convention. We said only a nonracial democracy, universal
franchise and a Bill of Rights in a constitution to be negotiated by the
representatives of all South Africans would bring peace. That message was
rejected by most of the voters, and we lost many seats around the country.

One of the wonders of the world is that the political climate changed so
quickly and so peacefully as people came to accept the political truths and
realities of our country. Today there are very few South Africans of
whatever political view who would want to go back to the apartheid past.

What an adventure it has been. From the early 1950s onwards I saw all of
the steps that were taken as apartheid took hold. As a public
representative for most of the past 37 years, I was able to help in a small
way to dismantle that edifice and move our country to a more normal
society. I was part of the peace process and also at Codesa. I was part of
the negotiations for the final Constitution, and I have served in each of
the democratic parliaments that followed the advent of democracy. While my
contribution may have been modest, I feel that I can claim to be a co-
father of our new South Africa and of this democratic Parliament.

There are some wonderful people in and around this place and I cannot
possibly name them all. I do not want to wreck the careers of ANC MPs by
mentioning those who are my friends. [Laughter.] There are four people on
my side that I want to mention. They are my own comrades Tony Leon, who was
my leader for 13 years, my dear friend Mike Ellis, who has been with me in
every fight for all of those years, my successor Ian Davidson, who is doing
so well as Chief Whip, and then Joe Seremane, the gentleman of politics in
South Africa. [Applause.]

Then there are other people like Frene Ginwala and Kasper Hahndiek, and
Kamal Mansura, sitting at the back, who must be singled out from the
numerous presiding officers and officials who have served us so diligently
over all the years. I think of all the table staff, the policemen, the
caterers, the staff in the parliamentary bars, in particular ...
[Laughter.] ... and so many others who have been kind to me. My secretary,
Riley Wakeford, and our whole parliamentary and political staff all deserve
thanks.

I have served on many portfolio committees. Two that stick in my mind are
Justice under the hon Johnny de Lange and Foreign Affairs under the hon Job
Sithole, both of whom became valued friends. I regret leaving the hard-
working finance committee under the hon Nhlanhla Nene after such a short
stay.

The voters do not realise the calibre of some MPs or, that apart from the
political grandstanding and the crossfire between parties, as well as the
sincerely held differences of opinion, there is generally a very good
relationship between people on both sides of this House.

What a wonderful and fulfilling journey it has been. It has provided
memories that no one can ever take from me. I have had a great life in
politics. From being a fight-back politician of the robust school, I shall
now have to learn to behave myself as a good diplomat should. While I am a
little sad about leaving the National Assembly and politics and the people
who have been so important in my life for so many years, I am determined to
live up to the great opportunity that has been given to me to serve our
country and our people.

From the bottom of my heart I thank you personally, Madam Speaker, for your
kindness and courtesy to me; and to all friends, for their kind words about
me and for this opportunity to say farewell to the National Assembly. I am
profoundly grateful to the voters and to my party for allowing me to serve
them for so many years. I shall miss you all. God bless this House, our
country and all of our people. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to take this opportunity just to say a
word because I don’t think one could add to the many words that have been
said here today in tribute to the hon Gibson. I would simply like to say
that one should, of course, congratulate your wife on this special day,
which is your 36th anniversary, for having married you and kept you on
course - I am quite sure - in many ways that we will never know about until
you write a book about the story of your life, which I am sure will be
interesting.

Congratulations to your family, your son included, on having been there for
you, because you wouldn’t have had the energy you had to do some of the
things you did from this podium. I remember you and your finger ...
[Laughter.] ... and now you are taking it to a place where you can’t quite
use it that way, except of course if you decide that one of your earliest
engagements when you get there is to go to Myanmar to try to engage with
those people. But please try to find the Buddhist monks because we do not
know what happened to them.

On a serious note, I just want to use this opportunity also, on behalf of
the Deputy Speaker and myself and all the Presiding Officers, to
congratulate you, and to thank you for the contributions you made in this
House, whether you were angry or making jokes, but everything somebody says
adds something - whether or not it is said in a way that other people take
negatively, but they make us think. Those things that you say make us
think.

So, we thank you for your contribution and we thank you for having accepted
the deployment to go and continue to serve the country outside South
Africa. Good luck and we trust that you will do your best as you have
always done in terms of your mandate.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

The House adjourned at 16:00.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

  1. The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
         Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2006-2007.

  2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2006-2007
         [RP 123-2007].

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
         Council (HSRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 128-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
         Natural Scientific Professions 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

                         TUESDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 — National Treasury
          for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2006-2007 [RP 139-2007].

2.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
          Fund (UIF) for 2006-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 162-2007].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service Sector
          Education and Training Authority (PSeta) for 2006-2007 [RP 73-
          2007].

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     (b)    Government Notice No 517 published in Government Gazette No
         30003 dated 21 June 2007: Repeal Part 1 of the Regulations
         published by Government Notice No. R2362 of 18 November 1977 in
         terms of the Trade Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).


     (c)    Government Notice No R.544 published in Government Gazette No
         30023 dated 6 July 2007: Compulsory specification for cement in
         terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     (d)    Government Notice No R.545 published in Government Gazette No
         30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment of
         levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
         specifications:
         Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     (e)    Government Notice No R.546 published in Government Gazette No
         30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment of
         levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
         specifications:
         Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     (f)    Government Notice No R.547 published in Government Gazette No
         30023 dated 6 July 2007: Regulations relating to the payment of
         levy and the issue of sales permits in regard to compulsory
         specifications:
         Amendment in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     (g)    Government Notice No R.580 published in Government Gazette No
         30050 dated 13 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     (h)    Government Notice No R.581 published in Government Gazette No
         30050 dated 13 July 2007: Incorporation of an external company as
         a company in the Republic of South Africa: Revere International
         Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


     (i)    Government Notice No R.582 published in Government Gazette No
         30050 dated 13 July 2007: Incorporation of an external company as
         a company in the Republic of South Africa: Delburne Holdings
         Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


     (j)    Government Notice No 643 published in Government Gazette No
         30074 dated 20 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     (k)    Government Notice No 644 published in Government Gazette No
         30074 dated 20 July 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     (l)    Government Notice No 648 published in Government Gazette No
         30092 dated 20 July 2007: Companies and Intellectual Property
         Registration Office (CIPRO)—Intellectual Property Division: Notice
         in terms of regulations 3(7) in terms of the Copyright Act, 1978
         (Act No 98 of 1978).


     (m)    Government Notice No 649 published in Government Gazette No
         30074 dated 20 July 2007: Repeal of Government Notice No 1322 of 1
         September 1995 and publishing of regulations in terms of the Trade
         Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).


     (n)    Government Notice No 698 published in Government Gazette No
         30144 dated 10 August 2007: Standards matters in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     (o)    Government Notice No 741 published in Government Gazette No
         30189 dated 17 August 2007: Incorporation of an external company
         as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Kotze Investments
         (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of
         1973).
     (p)    Government Notice No 781 published in Government Gazette No
         30225 dated 28 August 2007: Rules for the conduct of matters
         before the National Consumer Tribunal in terms of the National
         Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).


     (q)    Government Notice No 819 published in Government Gazette No
         30254 dated 7 September 2007: Proposed amendment of the Compulsory
         Specification for Vehicles of Category 03 and 04, in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

4.    The Minister of Science and Technology


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
         Foundation (NRF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 — Department of Arts
         and Culture for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for 2006-2007.


                        WEDNESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Finance


          a) Molaotlhomo wa Lekgethwana la Thomelontle ya Taemane [M 22 –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

         This is the official translation into Setswana of the Diamond
         Export Levy Bill [B 22 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

         (b)     Molaotlhomo wa Lekgethwana la Thomelontle (Tsamaiso) ya
             Taemane [M 23 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


         This is the official translation into Setswana of the Diamond
         Export Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23 – 2007] (National Assembly
         – sec 75).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


    (a)    Electronic Communications Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Communications. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF)
          for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 112-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
         Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
         Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2006-2007.

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
         (RSR) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 94-2007].

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
         Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 146-2007].

    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
         Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2006-2007.
    (g)     Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
         South Africa and Air Navigation Services Company for 2006-2007.

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
         (CGE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 116-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
         Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 96-2007].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
         Group of Companies (CEF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group of Companies for 2006-
         2007 [RP 189-2007].

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
         Board Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 111-2007].

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
         Regulator (NNR) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 95-2007].

    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology (Mintek)
         for 2006-2007, including the Report f the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 109-2007].


    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
         Council for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 26-2007].

3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 210-2007].


                         THURSDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
         Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         132-2007].


2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
         Board for Auditors for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    (b)     Government Notice No 824 published in Government Gazette No
         30264 dated 7 September 2007: Notice of allocations per
         municipality for Schedule 7 local government conditional grants, in
         accordance with sections 8(3) and 22(1)(a) of the Division of
         Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No 1 of 2007).


3.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
         Transport for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2006-2007.

4.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
         Social Development for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 for 2006-
         2007 [RP 203-2007].

5.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
         Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial for 2006-2007 [RP
         169-2007].
6.    The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 51-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education
         and Training Authority (Eseta) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 61-2007].

7.    The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa for
         2006-2007.

8.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department of
         Justice and Constitutional Development for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         23 for 2006-2007 [RP 119-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Presidents’ Fund for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 120-2007].


9.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         27 for 2006-2007 [RP 80-2007].


10.   The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
         Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

11.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
         Commission for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 147-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
         Authority (TCTA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
12.   The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
         Agriculture for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 25 for 2006-2007 [RP
         216-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of Land
         Affairs for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2006-2007 [RP 209-2007].


                          FRIDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bill submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Finance


        a) Bankwysigingswetsontwerp [W 12 – 2007] (National Assembly –
           proposed sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Banks
         Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec
         75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
        Vote 3 for 2006-2007.

   (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
        International Co-operation Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
2.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 - Statistics South
          Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements for Vote 13 for 2006-2007 [RP 104-
          2007].


3. The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
        Provincial and Local Government for 2006-2007, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 5 for
        2006-2007.

    (b)     Report and  Financial  Statements  of  Municipal  Infrastructure
        Investment  Unit  (Proprietary)  Limited  (MIIU)   for   2006-2007,
        including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
        Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 27-2007].


   (c)      Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Municipal  Demarcation
        Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 218-2007].

4.    The Minister of Social Development

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
         Security Agency for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 100-2007].

5.    The Minister of Communications
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
         Communications for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2006-2007 [RP
         204-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
         Institute of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of  2006-2007  [RP
         185-2007].

6.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  10  –  Department  of
         Public Service and Administration  for  2006-2007,  including  the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of  Vote
         10 for 2006-2007 [RP 220-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  12  –  South  African
         Management Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2006-2007,  including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  of
         Vote 12 for 2006-2007.

7.    The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  17  –  Department  of
         Labour for 2006-2007, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 17 for 2006-2007 [RP 49-2007].



8.    The Minister of Public Works

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of Public
         Works for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 6 for 2006-2007.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the  Independent  Development
         Trust for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 182-2007].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
         Environment (CBE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Construction  Industry
         Development Board (CIDB) for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

9.    The Minister of Health

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
         Health for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2006-2007 [RP 115-
         2007].

10.   The Minister of Housing

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
          (Proprietary) Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

11.   The Minister of Safety and Security

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Independent
         Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 22 for
         2006-2007 [RP 223-2007].

12.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2006-
          2007,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on   the
          Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South  African  Drug-Free
          Sport for 2006-2007, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 148-2007].

13.   The Minister of Trade and Industry

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade
         and Industry for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2006-2007.

14.   The Minister of Science and Technology

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
         Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 215-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Academy of Science  of  South
         Africa for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

15.   The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  30  –  Department  of
         Minerals and Energy for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 30  for  2006-
         2007 [RP 35-2007].

16.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of Water
         Affairs and Forestry for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34  for  2006-
         2007 [RP 201-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Inkomati Catchment Management
         Agency for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 177-2007].
17.   The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of  the  Land  and  Agricultural
         Bank of South Africa (Land  Bank)  for  2006-2007,  including  the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 219-2007].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements  of  the  National  Agricultural
          Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
          1-2007].

       c) Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological
          Products Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


National Assembly

1. The Speaker

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 – Public Service
         Commission (PSC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 11 for 2006-
         2007 [RP 160-2007].


                           MONDAY, 1 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Communications

         (a)     Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2007]
              (National Assembly– proposed sec 75) [Bill and prior notice
              of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 30307
              of 17 September 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Communications of the National Assembly, as well as referral
              to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in
              terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    (a)      Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Nuclear
         Regulator (NNR) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 95-2007].

        Please note: The abovementioned item is a correction of item 2(e)
        under the entry “Tablings” published on page 1898 of the
        Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 26 September 2007.

2.    The Minister of Housing


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  Vote  28  –  Department  of
         Housing for 2006-2007, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 28 for 2006-2007 [RP 113-2007].



3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Upliftment of the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr  M
         S Makamu, a senior magistrate at Benoni.

    (b)     Report in terms of section 13(4)(a)  of  the  Magistrates  Act,
         1993 (Act No 90 of 1993): Suspension of a  magistrate:  Mr  T  V  D
         Matyolo.

    (c)     Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in  terms
         of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of  1993):
         Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M F Mathe.

    (d)     Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in  terms
         of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of  1993):
         Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M K Chauke.

    (e)     Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in  terms
         of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of  1993):
         Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr M F Mathe.

    (f)     Progress Report dated 10 September 2007 to Parliament in  terms
         of section 13(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of  1993):
         Inquiry into allegations of misconduct: Mr I X Masimini.

 4. The Minister of Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  Vote  15  –  Department  of
         Education for 2006-2007,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 15  for  2006-2007  [RP
         110-2007].

5.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  the  Tshumisano  Trust  for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Letter from the Minister for Provincial and Local Government
         dated 17 August 2007.

    (b)     Policy Process on the System of Provincial and Local Government
         (Background: Policy questions, process & participation).

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
        Government for consideration and report.


    (c)     Letter from the Minister of Correctional Services, dated 13
         September 2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms
         of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act
         No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
         Report of the Department of Correctional Services for 2006-2007.


      TABLING OF DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE
         2006/2007 FINANCIAL YEAR.


      Madam Speaker, due to the national public sector strike action during
         June 2007 the Auditor-General had to delay the finalisation of
         audit of affected departments. As a result, the Auditor-General’s
         consistency review process oa the audit reports could only be
         conducted subsequent to 31 July 2007, the consequence of which was
         delay in the finalisation of the audit of this department for the
         2006/07 financial year.


      Furthermore we are not in a position to table the Annual Report
         without the audited financial statements by the Auditor-General
         within the prescribed period in terms of the Rules of the National
         Assembly. The Auditor-General will highlight this on the final
         document that will be inserted in our Annual Report to be submitted
         in Parliament.


      Please accept our apology. We were promised by the Office of the
         Auditor-General that they’ll communicate directly with Parliament
         to alert them of this delay.


      Kind regards


      Ngconde Balfour, MP
      MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES


2.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals


    (1)     The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker in accordance with Rule 234:

         (a)     Legislative Proposal to amend the Remuneration of Public
             Office Bearers Act (No 20 of 1998) (Mrs S A Seaton)


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
         Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.


                           TUESDAY, 2 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
       Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2007] – Act No 13 of 2007 (assented to and
       signed by President on 26 September 2007).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

     (1)    The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
        Portfolio Committees:

        Justice and Constitutional Development
        Appointed:     Carrim, Mr Y I
        Discharged:    Chohan, Ms F I


        Public Enterprises
        Appointed:     Chohan, Ms F I
        Discharged:    Carrim, Mr Y I
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of   National   Prosecuting
         Authority for 2006-2007, including  the  Reports  of  the  Auditor-
         General on the  Financial  Statements  for  2006-2007  and  on  the
         Financial Statements of the Criminal Assets  Recovery  Account  for
         2006-2007.


                          WEDNESDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

    Public Enterprises

    Ms F I Chohan has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
    Committee on PublicEnterprises with effect from 2 October 2007.

    Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    Mr Y I Carrim has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
    Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development with effect from 2
    October 2007.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
     SANDF to Uganda, dated 14 September 2007:

        The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
        letter from the President on the employment of the South African
        National Defence Force (SANDF) to Uganda, referred to the Committee,
        reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


2.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
    SANDF to the Union of Comoros, dated 14 September 2007:

        The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
        letter from the President on the employment of the South African
        National Defence Force (SANDF) to the Union of Comoros, referred to
        the Committee, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
        thereon.


3.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
    SANDF within the Republic of South Africa, 14 September 2007:

        The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
        letter from the President on the employment of the South African
        National Defence Force (SANDF) within the Republic of South Africa,
        referred to the Committee, reports that it has concluded its
        deliberations thereon.


4.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
    SANDF to Zambia, dated 14 September 2007:

        The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
        letter from the President on the employment of the South African
        National Defence Force (SANDF) to Zambia, referred to the Committee,
        reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.




                           MONDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2007



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted
     (1)    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


         (a)     UMthethosivivinywa Kazwelonke Wkuochibiyela Ezemidlalo
             Kanye Nezokuzithokozisa [B 17B – 2006] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).


         This is the official translation into isiZulu of the National
         Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2006] (National
         Assembly – sec 75).


    (2)     The Minister of Housing


         (a)      Wysigingswetsontwerp op Beskermingsmaatreëls vir
            Behuisings-verbruikers [W 6 – 2007] (Nasional Assembly – sec
            76).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Housing
         Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill [B 6 – 2007]
         (National Assembly – sec 76).



TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  20  –  Department  of
         Correctional Services for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote  20  for  2006-
         2007 [RP 217-2007].

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (a)    Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Perishable  Products
         Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.



3.    The Minister of Transport

    Letter from the Minister of Transport, dated 04 October  2007,  to  the
    Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)  of  the
    Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining  the
    delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports of  South  African  Maritime
    Safety Authority, the Cross-Border Road  Transport  Agency,  the  Urban
    Transport Fund and the Road Traffic Management  Corporation  for  2006-
    2007.


    WRITTEN EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING  OF  THE  ANNUAL
    REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN  MARITIME  SAFETY
    AUTHORITY (SAMSA), THE CROSS-BORDER ROAD TRANSPORT AGENCY (C-BRTA), THE
    URBAN TRANSPORT FUND (UTF) AND THE ROAD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT  CORPORATION
    (RTMC) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2007


    I write to inform Parliament that in terms of section 65(2)(a)  of  the
    Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No  1  of  1999),  as  amended
    (PFMA), I was unfortunately not able to table the  Annual  Reports  and
    audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March 2007   of  the
    South African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA), the Cross-Border  Road
    Transport Agency (C-BRTA), the Urban Transport Fund (UTF) and the  Road
    Traffic  Management  Corporation  (RTMC)  before  the  deadline  of  30
    September 2007.


    The explanation of the late tabling of the Annual Reports  in  question
    is that the SAMSA, C-BRTA, UTF and RTMC could not submit  their  Annual
    Reports  in  time,  because  of  unforeseen  delays  that   have   been
    experienced with the office of the Auditor-General  in  submitting  the
    respective Audit Reports on the Entities’ Financial Statements for  the
    year ended 31 March 2007 to  be  included  in  their  2006-2007  Annual
    Reports.
    Arrangements will, however, be  made  for  the  above-mentioned  Public
    Entities’ Annual  Reports  to  be  tabled  in  Parliament  as  soon  as
    possible.


    I trust that this will be in order.


    Kind regards


    Mr J T Radebe, MP
    Minister of Transport

4.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    Report of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate for 2006-2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

   National Assembly
1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on the Social Housing
    Bill [B 29 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 3 October 2007:

       The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having considered the subject of
       the Social Housing Bill [B 29 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76),
       referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
       section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 29A – 2007].


                           TUESDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Withdrawal of tabling of draft rules

    (a)     A letter dated 18 July 2007 was received from the Minister for
         Justice and Constitutional Development, requesting the withdrawal
         of the draft rules made in terms of section 7(2)(c) of the Criminal
         Procedure Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 42 of 2003), tabled on 28
         February 2007.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No R.824 published in Government Gazette No
         30264 dated 7 September 2007: Allocations per Municipality in terms
         of Sections 8(3) and 22(1)(a) of the Act for the following Schedule
         7 Local Government Conditional Grants: (1) Bulk Infrastructure
         Grant, (2) Backlogs in Water and Sanitation at Clinics and Schools
         Grant, and (3) Backlogs in the Electrification of Clinics and
         Schools Grant in term of the Division of Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No
         1 of 2007).


    (b)     Government Notice No R.835 published in Government Gazette No
         30276 dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 1 (No.
         1/11344) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

    (c)     Government Notice No R.836 published in Government Gazette No
         30276 dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 3 (No.
         3/619) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

    (d)     Government Notice No R.837 published in Government Gazette No
         30276 dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 3 (No.
         3/620) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

    (e)     Government Notice No R.838 published in Government Gazette No
         30276 dated 14 September 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 4 (No.
         4/306) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Gender
         Equality (CGE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 176-2007].

National Assembly

 1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Draft Rules made in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of
        Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development for consideration and report.


                          THURSDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

     a) Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/08 Financial Year) [B
        37 – 2007] – Act No 16 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President
        on 1 October 2007).
2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)

National Assembly

1. Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
         Portfolio Committees:

      Agriculture and Land Affairs
         Appointed:  Van der Walt, Mrs D (Alt)


      Education
         Appointed:  Van der Walt, Mrs D (Alt)


      Finance
         Appointed:  Davidson, Mr I O (Alt)


      Foreign Affairs
         Appointed:  Botha, Mrs C-S (Alt); Camerer, Mrs S M (Alt)


      Home Affairs
         Appointed:  Kalayan, Mrs S (Alt); Weber, Mrs H
         Discharged: Labuschagne, Mr L


      Labour
         Appointed:  Labuschagne, Mr L; Swart, Mr M (Alt)
         Discharged: Weber, Mrs H


      Minerals and Energy
         Appointed:  Blanché, Mr S (Alt); Morgan, Mr G (Alt)


      Provincial and Local Government
         Appointed:  Swart, Mr M
         Discharged: Swathe Mr M


      Trade and Industry
         Appointed:  Marais Mr S J F (Alt); Stephens, Mr M (Alt)


      Transport
         Discharged: Swathe Mr M


      Water Affairs and Forestry
         Appointed:  Weber, Mrs H (Alt)


    (2)     The following changes have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
         Standing Committees:
         Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions
         Appointed:  Lowe, Mr M


      3) The following changes have been made to the membership  of  Ad  Hoc
         Committees:


         Nomination to Fill the Vacancy on the Commission for Gender
    Equality
         Appointed:  Camerer, Mrs S M
         Discharged: Delport, Dr J T

    (4)     The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad
         Hoc Committee on Matters Relating to the Ex-Mineworkers Union,
         viz:


         African National Congress
         Direko, Ms I W
         Mathibela, Ms N F
         Matsemela, Ms M L
         Mkongi, Mr B M
         Mthethwa, Mr E N
         Mtshali, Mr E
         Sibanyoni, Mr J B
         Sonto, Mr M R


         Democratic Alliance
         Dreyer, Mrs A
         Schmidt, Mr H


         Inkatha Freedom Party
         Lucas, Mr E J


         Azanian People’s Organisation
         Nefolovhodwe, Mr P J


         Independent Democrats
         Greyling, Mr L

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of Sport
        and Recreation South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for 2006-
        2007 [RP 106-2007].


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     a) Letter from the Minister of Sport and Recreation, dated 10 October
        2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
        65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
        the Department of Sport and Recreation for 2006-2007.


        TABLING OF SPORT AND RECREATION SOUTH AFRICA’S 2006/07 ANNUAL
        REPORT


        Dear Madam Speaker


        In terms of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) Section 40(2),
         the Auditor-General must submit the Audit Report to the Executive
         Authority by 31 July of the financial year following the one under
         review. However, as mentioned in the Department’s Audit Report for
         the 2006/07 financial year, this requirement was not met as a
         result of the Public Sector Strike that took place during June this
         year. The Audit Report was only submitted to the Sport and
         Recreation SA’s Executive Authority on 27 August 2007.


        This delayed submission of the Audit Report to the Executive
         Authority affected the finalization of Departments’ Annual Reports.
         As a result of the late receipt of the Audit Report, the Department
         could not finalise the design and printing of its Annual Report
         timeously. The Department was therefore unable to table the Report
         by the prescribed deadline of 30 September as per Section 65(11) of
         the PFMA.


        The Department has finalized the design of the Report and will be
        able to table it by 11 October 2007.


        I hope that the above explanation sufficiently clarifies our
        situation.
        Yours truly


        REV. DR. M. A. STOFILE
        MINISTER: SPORT AND RECREATION SA


                           FRIDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Bili ya ho Fana ka Matlataelo a Mekgwa-Tsamaiso ya
              Diprovense [B 8 – 2007] (National Council of Provinces – sec
              76).


         This is the official translation into seSotho of the Mandating
         Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8 – 2007] (National Council of
         Provinces – sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Education

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
         Educators (SACE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
         Assurance in General and Further Education and Training – Umalusi
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

  1. Report of the Portfolio Committee of Environmental Affairs and  Tourism
     on the National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B35 - 2007]  (National
     Assembly – sec 76), dated 10 October 2007:

        The Portfolio  Committee  on  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism,
        having considered the subject  of  the  National  Environment  Laws
        Amendment Bill [B35 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76),  referred
        to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as  a  section
        76 Bill, reports the Bill without amendments.

                          TUESDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2007
ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bills submitted

      1) The Minister for Public Enterprises


         (a)     Mulayotibe wa Afrika Tshipembe wa u Bvisela Khagala
             Vhudipfi [M 14 – 2007] (National Assembly– sec 75).

         This is the official translation into TshiVenda of the South
         African Express Bill [B 14 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


      2) The Minister of Sport and Recreation


         (a)     UMthethosivivinywa Kazwelonke Wokuchibiyela Ezemidlalo
             kanye Nezokuzithokozisa  [B 17B – 2006] (National Assembly–
             sec 75).

         This is the official translation into isiZulu of the National
         Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2006] (National
         Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
         2007.

    (b)     Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank – 20
         September 2007.

2.    The Minister of Housing

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
         Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 167-2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
    on the Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2007] (National
    Assembly – sec 75) dated 16 October 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
        considered the subject of the Local Government Laws Amendment Bill
        [B 28 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
        classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
        reports the Bill with amendments [B 28A – 2007].

2.    Report of the Portfolio on Public Enterprises on the Broadband
    Infraco Bill [B26 -2007] (National Assembly- sec 75), dated 10 October
    2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, having considered
        the subject of the Broadbrand Infraco Bill [B26-2007] (National
        Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B26A-2007].

3.    Report of the Portfolio on Public Enterprises on the South African
    Express Bill [B14 -2007] (National Assembly- sec 75), dated 10 October
    2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, having considered
        the subject of the South African Express Bill [B14-2007] (National
        Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B14A-2007].

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the filling of
    a vacancy on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority of
    South Africa, dated 16 October 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
        request of the National Assembly of 15 June 2007 to submit a
        shortlist of candidates to the Minister of Communications for
        appointment to the Council of the Independent Communications
        Authority of South Africa (Icasa), due to the resignation of Ms M
        Mohlala, referred to it, reports as follows:


        The Committee invited the public to nominate persons for
        consideration and recommendation to the Minister for the filling of
        a vacancy on the Council. Nominations and applications were
        received from 29 candidates.


        The Committee considered the nominations and agreed that the
        following persons be shortlisted to be interviewed on 9 October
        2007:


        Mr NT Baloyi, Mr T Ndlovu, Ms R Msiza, Mr S Mampuru, Mr M Kibido,
        and Ms S Booley .


        After having considered the shortlist, and after having interviewed
        the candidates, the Committee recommends that the House, in terms
        of section 7 of the Independent Communications Authority of South
        Africa Amendment Act (Act 3 of 2006) submits to the Minister a list
        of suitable candidates at least one and a half times the number of
        councillors to be appointed, namely:
        Ms R Msiza; Mr T Ndlovu

        Report to be considered.

