---
title: 'National Assembly - 30 August 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-08-30
---

THURSDAY, 30 AUGUST 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Acting Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

      APPOINTMENT OF MR I D MOGASE AS CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY

                               (Announcement)

The ACTING SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that I have been
informed that Mr I D Mogase has been appointed Chief Whip of the Majority
Party with immediate effect. [Applause.] Congratulations, Mr Mogase. I wish
you every success.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

        Progress in terms of the empowerment and development of women

13.   Mrs N B Gxowa (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether our country is on course in terms of the empowerment and
           development of women; if not, what is the position in this
           regard; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether the Government intends putting in place any additional
           programmes and institutions to accelerate women’s development;
           if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             NO1894E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you very much, Madam. I am told you
are the Acting Speaker. I’m told that we have people in the gallery whom
I’d like to welcome to Parliament. They are from around Cape Town, Athlone,
Atlantis, Bellville South, Elsies River, Fisantekraal, Fish Hoek, Grassy
Park, Gugulethu, Hout Bay, Khayelitsha, Kuils River, Langa, Manenberg,
Mfuleni, Milnerton, Mitchells Plain, Mowbray, Muizenberg, New Crossroads,
Philippi, Crossroads and Sea Point. I am very glad to see you here in the
people’s Parliament. Welcome. [Applause.]

The hon Gxowa asked questions concerning issues about the empowerment and
development of women. I have no hesitation in answering both questions that
she posed in the affirmative. Yes, indeed, we are on course in terms of
empowering women, and will continue to work to accelerate women’s
development because, among the central tenets of our democracy, is the
conscious and deliberate implementation of a programme to create a truly
nonsexist society.

Among other things, our commitment to the promotion of gender equality has
been demonstrated by the establishment of a comprehensive national
machinery for the advancement of gender equality in our country. This
commitment is further affirmed by the explicit focus on gender issues in
all our policies - by ensuring that our policies are designed in a manner
that helps us to root out gender discrimination and promote women’s rights,
by the concrete projects in our programme of action around gender issues.
Central to all this is ensuring that women are themselves integrally
involved in the design and implementation of our policies.

As we know, about a third of the members of this House are women. Forty-
three per cent of Cabinet members are women. Four of the premiers in our
nine provinces are women. At the local government level, 40% of councillors
are women. Three of our six metros are led by women mayors. In this regard,
we have already surpassed the 2009 Declaration on Gender and Development,
which calls for 30% representation of women in decision-making structures
in the SADC community of nations.

Currently, our Parliament is ranked 10th out of 130 parliaments in the
world in terms of women’s advancement in governance. Yet, as we have said
in the past, this is still not enough. We need to do more to ensure
increased participation of women in our politics. We can add to this the
fact that our policies make a significant impact on the lives of our women.
For instance, over 40% of households that have benefited from the housing
programme are headed by women. There is free health care for pregnant
mothers and children under the age of six. Women benefit from the provision
of water, electricity and sanitation, which have, in real practical terms,
improved the quality of life of the poor.

In addition, the progress in pushing back the frontiers of poverty, with
clear benefits to millions of women in the country, is the direct outcome
of the constitutional, legislative and programmatic initiatives that our
government has put in place since the attainment of our democracy.

With regard to education, statistics indicate that girls tend to outnumber
boys in secondary school enrolment. A larger proportion of females than
males therefore benefit from secondary education. At the tertiary level,
women account for more than 40% of total university enrolment. The ratio of
female to male in the ages 15 to 24 years who completed Grade 7, as a
measure of literacy, was 111 women to 100 men. Statistics SA’s twice-yearly
labour force survey shows that a larger proportion of women than men have
completed Grade 8.

At the same time, we need to move with the necessary speed to ensure
greater empowerment in the economy. A recent study called the Nedbank
Businesswomen’s Association: South African Women in Corporate Leadership
Census shows that women constitute 19,8% of executive managers, and 10,7%
of directors of the 372 companies surveyed.

These figures are an improvement on last year’s comparable figures.
However, considering that 41,3% of the working population is female, these
figures indicate that more work should still be done. The census ranks
South Africa above Australia when it comes to the percentage of women who
serve as board directors, and above the US, Canada and Australia when it
comes to executive women managers.

We are still at the very beginning of the journey to attain gender
equality. The majority of the poor are disproportionately women. The level
of women’s participation in the economy is indeed woefully low, whether as
employees in the most skilled categories or as managers and as
entrepreneurs. For instance, a recent study on women entrepreneurs suggests
that women comprise 83% of the informal economy, of whom 61% are African
women, mostly in survivalist activity. The same report also underlines the
need to promote entrepreneurship among women because it says that men are
1,7 times more likely than women to be involved in entrepreneurship.

Besides these challenges are the social pathologies that women still endure
in our communities, including gender-based violence and abuse. As such,
much more needs to be done to ensure that we create a society in which all
human beings enjoy a dignified existence in all respects.

This brings me to the second part of the hon Gxowa’s question, and I will
again cite a few examples to illustrate the issue about the additional work
that needs to be done.

This clock is not working, Madam Acting Speaker.

The ACTING SPEAKER: We decided to keep it that way, because it’s not useful
when the President is here. [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: So, may I continue?

The ACTING SPEAKER: Yes, please.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: In recognising that we have many women in
the marginal survivalist business category and underrepresented in
enterprises higher up in the value chain, there are a number of specific
programmes to support the creation of successful businesses run by women.
For instance, a Women’s National Directory for Procurement Purposes has
been finalised, and was launched last year.

The Presidential Women’s Working Group that met on 7 August this year
considered the important initiative proposed by the women who participate
in this working group to form a women’s retirement fund, and agreed that it
should be launched. The fund will be focused on significantly improving
social security and retirement provisions for women and vulnerable women
workers. It will be managed by women, and invested in a way that benefits
the women of South Africa.

The women leaders responsible for this initiative stated that a fund would,
and I quote:

  Harness the collective influence of current retirement savings of women
  to create a greater role for women, and increase security and retirement
  coverage and income security of vulnerable groups such as domestic
  workers and women in rural areas.

In addition, the meeting also discussed the Women Entrepreneurs Fund,
championed by our Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, Elizabeth
Thabethe. This fund will provide finance and comprehensive support to women
small and medium entrepreneurs, precisely for the women to empower and
develop themselves, and break their subjection to an inherited and
antidemocratic, unequal power relationship with the male species of our
society.

Other key issues dealt with during the meeting include the need to pay
extra attention to the matter of basic services for women in rural areas,
such as the continuing challenge of access to water, sanitation and basic
education, the role of families in girl-child education and upbringing, and
violence against women, as well as challenges facing farm labourers.

In conclusion, precisely because the relations of patriarchy which
necessitated the struggle for gender equality remain entrenched in our
society, we do indeed need to intensify the struggle as an integral part of
our effort, among other things, to eradicate poverty and underdevelopment.
Thank you very much, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Mrs N B GXOWA: Mr President, thank you very much for what the government
has done already for women as this month, August, is a month in which we,
the women of South Africa and the women in leadership, rededicate ourselves
to work and improve on all the achievements that we have achieved for
women.

Mr President, we appreciate the efforts that government has made to empower
women. We are also aware that a lot of effort is put into the emancipation
of women in rural areas. What efforts can be made to sustain such
programmes in rural areas, and could government consider the deployment of
community development workers to monitor and sustain developmental
programmes in the rural areas? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, indeed, hon member, the matter of rural
development is of course one of our principal challenges, because these are
the areas which reflect some of the worst levels in our country in terms of
poverty and underdevelopment. They do require very special attention.

We have, as government, been discussing that specific matter of integrated
rural development, which all of us know would have a positive impact,
particularly on women, given the fact that women constitute the
overwhelming number of people who are in these areas that we are talking
about.

About two or three weeks ago, I was in Limpopo, and the provincial
government had convened a meeting of all of the ward councillors and the
community development workers deployed in the province to discuss the
specific matter of the co-operation between them, because I’m sure the hon
member knows that, in some areas, there are tensions that have arisen
between the councillors and the community development workers.

They therefore decided to convene everybody in the province to discuss this
matter because, quite correctly, the premier in the province and the
government had taken the decision, which is precisely the point that the
hon Gxowa indicates – that the CDWs have a very important role to play in
terms of all of these rural areas, particularly in the province of Limpopo.
Therefore, we couldn’t afford a situation of tension between them and the
councillors.

I think we did agree with them that we would, all of us, throughout the
country, have a look at the outcome of that meeting, which would seek to
enhance co-operation between the councillors and the CDWs, in part to
enhance the impact of the community development workers in terms of
responding to the development challenges in the rural areas of Limpopo. We
agreed with them that we would want to have a look at that report so that
we can see in what ways we can communicate to the rest of the country such
lessons as would have been derived from that process. I am saying that,
essentially, I do indeed agree that we need to ensure that this development
effort, in all its elements, including the intervention of the CDWs, does
indeed focus on the rural areas.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Hon Acting Speaker, Mr President, many men in South Africa
and indeed throughout the world still have a very patriarchal attitude
towards women. If this was not so, we would not have to discuss the
empowerment and development of women and programmes needed to empower them
in this House today. To put it crudely, most men – indeed, a lot of men –
believe that a woman’s place is barefoot and pregnant in the kitchen. This
attitude applies to women in business and politics, and often women come to
believe it themselves.

Does the President have any ideas on how this patriarchal attitude can be
changed so that women can indeed take their place on an equal footing with
men in society? Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, I indeed recognise the
truth in a lot of what the hon member is saying. I would have been very,
very pleased indeed if the hon member had said something about how to
respond to this challenge. That would help.

I think that it is clear, when we talk about the kind of society that we
are trying to create, that one of the things we have got to fight against
is precisely this patriarchal attitude which produces these outcomes that
she is talking about. The way we have dealt with it is that it is actually
for us a constitutional requirement. Our Constitution says that we must
produce a nonsexist society, so it’s not a matter of an option from that
point of view.

Therefore, we asked what it is that we have to do in regard to that. As you
know, when I stand, in these circumstances, I am representing the
government and the Republic, not political parties, but I don’t know how
many of our political parties have actually taken the decision to have
gender equality in the composition of all their structures - their
representatives that they deploy in government and all of that. [Applause.]
That is an important intervention. It may very well be that we should come
to some point quite soon when we follow the example that has been set by
other African countries actually to address the matter of gender equality
via a constitutional amendment. It may be that we are coming quite close to
that.

That is an intervention that needs to be made, but I think the political
parties in this Parliament do indeed need to take the decision to say, as
political parties – and that includes the DA – let us have gender parity
... [Applause] ... starting first of all within our ranks, and then going
into the other broader areas in terms of the people that we deploy.
[Interjections.]

I am very glad the hon members of the DA here are heckling, and saying that
they have the hon Sandra Botha here, a woman leader. Congratulations. I did
say congratulations to her then. The hon Helen Zille is leader of the DA,
and I said congratulations to her also. That’s an important step forward.

I think we might want to start with those interventions, and then of course
we must, as government, pursue these various matters that I have spoken
about, which are targeted not only at that parity in terms of
representation such as we would have here, but also impacting on the actual
life conditions of women. Rural women are the ones who go to fetch water in
the rivers and the dams if there are no taps.

So, when we say clean water is delivered there, it impacts directly on
women. When we say let’s electrify the villages, and use electricity to
cook and all that, it’s to address this problem that it is the women who go
to fetch firewood and spend lots of time burning this fire in order to
cook, and therefore, all of these interventions are the ones we need to
make so that indeed we transform the socioeconomic condition of women while
at the same time ensuring that women assume their rightful place in terms
of the leadership of our country. Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Acting Speaker, hon President, I greet you in the name
of Amakhosikazi! [Women!]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Your reply to this question has touched on most of my
concerns, but just to have a little more clarity, I am still going to ask
you a further question.

The first thing I want to say, as far as empowerment and development of our
women in South Africa is concerned, is that our three-day Women’s
Parliament has proved this in respect of the attendance and participation,
and for that we applaud our government. [Applause.]
Hon President, what I would like clarity on is whether these additional
programmes and institutions will also include covering the violence and
abuse against women and preventative methods for the protection of our
women in South Africa. I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The hon member knows that having run this
campaign for some years of 16 days of activism in terms of violence against
women and children, the government has said that we need to transform that
into 365 days of activism in terms of violence against women and children,
and that it clearly isn’t enough that we just have this campaign towards
the end of the year during the 16 days, but that this be a campaign that we
conduct every day. So, I think that is a very important intervention and,
therefore, work is going on to translate that into real programmes.

In that context again, I would like to again make an appeal to our
political parties: I think all of us by now are sufficiently familiar with
the nature and the sociology of this violence against women and children.
We have a pretty good idea of where it occurs, when it occurs and why it
occurs. It is clear that an important element in the fight against violence
against women has to be intervention with our communities. It has to be
engaging the masses of our people in this struggle. It means the process of
the mobilisation of our people to act against this, rather than saying:
Well, there’s violence against women. Yes, we all recognise that. All of us
say that it is unacceptable and very bad, and we leave it to the government
to deal with the matter and the police.

It really has to be very much driven by what happens in our communities,
and it is the political parties – not civil servants -that can mobilise the
communities to confront this. That actually relates to other matters which
are very important here because, again, a lot of this violence you would
find – as I am sure all of us know – is also associated very closely with
alcohol and drug abuse. Again, the only way to deal with those matters, in
addition to whatever other interventions can be made from the government’s
side, is that a critically important intervention in this is the
involvement of the communities in this fight, not for 16 days in the year,
but for 365 days in the year.

So, in that sense, I am saying that a large burden in terms of this fight –
an important fight – must fall on the shoulders of our political parties
and, really, that is the only way that we can move forward with the sort of
speed and the critical outcomes that I am sure all of us are interested in.
Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Acting Speaker, thank you, hon President. There is a view
articulated by some that a proposal to subsume the existing Gender
Commission into a broader human rights constitutional instrument would
diffuse national focus on gender and indeed impinge on the current powers
and functions of the Gender Commission. Could I ask you if you would
support the undertaking of extensive research into the effectiveness or
otherwise of the Gender Commission since its inception? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Acting Speaker, at the end of last week I
received a copy of the report the hon Suzanne Vos refers to. I’m afraid I
haven’t read it yet, but I will certainly do that. I certainly would be
concerned - whatever the justification for the proposals that have been
made in terms of that report - that we shouldn’t do anything that would
dilute, minimise or downgrade the focus on the matter of the emancipation
of women. [Applause.]

It is correct; we have all said that women’s rights are human rights. We
all agree. But I don’t think it necessarily follows that because women’s
rights are human rights, that the issue of the struggle for the
emancipation of women should become a subdivision in the larger thing. I
don’t think this is necessarily correct. I am quite certain, hon Vos, that
if we wanted to assess the effectiveness of the Gender Commission, it
wouldn’t need an extensive study. I think, as a country, we like all these
extensive studies and spend a lot of time studying things and so on.
[Laughter.]

I’m sure I can give you an assessment of the Gender Commission in two days
- it doesn’t need anymore than that – including proposals as to what we
might do to improve its effectiveness. As I said, I am terribly sorry, I
haven’t read the report and I don’t know what it says, but I don’t think we
can proceed from a position which would in any way whatsoever seek to
minimise the kind of critical and strategic importance of the issue of
gender emancipation, because it is actually integral to the definition of
our democracy.

If you say we are a democratic society, you cannot say we are a democratic
society when you’ve disempowered the majority of the people in the country.
You can’t say you’re a nonracial society with the same effect on nonsexism,
etc. The matter must remain very central, and I am sure we will all discuss
this report. But I really hope that we would want to approach it, whatever
the proposals contained in the report, in a manner that avoids unintended
consequences. Thank you, Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

        Steps to address concerns raised in service-delivery protests

14.   The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the
      Republic:

      Whether the Government is taking any steps to address the concerns
      raised in a number of service-delivery protests throughout the
      country; if not, why not; if so, what steps?NO1836E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting President, we ...
[Interjections.] What did I say? [Laughter.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: I didn’t know that I was Acting President. [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No. I think you would make a very good
Acting President. [Laughter.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Thank you, sir.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, no – Acting Speaker – we did address, as
you know, this matter when we dealt with parliamentary questions in May of
this year. As we said then, we reconfirmed that, yes, indeed government
continues to take steps to address concerns raised in the number of service-
delivery protests.

These include the ongoing process of strengthening the capacity of our
municipalities, which are the structures that I deal directly with in terms
of many of our people that are faced with the challenges of service
delivery. Initiatives, as the hon members know, introduced in this regard
include Project Consolidate through which we have mobilised and deployed
over 300 experts to over 80 municipalities. The impact of this intervention
has been seen in improved financial and project management and, generally,
in improved service delivery.
Further, working with the Development Bank of Southern Africa, through the
initiative called Siyenza Manje, in order to provide technical assistance
to targeted municipalities, about 100 experts and graduates have already
been deployed.

Again, I’d like to inform the House that our work in the local sphere of
government is informed by the five-year local government strategic agenda,
which was adopted last year, and whose central objective is to ensure that
municipalities are provided with sufficient institutional capacity and
resources necessary to discharge their obligations.

To help improve the work of these municipalities, government departments at
provincial and national levels have indeed developed measures and
implementation plans to ensure hands-on support to the local government
structures. We have also ensured that public representatives engage
communities on an ongoing basis through the imbizo programme. In this way,
the citizens of our country are able to articulate their views and engage
whatever problems they face at local level.

Again, as we have reported in this House and as was asked by the hon Gxowa,
we have deployed community development workers so as to improve
communication between government and the communities and help address
problems as they arise. We are continuing to build more Thusong community
centres, and the recent Cabinet lekgotla in July also adopted the decision
to transform our post offices into such Thusong centres.

Further, the process of ensuring full participation of local people in
issues affecting them continues, especially with the programme of
strengthening the ward committees. In addition, because the problem of
service delivery is, in some instances, due to corruption in some
municipalities, we are giving this matter the necessary attention.

Accordingly, we have put various measures in place, including the adoption
and implementation of the Public Service anticorruption strategy. But we
should, at the same time, not lose sight of the fact that our government
has indeed implemented extensive programmes since it came into office to
ensure that the quality of life of all our people is improved, and the
impact of these programmes can be seen across the country. This relates,
for instance, to matters of electrification; it relates to matters of basic
sanitation; it relates to matter of potable water. However, even given the
progress that has made in this regard, government continues to work hard to
further improve service delivery.

I’ve said what I’ve said to emphasise the point, firstly, that the work of
providing services to all our citizens is indeed continuing apace.
Therefore, for anyone to posit a notion of a crisis of service delivery in
the country would be incorrect. Secondly, the facts that 15% of our
households do not have access to potable water, that 30% do not have access
to sanitation, and that 26% do not have access to electricity mean that we
still have some way to go before we attain our objectives.

With regard to the protest to which the hon Leader of the Opposition has
referred, our research points to the fact that in these localities,
specific individual attributes or a combination of these manifest
themselves. These include areas in which or near which there are service-
delivery projects taking place, areas in which the condition of
infrastructure to delivery services is suboptimal as a consequence of
demand exceeding supply, and areas in which there is inadequate maintenance
or illegal connections and usage. This includes areas in which there is
poor communication around development plans of the various spheres of
government, areas with manifestations of tension within and among political
formations as well as organs of civil society, and areas in which specific
organisations have chosen to exploit difficulties to create false
expectations and ride on the wave of the resultant impatience.

What this communicates to us is that in each of these localities we need to
develop specific interventions to address the specific issues that
precipitate such protests. Many of these issues require action by
government in terms of improving the functioning of the ward committees and
communication structures and building capacity of institutions at the
coalface of service delivery.

In many instances, political and community organisations have a critical
role to play, and I do hope that the hon members, especially those with
parliamentary constituency offices in these areas, will help ensure that
these issues are addressed and that all of us indeed will conduct our work
in such a way that the need for such protests is eliminated. Let me stop
there for now, Madam Acting Speaker.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon Acting Speaker.
Mr President, may I point out that the DA achieved 100% women
representation in leadership positions without changing the Constitution.
Despite your reassurances, there have been 5 000 service-delivery protests
in the past year – the highest in the world. To me, that sounds like a
crisis.

The DA is convinced that the ANC policy of cadre deployment to managerial
positions in preference to appointment on the basis of competency is at the
heart of this problem. Would you personally be prepared to lead a focused
initiative to replace incompetent or corrupt public representatives and
public-sector officials, and, in this context, set measurable targets for
the legacy you will leave your successor in 2009? Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I have indicated already, as
the hon members know, today and on previous occasions about the work that
the government is doing to improve the capacity of our system of local
government. That’s why we are talking about Siyenza Manje, about Project
Consolidate and so on, all of which are practical programmes focused on the
deployment in municipalities of the people with the necessary skills.
That’s practical work that is going on, and indeed I have spoken about this
even today.

The government will continue that work. Part of the work that we do, even
in the imbizo processes - whenever we interact with the municipalities and
even when we are here in the Western Cape doing a provincial imbizo, but
which also dealt with the municipalities in the province – in terms of one
of the matters indeed that we discussed, as we would discuss in any of
these izimbizo, is precisely this question: vacancies in terms of certain
levels of management, vacancies in terms of various skills in the
municipalities, vacancies in terms of technical sections.

This is precisely to see in what way all three spheres of government can
assist the municipalities to meet this particular challenge. And it is a
particular challenge. When we were in the Eastern Cape in a similar imbizo
process, they gave us the example of the Municipality of Aliwal North,
which had put out an advertisement for a chief financial officer,
interviewed people and found the person – very good, very competent – who
accepted the job. But, then, before he took it, he communicated with the
municipality and said he had had a look around his rural area and that all
sorts of social amenities were not there – cinemas, etc – and had rather
decided to take a similar job at Port Alfred. So he was gone. That is a
particular challenge.

This has nothing to do with cadre development and all of that. It’s clear
that the municipality couldn’t solve this problem on its own. It wouldn’t
have the resources to be able to retain or attract the CFO as compared to a
wealthier municipality.

So, what I am saying is that yes, indeed, the government is intervening in
this matter in all three spheres to ensure that our municipalities do have
this capacity to be able to discharge their responsibilities to the
citizens. But it is perfectly obvious that they would not be able to cope
with this challenge on their own, except for the metros – the metros can.

But the rural municipalities in particular face a very, very difficult
challenge in this regard. We are indeed responding to this. I think that it
would be good indeed if our political parties, including the DA, had a look
at this thing in its actuality – outside of the context of the political
campaigns against one another – because it is a very, very important
challenge. And, as part of trying to address it, for instance, we have
looked at whether there should not be a strengthening of the district
municipalities, which would then attract this professional and technical
capacity and use the district municipalities to extend services
professionally and technical services to the local municipalities as part
of this challenge.

It’s a difficult challenge and, I think, it would be very good if the
political parties had a look at this matter in its objective reality,
while, of course, continuing with their political campaigns. In the end,
what is going to solve the problem for us is a very, very close attention
to meeting this resource deficiency in a sphere of local government that
probably is not as well funded as it should be. That’s what I think.
Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Acting Speaker, hon President and hon members, what
worries many is the anger, vandalism and signs of defiance that people have
been displaying in these protests and marches, whether they be community
marches, community protests, industrial action or crowds attending court
cases. Sometimes the lack of decisive action by government to solve these
issues, like Khutsong, lies at the heart of the escalating unrest. It
creates a precedent that, in order to be heard, a community needs to resort
to protests. Where we are fortunate in this country, however, is not that
we don’t know who is doing this. The media has been helpful in pointing out
to us the people and organisations that are doing this.

At face value, the picture portrayed seems to indicate that citizens are
not being listened to and hence they resort to protests against lack of
service delivery. The second conclusion could be that there are forces that
have identified an opportunity to vent their anger and frustration under
the guise of community concerns when, in fact, they are engaged in settling
political scores. In the ...

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order! The time allocated has long expired.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Can I ask the question? [Interjections.] I thought the
President would give me the benefit of the doubt. Could I ask the question?

The ACTING SPEAKER: You should have just asked the question.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Alright; could I ask it?

The ACTING SPEAKER: I’ll give you half a minute to do so.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Thank you. In the event that the analysis of the security
situation indicates that these protests are, in fact, politically
motivated, what measures will government take?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, Madam Acting Speaker, let me first of
all agree very, very fully with hon member Bantu Holomisa about an
unacceptable feature of some of these demonstrations, and he says that some
of them are not connected to service-delivery protests. Indeed, even this
afternoon, shortly before we came to the House, somebody on the radio was
talking about similar conduct at football matches: that when teams lose,
the police have to send in armoured vehicles to evacuate coaches from
stadia, because the fans of the losing side ... [Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Order, hon members, please!

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: They did not say Pirates supporters.
[Laughter.] But, I think, the hon member is actually drawing attention to a
very important matter. You do have this unacceptable behaviour when people
think that they are entitled to burn houses, to do all sorts of criminal
things, in fact, in order to advance their interests. Indeed, I would want
to agree that it’s absolutely the responsibility of our law-enforcement
agencies to act very firmly against this kind of behaviour. There is
nothing at all which says that because I’m protesting about something, then
I’m entitled to break the law. This has included the killing of people. It
cannot be right; it’s not right. And, indeed, I am sure the state must act
with regard to that.

We haven’t, hon member, considered this as a matter that is of a security
nature in that it poses a security threat, but rather in part as a matter
that reflects perhaps a continuing challenge in terms of our understanding
as a population of the meaning of democracy, with some people thinking that
democracy - these freedoms and these rights that we have - is, in fact,
unlimited and entitles us to do whatever; that as I march down the street
and there’s a shop with jewellery on display I’m entitled to break the
window and steal the jewellery.

There is something there with regards to our understanding of democracy and
our responsibility as citizens that we have not quite done as a society,
and it results in the wrong types of behaviour. I’m saying that we have
not, as government, said that this is a security matter that must be
responded to in a particular way.

So, with regard to answering your question specifically as to what we would
do, I don’t know because we haven’t really gotten there.  Certainly, we
have asked that a more detailed study be made of these demonstrations
because, in reality, in all instances – in absolutely all instances – what
appears on television as these demonstrations is not always the
communities. It would be a particular group.

You might have a community of half a million people, and get 200, 300 or
400 people demonstrating in the street – organised, put together by
somebody. So to convey a notion of a mass rebellion is wrong. It doesn’t
actually represent practically what is happening in our communities even if
the complaints are legitimate. I am saying that perhaps we should discuss
this. The study – which we have asked for to be conducted into the detail
of these kinds of protests – may very well help us to come to some
conclusions with regard to whether there are any security elements with
regard to these demonstrations.

I think it would be important that everybody keep in mind the point that
the hon Bantu Holomisa is making in that legitimate as our complaints may
be, they don’t serve as entitlement to do illegal things. I think that that
is very important. Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Ndiyabulela Mongameli nangona lo mbuzo sele uphendulwe
kodwa ndiyacinga ukuba mandike ndiwubeke nangesintu. Kukho ifuthe elikhoyo,
nekubonakala ukuba liyakhula, liphenjelelwa ngofunzeweni, abazibiza ukuba
bazinkokheli zabahlali nangona kubonakala ukuba ingathi balwela izikhundla
ezithile kunye namaqithiqithi ahamba nezizikhundla. Aba funzeweni
balahlekisa abantu ukuba baqhankqalaze benze izidubedube endaweni yokuba
babakhokele. Le nto aba funzeweni bayenzayo ifuna ukukhalinyelwa ingekade
inwenwele kwilizwe lonke, igxobhe ulwawulo lukarhulumente. Zithini na
ezakho izimvo Mongameli ngokuba aba funzeweni bangxoliswe, nathi
sizinkokheli sifundise abantu ukuba ulawulo lwentando yesininzi lusebenza
njani na. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you Mr President. Even though this question has been
answered I think I should state the question in vernacular. There is a
revolving force that is spreading with the influence of certain anarchists
who call themselves community leaders even though it is obvious that they
are more concerned about certain positions and other benefits that come
with those positions. These anarchists are actually misleading people,
propelling them to protest and they are causing disorder instead of leading
them. The behaviour of these anarchists needs to be curbed before it
explodes throughout the country and thereby destabilises the government’s
order. Mr President, what are your views on reprimanding these anarchists
and our responsibility as leaders on educating people on the significance
of democracy? [Applause.]]

The ACTING SPEAKER: Before the hon President responds to that, I just want
to mention to the guests of the National Assembly that you are not allowed
to participate in any debates by clapping hands.

uMONGAMELI WELIZWE: Sekela Somlomo, mandibulele, ndifunde nto ke namhlanje.
Mandibulele mntakwethu uMadasa ukuba le nto le yenziwa ngofunzeweni.
Ndithemba ke into yokuba sizinkokheli zala maqela alapha ePalamente siza
kukhe siyisebenze le nto ukuze ilizwe lingamoshwa ngoofunzeweni ngoba bona
ke bambalwa, thina sibaninzi kunabo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you Deputy Speaker, I learnt
something today. I thank brother Madasa for informing us that this is
caused by anarchists. I hope that as leaders of all the political parties
that are represented in Parliament, we will intervene as a unified force
and in numbers to prevent our country from chaos caused by just a
minority.]

The hon Madasa is very educated politically. He knows more than I do about
what is happening with regard to abofunzenzweni [anarchists]. And, I am
quite sure that the ANC, of which he is a member, like all the other
political parties, will make sure that they intervene in a manner that
ensures that people that fight for positions don’t misuse and abuse our
people in order to achieve these partisan outcomes.

But, certainly, I think that the defence of our democracy is our collective
responsibility, and we can’t allow it to be undermined by people who are
ready to cause all manners of problems simply because of their pursuit of
some selfish interests. Thanks, Acting Speaker.

Mnu M W SIBUYANA: Ndiyabulela Bambela Somlomo, mhlawumbi kuyakuba ngcono
ndiyibeke ngesiXhosa. Siye sahamba saya eNgcobo, safika amakhosikazi
esibalisela ukuba ahambile, aya kufuna amanzi emfuleni ebusuku, aze adibana
nesiporho abe amadoda wona elele. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Mr M W SIBUYANA: Thank you Deputy Speaker. It would probably be better for
me to put this in isiXhosa. We went to Ngcobo and women there told us that
they had gone to fetch water from the river at night, whilst their husbands
were asleep, and they met a ghost.]
Laha ndzi humaka kona wansati u fambile a ya ka mati enambyeni ivi a
hojomela a fa. Ejoni, loko hi fambile hi ya languta timhaka ta mati kona,
hi byeriwile kahle hi vamasipala leswaku loko va nga kumi mali yo engetela
a va nga swi koti ku endla leswi Presidente a swi vuleke. Xana loko va nga
swi koti ku fikelela swipimelo leswi, Presidente u ta thlerisela endzhaku
nkarhi lowu a wu vekeke leswaku swilo swi hetisiwa? (Translation of
Xitsonga paragraph follows.)

[Where I come from, a woman went to fetch water in the river where she
accidentally plunged into the water and died. In Johannesburg, during our
oversight visit on Water Affairs, we were informed by the municipality that
if they did not receive additional funds they would be unable to reach the
targets set by the President. If they are indeed unable to reach these
targets, is the President going to extend the timeframe set to accommodate
them?]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, the government is
keeping a very close eye on the matter of these targets that we have set
with regard to water delivery, with regard to sanitation, with regard to
electricity and so on. Indeed, it is watching the progress that is being
made relative to the targets that we have set and is continually assessing
the matter of the availability of resources and the allocation of resources
for the achievement of those targets.

We haven’t come to any position yet that we need to revise the targets, but
certainly we take the position that because the targets have to do with
changing the lives of the people for the better, which is why they are
important, that we must then make sure that in terms of everything -
financial resources, human resources, organisational structures and
anything and everything that is relevant to this - we do indeed attend to
all of those matters so that we reach the targets rather than revise them.

So, I would like to assure the hon member that yes, indeed, we are looking
at this matter quite continually, quite closely, so that in the event that
you can see that the resource allocations are inconsistent with the targets
we want to achieve, that surely we would look at that. This is a matter
that we really are keeping a very close eye on, and indeed discussed again
at this last Cabinet lekgotla in July.

Bendingazi ke ukuba zisekhona iziporho eNgcobo. [I did not know that there
were still ghosts in Ngcobo.]

In the past, yes, I knew they were there. [Laughter.] But it is clear that
the modern developments haven’t yet caught up with Ingcobo [Butterworth]
quite fully. That’s why these iziporho [ghosts] are still there.

Regarding the point that is made by the women, yes, indeed, the women are
quite correct: we have to deal with the matter, as I was saying earlier, of
the availability of potable water everywhere in our country, because the
burden of fetching water from the rivers and so on indeed falls on women,
and indeed the burden of coming across ghosts will also fall on women. So,
I think, that to free them from both ghosts and this work, we do indeed
need to address this matter of water delivery. Thanks, Madam Acting
Speaker. [Applause.]

         Establishment of a Ministry for Women and Rural Development

15.   Mr M B Skosana (IFP) asked the President of the Republic:

      Whether the Office of the President will consider establishing a
      Ministry for Women and Rural Development in order to intensify the
      fight against rural poverty, unemployment and underdevelopment and to
      enhance the general advancement of women; if not, why not; if so, what
      are the relevant details?

                  NO1885E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, with regard to the
question that the hon member asked about the possibility of establishing a
Ministry for Women and Rural Development, I think the essence of the
question is whether our country needs further institutional mechanisms to
deal with the challenges of women’s advancement, as well as rural
development. As we know with regard to the challenges facing women, we have
established a number of organs to pay focused attention to this matter.

These include the Minister in the Presidency, the Office on the Status of
Women in the Presidency, the gender focal points in national government
departments, the Commission on Gender Equality, the Presidential Women’s
Working Group and the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of the
Quality of Life and Status of Women at this legislative level. We are of
the view that these various organs, for which the specific mandate is
empowerment and development of women, including those in rural areas, have
the competence to address the challenges to which the hon Skosana referred.


In addition, government ensures that policies of the different departments
address themselves to the huge challenge of rural poverty, unemployment and
underdevelopment, as well as the general advancement of women. One thing is
certain - and I am sure all of us recognise this - and that is that we need
to strengthen the capacity of the existing institutions to ensure that they
perform their work better. We need to ensure better monitoring and
evaluation and to improve the implementation of programmes and projects.

As new needs arise, as is the case with the DTI project to assist women
entrepreneurs and the proposal on a women’s pension fund, specific
institutional capacity may need to be created to carry out these tasks. As
we gain further experience in implementing gender programmes, new insights
may emerge about the efficacy of the structures that we have set up.

The hon Skosana may be well aware that the issue of a Ministry for Women
has been raised, among other things, by the SA Women in Dialogue at their
last annual conference at the beginning of July. The theme for this
discussion was “From dialogue to development: Women uniting to eradicate
poverty.” We recognised the importance of the various proposals that were
made during this conference, as well as the survey process itself. Our
government has interacted and continues to interact with Sawid. At all
times, government strives to ensure that we have, as a country, a
comprehensive and co-ordinated antipoverty programme, that we continually
improve on the existing interventions and ensure better integration of all
government programmes.

As I indicated in the state of the nation address in February, the work
done by Sawid, together with various government departments and learning
from countries such as Tunisia and Chile about the struggle against
poverty, would help us better understand some of our own weaknesses.

Accordingly, we are working on addressing some of these weaknesses, which
would help us to accelerate our development programmes so as to defeat
poverty and underdevelopment, both in the urban and rural areas. Among
other things, this work will ensure that we develop a better database of
households living in poverty, identify and implement specific and relevant
interventions and have better monitoring programmes on the impact of our
interventions. We will also be in a better position to align our
antipoverty programmes, maximise impact and avoid wastage and duplication.
All these interventions that we identified in the state of the nation
address and others, and others that have been ongoing are important
elements in the fight against rural poverty, against unemployment and
underdevelopment, and indeed are very central to the struggle for the
empowerment of women. Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Thank you, Acting Speaker, and thank you, Mr President.
Well, I must say that my fox is wounded, shot by the President. The
President has indeed outlined several programmes which have to do with this
question of women’s empowerment and emancipation. I think mine was an
additional viewpoint.

I looked at the situation in rural areas and I thought that in fact mine
was in support of most of the people whom the President said raised this
issue. I focused more appropriately on a resourced and empowered women
agency; in this case I am looking at the Ministry for Women and Rural
Development. It might be a simplistic view, but I think it has the
potential to turn the rural economies around for the betterment of all. In
the long run, I also believe that it has the potential to impact positively
on what is happening in urban areas with regard to criminality,
unemployment, poverty itself, homelessness and the proliferation of shacks.
Acting Speaker, this cannot be a question. It is simply a plea to the
President and government to also look at these viewpoints.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, the issues that the
hon member raised are obviously important questions, both with regard to
rural development and with regard to the impact on women and the consequent
impact thereof in terms of what is happening in our urban areas. Obviously,
these are all very important issues. It might help if the hon member had a
look at some of the interventions that we have made. I am sure that the hon
member, for instance, is familiar with the decision we took some time back
– he was still part of government then – in terms of these integrated and
sustainable rural development programmes. We identified particular rural
areas which, on the basis of various criteria, seemed to be the rural areas
that were most in need of these particular interventions.

The way we designed those programmes was indeed to make sure that we then
have the necessary impact. This is because there were areas of the country
– rural areas - that had the highest incidence of underdevelopment, of
poverty and all of the negatives. I would accept that indeed the programmes
that we have implemented in those areas have not moved as fast as they
should. Indeed, we have sought to discuss this to see what it is that we
could do in order to improve our performance. Perhaps the hon member can
have a look at that to see in what ways we can improve our performance with
regard to rural areas that have already been identified. This is not to say
we have not done anything in other rural areas.

With regard to the areas that have been identified as priorities, we need
to look at what is happening with regard to that, integrated within which
would be this matter of women’s empowerment. I agree that we have not moved
as fast as we should have, with regard to advancing development in these
areas, even despite the fact that they were particularly selected as
development nodes. I think it is within that context that we would be able
to answer in a very practical way the correct appeal that the hon member
makes.

The matter of this women’s Ministry, as I have indicated, has been raised
and we had taken a decision originally in 1994, which I believe was
correct, that the matter of women’s development as far as government is
concerned is better placed in the Presidency. It relates to all departments
of government that the hon member, I am sure, is familiar with.

The problem about a women’s Ministry – and I’m sure that we should discuss
it; I’m not saying that I am ruling it out - is that Ministers are equal.
You can have a woman Minister of Women’s Affairs. That Minister would not
have any possibility to direct what the Minister of Finance says, because
you are another Minister. Therefore we have taken a decision that it was
better to place the issue of women’s development in the Presidency so that
we can then make an impact on the entirety of government in all spheres
with regard to that.

Now, one of the problems – which, again, I accept - has been that we have
not given sufficient capacity and we have not built a sufficient
departmental capacity in the Presidency to follow up on women’s matters.
That is correct. I think the matter would need to be argued further as to
why a Ministry of equal weight with other Ministries should be the one that
should intervene on a matter that is, in fact, transversal.

People at Health must address women’s affairs; people at Trade and Industry
must address women’s affairs; people at Finance must address women’s
affairs; people at Water Affairs and Forestry must address women’s affairs;
people at Sport and Recreation must address women’s affairs – even Ngconde
Balfour at Correctional Services must address women’s affairs. Everybody
must. Surely that must be the responsibility of the Presidency of the
country to ensure that everybody responds to this challenge. That’s my
view. I may very well be wrong in that a Ministry of women’s affairs would
address this challenge better. I think if we increase our capacity to
follow up on the implementation of the programmes and look at the outcomes
we are achieving throughout all the spheres of government, we will make
better progress with regard to both rural development and women’s
empowerment. Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Acting Speaker, Phonane Sithole is a 40-year-old Sotho
speaking woman; she lives in a shack with her eight children in the
Diepsloot informal settlement in the north-western part of Johannesburg.
She barely survives on government grants, but she supplements her income by
doing washing for other residents in Diepsloot.

She is healthy and willing to work, and there are many people who would
like to give her a job. However, overstrict employment conditions at the
job entry level keep her unemployed. My question to the President is: When
will the ANC government change employment conditions to make it easier for
women like Phonane Sithole to find a job and regain their dignity?
[Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, I accept that the hon
member is raising this matter out of genuine and serious concern. I accept
that. It would help us a great deal if the hon member could indicate what
it is that exists in government legislation, regulations and so on that
makes it impossible for this lady in Diepsloot to get a job, as she
indicated. It would be better because then we can act on that.

What we have decided, and we have said it here, is that we would ask our
Minister of Labour to look at all of these questions that relate to the
negative impact of the regulatory framework. This is because this is not a
unilateral decision of government. That is part of what you have to
understand, and I think that is part of what the hon Holomisa was trying to
address. The way we have constructed our democracy is indeed that we must
engage in these inclusive processes.

You know very well that the legislation and the interventions of that kind
that come from the Minister of Labour have to go through Nedlac. Even with
regard to this matter, you have to get into a discussion with all of the
social partners that relate to this matter.

I am quite certain that if it was just government’s right to take any
decision that it liked on this matter, of course we can take a decision
tomorrow. It would really help a great deal if the hon member could say:
Here is this case. She is clearly very familiar with this 40-year-old woman
in Diepsloot. Go back to her and let us discuss that so that you can come
back and say that these are the things that block the possibility of the
lady of Diepsloot from getting a job. Then we can attend to that.

A political statement which talks about ANC government and all of that is
not going to solve this problem. I really appeal to the hon member to
proceed in that way. Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker. Arising from your response,
hon President, some 11 million South Africans at present have access to
social security grants, many of whom are rural women. Whilst the ACDP fully
supports the provision of social security grants which are used to
alleviate poverty, clearly, we as a nation need to ensure that as many
people as possible, and where applicable, exit the social welfare grant
system and enter the labour market to obtain employment.

During the state of the nation address earlier this year, Mr President, you
indicated that the Expanded Public Works Programme, which is one of the
main job creation strategies, needs to be: “retched upwards quite
significantly to provide more and better jobs.” To what degree, hon
President, has this occurred and are you satisfied that a sufficient amount
of women will and are benefiting from the Expanded Public Works Programme,
especially in the rural areas, or is this an area where we are not moving
as fast as we should? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, I would probably have
said “ratcheted” up rather than “retched”. Indeed, we want to achieve that
objective and some progress has been achieved with regard to that. It might
be better that we arrange that the Minister of Public Works gives a report
to Parliament about that. I am quite certain that my response to your
question would not be sufficient. There certainly has been progress;
certainly been ratcheting up; but the extent to which and the kinds of
impacts and so on, I think you would need a more detailed and comprehensive
report. We certainly can discuss this with the Minister of Public Works.

The hon member raised an important point about people exiting the system of
social grants. Again, the Cabinet lekogtla in July discussed this specific
question. In that context it discussed the need for us to ensure that we
have a co-ordinated antipoverty programme. And, as I indicated in an
earlier reply, that as part of that, we produce a detailed database of the
households that depend on grants, so that we can come right down to that
level of the household to say what we have done with regard to this
specific household. I am sure that would include the lady in Diepsloot.
What have we done with regard to this specific household to empower the
household to exit the grant system? That is what we are working on now to
ensure.

We have this comprehensive and co-ordinated antipoverty programme, an
important element of which must be assisting people to exit the grant
system. It means job opportunities, whether through the Expanded Public
Works Programme, or any other job opportunity, etc. We are indeed looking
into that particular matter. With regard to the specific question, I think
it would be possible for government to give a detailed and comprehensive
report as to what has happened with regard to the Expanded Public Works
Programme, which, indeed, is being ratcheted up and is taking in more
people, including women. Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker.

Nkskz P TSHWETE: Bambela-Somlomo, ndicela ukubulela uMongameli ngengcaciso
yakhe ecacileyo, ngakumbi impendulo yakhe ngokubhekisele kwiSebe lolawulo
elijongene nemicimbi yamakhosikazi. Kodwa andikwazi ukuthula ndithi cwaka,
ndingayivezi into yokuba ikhwelo lokuba kube kho iSebe lolawulo elijongene
nemicimbi yamakhosikazi lenziwa yi-ANC kuqala, yibhasi eqhutywa yi-ANC.

Kuluvuyo ke ukufumanisa ukuba nayo i-IFP iyafuna ukukhwela kule bhasi
ekudala ihamba. Kodwa ke ndiyabona ukuba uMongameli akade atsho
ngelitsolileyo ukuba silicandelo lamakhosikazi le-ANC, sisebenzisana
nemibutho engekho phantsi kukarhulumente, kudala sayibona imfuneko yobukho
beSebe lolawulo elijongene nemicimbi yamakhosikazi.

Akude utsho, Mongameli, ukuba phaya kwiOfisi kaMongameli nazi izinto eniza
kuzenza ngokubhekisele kwikhwelo lokusekwa kweli Sebe lolawulo. Siyayibona
imizamo eyenziwayo ngokubhekisele kwintswela-ngqesho kwanemiba
yamakhosikazi ekufuneka ishukuxwe ngamaSebe obuwakhankanyile afana
nelikaMnu Balfour, kodwa ke ikhona into yokungaxoli, Mongameli, kuba awude
utsho poqo ukuba phaya kwiOfisi yobOngameli nimi ndawoni ngokubhekisele
kulo mba. Enkosi. [Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms P TSHWETE: Madam Acting Speaker, I would like to thank the President
for his comprehensive explanation especially his response as far as the
Office on the Status of Women in the Presidency. I just cannot keep and not
reveal that the initiative to have a department that deals specifically
with women’s development was first introduced by the ANC and is still
driven by the ANC.

It gives me pleasure to discover that the IFP is interested in aligning
itself with this initiative. But I notice that the President does not want
to come right out and say that the ANC Women’s League interacts with
organisations that are not part of government, and that we had long
realised the need for a department that will deal with the status of women.

Mr President, you have not disclosed what process you are going to
implement as the Presidency. We do recognise the attempts that are being
made to address the issue of unemployment of women, which still needs to be
given attention by the departments that you have mentioned such as Mr
Balfour’s department, but we are not satisfied because you refuse to state
blatantly what your position is as the Presidency concerning this issue.
Thank you. [Time expired.]]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, I did not mention the
ANC Women’s League because I knew that the hon Pam Tshwete was here.
[Laughter.] She would very well represent the ANC Women’s League. She is
quite correct that indeed the ANC Women’s League had raised this particular
matter.

With regard to steps that government might take to strengthen capacity in
the Presidency to address the issue of women’s development, I want to leave
that matter to Minister Essop Pahad. I am sure that he can address this
matter quite competently. Minister Pahad, you have heard what the hon
member said. They need to get some response as to what the Presidency
intends to do to strengthen its capacity to address these challenges. I
hope the hon member will accept that. He must tell everybody and not just
the hon Pam Tshwete. The leader of the DA here is very interested also in
this matter. She has just whispered that to me now. We can do that. Thanks,
Madam Acting Speaker.

     Progress made in implementation of government’s programme of action

16.   Ms N M Twala (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      Whether, following the July mid-year Cabinet lekgotla, the progress
      made in implementing the Government’s programme of action has been
      satisfactory; if not, (a) why not and (b) what interventions did the
      lekgotla identify to speed up progress in this regard?
                                                   NO1895E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, we held our media
lekgotla during the last week of July, and, as is customary, we used the
occasion to review reports on the implementation of the government’s
programme of action. Subsequently, the clusters of departments submitted
their latest round of reports to Cabinet.

And as you would know, Acting Speaker, Ministers have also been briefing
the public during the course of this week on our latest programme of action
reports, and summaries of the progress have been posted on the government
website.

Generally, it would be fair to say that we are making good progress. The
economy is doing well, and an increase in employment and in the extension
of government’s social programmes, among other things, have made an impact
on the overall struggle against poverty.

More specifically regarding the economic sector, the government has
announced and launched a national industrial policy framework and the first
annual industrial policy action plan. Within the action plan, we have
identified four economic sectors where we intend to focus our development
efforts. The sectors are capital goods, forestry and forest products,
chemicals and pharmaceuticals and the motor industry.
These join the three areas of industrial policy support announced in the
Asgisa programme. Of the three Asgisa sectors, tourism, business and
outsourcing are progressing well while the biofuel strategy is almost
complete, though it is a few months behind schedule.

Further, we have adopted a national public transport plan and are making
considerable progress in its implementation. In the science and technology
sector, we’ve adopted a 10-year plan to focus our research and development
efforts, and we’ve agreed to establish a technology innovation agency to co-
ordinate government efforts to stimulate research and development.

Important developments were also announced in our efforts to reduce the
costs of telecommunications. The implementation of the Electronic
Communications Act and planned new investments will support the continued
reduction of telecommunications costs.

Another important development was the presentation of a draft national
human resources development strategy to co-ordinate and prioritise our
efforts in education and training. Discussions continue towards the urgent
finalisation of this initiative.

Clearly, one area proceeding slowly in our efforts is to integrate
infrastructure development planning. And we do hope to make more advances
in this area during the remainder of this year. We have continued
discussions on the related area of long-term planning and are exploring the
manner in which this function might be accommodated in government.

As far as the social sector is concerned, we continue to make progress in
the implementation of our social service programmes, including health,
education and social grants. However, we continue to be concerned that too
many South Africans are not able to progress out of the state of poverty on
their own. And as I’ve just indicated, we reviewed some of our strategies
in this area.

We had initial discussions on the need for and the design of a
comprehensive antipoverty strategy, which would combine all of initiatives
into a more systematic approach to reduce poverty. This includes welfare
measures, infrastructure and social service provision and efforts to
improve access to economic opportunities.

And we do expect that discussions of this matter will lead to the
presentation of a draft strategy to Cabinet later this year.

We also discussed the need for some possible strategies in the field of
improving social cohesion in our country. In this area, too, we expect
significant progress before the end of the year.

As we reported shortly before the lekgotla, while our overall crime rate is
considerably down over the past six or seven years, crime in some
categories spiked during 2006. A major contributing factor was the security
guards’ strike, and more recent trends suggest that we continue to make
advances in our efforts to reduce crime.

And so, though we have made modest gains in our war on crime, the
imperative to continue to improve the effectiveness of the criminal justice
system remains. It is a priority of government to enhance the
implementation of the ongoing interventions in this regard with a view to
improving the safety and security of our people.

The government especially welcomes the partnership that is firming between
itself and the business community, the religious leaders, the women’s
groups and other community-based organisations.

We are also pleased with the progress in our efforts to improve the
performance of the Home Affairs department, with the appointment of a new
director-general and the development of a turnaround strategy. We expect to
see the fruits of these interventions in the near future, with a more
efficient delivery of services to our citizens and effective implementation
of our revised immigration strategy.

Again, the lekgotla discussed extensively the challenges facing government
in the area of governance and administration. We reiterated the observation
that we have made in this House on various occasions, that strengthening
the capacity and the organisation of the state remains the single most
important task facing this government. Consequently, government has
developed and is implementing various programmes in order to ensure that we
do indeed meet this task.

Let me stop there, Madam Acting Speaker. There are some other areas I will
indicate later regarding the issues that were addressed by the Cabinet
lekgotla. Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Nkskn N M TWALA: Enkosi, Mongameli, ngempendulo yakho ephangaleleyo. Umbuzo
wam olandelayo uthi: Loluphi uhlobo lokujonga okanye lokufumana iinkcukacha
ezinokuqinisekisa ukuba uphuhliso lweenkonzo luyaqhuba kuwo onke amanqanaba
karhulumente? Yeyiphi indima, ukuba ikhona, enokudlalwa luluntu jikelele
ekumiseleni iindlela zokuhlola inkqubela?

Ngaba nikhe nathethisana na noluntu ngokubanzi, nive ukuba lungancedisa
njani na kule meko? Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N M TWALA: Thank you, Mr President, for your extensive response. My
next question is: How else can we monitor or find information to ensure
development of services in all spheres of government? What role, if any,
can communities play in establishing monitoring processes of service
delivery?

Have you had interaction with people and communities to find out how they
could assist in this particular issue? Thank you.]
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, I’ve been trying to
indicate in earlier questions what government is doing with regard to these
challenges of development and the work that is being done to ensure the
involvement of people and communities. For instance, earlier we talked
about the launching of a women entrepreneurs’ fund by the Department of
Trade and Industry, the launch of a project coming out of the presidential
women’s working group that has to do with women’s savings and how we might
utilise those to have an impact on women. These are initiatives,
particularly the second one, that come from the communities.

Addressing the matter of strengthening the capacity, for instance, of local
government, has to do with also ensuring that local government is able to
respond to these challenges of development. As the hon member would know,
all of the local governments, apart from their IDPs, are supposed to have
local economic development programmes, which are very important in terms of
addressing this challenge that she addresses.

So, when the lekgotla looks at how we strengthen our system of governance
and administration, one of the issues is to say that we need to strengthen
it in all spheres of government in order to impact on the issue that she’s
raising.

Again, as you would know, the lekgotla is attended not only by national
government, but also by the premiers, representatives of Salga and the
directors-general at provincial government, so that all spheres of
government sit together to address this.

We have tried to address the mobilisation, as I say, of people, of
communities and the rest of society to participate in this. That includes
the mobilisation of the private sector, even – and I’m sure the hon member
is familiar with this – in areas such as housing. For instance, when we
were here in Cape Town during the provincial imbizo, indeed you had Nedbank
and Old Mutual participating in a housing project here in Cape Town. The
private sector mobilised to participate in this process of development is
not just leaving this to government.

So, yes indeed, therefore, as government we have to look, are looking and
have been looking at all spheres of government with regard to the
development challenge, as well as this other question of trying to ensure
that our people are not mere observers and recipients of development, but
themselves participate. Indeed, in that context, again, I’m sure that the
hon member would be aware that a lot of discussion that has taken place
around the development, for instance of co-operatives, has been about
finding ways and means of engaging our people within the development
process. Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker.

Mr K J MINNIE: Madam Acting Speaker, Mr President, during a cluster media
briefing on 28 August 2007, the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration stated that, and I quote: “The single Public Service is
directly focused on decentralising” – and I repeat, decentralising,
“government services so that they can be easily and simply accessed by the
citizen.”

Mr President, the single Public Service is about centralisation and not
decentralisation. On a daily basis in portfolio committees, we hear from
directors-general that they cannot perform because of a lack of skills and
capacity. Government plans, therefore, remain plans only, with no action.

My question to you, Mr President, is: How do you think that a single Public
Service will bring action plans to fruition, given the fact that the skills
and capacity shortages will remain, and given the poor performance by many
central government departments at present? I thank you.

The ACTING SPEAKER: The question to the President is not necessarily
related to the initial question, but the hon President will decide whether
to respond to that or not.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, I was hoping, Madam Acting Speaker,
that you were going to explain the question to me. I was very glad when you
started off with “the question”. The question comprises many unrelated
matters.

There is a challenge generally in government, in all spheres, to attract
and retain skills – as I said, in all spheres of government. It has the
worst impact at local government level. The matter we are addressing we
must continue to address.

Indeed, there are other interventions that are being made with regard to
this. This is something we have to address, and is a reflection of a skills
shortage that is general in the country. It will reflect itself in the
economy and it will reflect itself in all sorts of other areas. Indeed, I
think all of us, as a country, have recognised this. So this is a matter
that we have to address.

This matter is independent of the matter of a single Public Service. It’s
something that we have to address, as the country is trying to address it.
And, fortunately, in this regard, I’m very happy indeed to see that all
sectors of society are responding to this matter as a national challenge,
rather than a political matter.

For instance, just now, when we had a meeting of the Presidential
International Advisory Council on Information Society, very important plans
were announced by private companies to respond to this challenge of skills
shortage as it impacts on their particular sector.

So, in addition to supporting government initiatives in this area, various
companies announced plans that they have to set up their own training
institutions, right up to the training of people to PhD level, to respond
to this challenge. I’m saying I’m very glad indeed that South African
society is responding to this challenge. It’s a common challenge, hon
member, that is the skills shortage one, and must be addressed by all of
us.

Regarding the matter of a single Public Service, I discussed earlier the
example of the person that the Aliwal North Municipality tried to employ as
their chief financial officer but who then went and got himself employed
somewhere else.

Surely, it must be possible, within our system of government, to say: Here
is a chief financial officer – maybe not a chief, but somebody with these
particular skills - who sits in a department at headquarters in Pretoria.
Why don’t we send this person to Aliwal North to give this capacity to this
municipality to do that?

To do that would most certainly assist a great deal if you had an
integrated Public Service covering all spheres of government. Quite why
having one integrated Public Service is centralisation of anything, I don’t
know.

Look at the actual situation now as it obtains between national and
provincial government. National and provincial governments have one Public
Service. In what way has the fact that you have one Public Service, both
nationally and provincially, centralised power in actuality as an actual,
real, practical situation, not speculative? What has happened?

I’m quite certain that the people who argue that a single Public Service
means centralisation of power can’t answer that question. Here is a
provincial government; it functions within the confines of the
Constitution. There’s a Public Service that operates at provincial level,
which is very much part of the same Public Service as at the national
level, and it has not impacted in any way in terms of limiting the powers
of the provincial government as defined by the Constitution. Why must this
do this now with regard to local government?

So, the hon Minister for the Public Service and Administration was quite
correct. This creation of the system would, among other things, allow for
great mobility within our Public Service system and the possibility to
easily shift people to areas where they are more needed, with all of the
implications about pensions and this, that and the other. Therefore, this
would empower government, as is the situation today with provincial
government, to be able to do their work.

The hon member there spoke about the women of Engcobo who go to fetch
water, ze badibane neziporho [and then come across ghosts]. This is another
sporho. [Laughter.] People want to frighten themselves about something that
doesn’t exist. Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr J BICI: Madam Acting Speaker, President, first of all I want to commend
you for the respectful and humble manner in which you handle our questions.
One would wish, especially from this side of the House, that that attitude
prevails even if you are not here.

Mr President, in your responses you repeatedly mentioned government
capacity, especially with regard to local government. Now, my question, Mr
President, is: How effective is the capacitating of these officials? To me
they have always been capacitated, but we don’t really see something
happening. Do they really need only capacitating? Isn’t there anything else
that they need? Don’t we need to investigate and see whether there’s
nothing else we need to do besides capacitating them?

For instance, at Engcobo, where they say there are spooks, the local
government there is sitting on a guarantee of R350 million to develop that
small dorpie near your home, Idutywa. However, the municipality is sitting
on that; they are doing nothing about that. They are waiting for somebody
they love to come and apply. In the meantime the money is there; and
somebody wants to do development. Does that really mean that they need to
be capacitated? Is there nothing else wrong? Thank you. [Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, I don’t know. The hon
member might be able to answer that question in that beyond capacity, as we
have discussed it, there is something else that we are not attending to. It
may very well be that there is, but I would hope that the hon member would
help us to address that.

In terms of our experience – and the hon member is familiar with this –
apart from reports that we get from the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, etc, the direct intervention in and interaction with the
municipalities do indeed raise very sharply this question of capacity of
all sorts.

Today we’ve talked about capacity with regard to skills, and this is in
section 57, isn’t it, which deals with managers? Always check on this: How
many are there? What vacancies are there? What are we going to do to make
sure that its management echelon is in place: professionals, engineers,
people of that kind and then technicians, the maintenance people? Always
check on this. This is one element of capacity, which we must address.

Another element of capacity is the political competence of your
councillors: familiarity with the legislation that governs municipal
government, familiarity with the obligations of municipal government with
regard to all sorts of things and things like the council. So there is that
capacity also. There is also the aspect of familiarity with a matter that
is still in debate here in the Western Cape, for instance, namely the ward
committees. What are these ward committees and how should they relate to
the councils? How do they, together, relate to the communities? Capacity
relates to understanding those things and implementing them.

One should understand, for instance, that legislation requires that the
municipalities should provide ward committees with sufficient resources to
be able to do their work. You find, in some instances, that they do not
provide them with the required resources. So, I’m saying that it is
capacity of different sorts that is required.

Indeed, even when you look at the question of municipalities, they draw up
a local economic development plan. It’s called a local economic development
plan. Every time we go to municipalities we study this plan. The fact that
Ugu Municipality, for instance, decides to produce aeroplanes doesn’t make
this a local economic development plan, because they can’t reproduce an
aeroplane, never mind a bicycle. But this is a fake example because Ugu
would never do that.

However, people would indicate such things, for instance, as part of the
local economic development plan, and you can see that whoever did this
knows nothing about economic development, but they have a plan – as is
required. So, I’m saying, hon member, that there are capacities of all
sorts that are required.

Now, it may very well be that if Engcobo Municipality is sitting with R350
million that they are not spending, this may reflect some capacity problem
– what capacity, I don’t know. Maybe they are afraid of taking decisions, I
don’t know, or maybe something else.

So, I’m saying that the hon member may indeed be able to identify that we
need to intervene with regard to other capacities other than the capacities
that we have normally been talking about, such as Project Consolidate,
Siyenza Manje, etc. There may be other interventions that we are not making
with regard to this capacity matter, as a result of which even with those
interventions we are not making the progress we should be getting.

Indeed, I’d be very pleased if the hon member had some understanding of
this that he would communicate it. I’m quite certain that all of us want to
make progress with regard to these matters. Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker.
[Applause.]

     Report to SADC leaders following South Africa’s role as mediator in
              Zimbabwe, and steps to address crisis in Zimbabwe

17.   Mrs C Dudley (ACDP) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   In light of the fact that the people of Zimbabwe are looking to
           Africa’s leaders to bring an end to the abuse of human rights
           and the economic meltdown in their country, what report was
           given to the Southern African Development Community leaders
           following the SADC mandate to South Africa to act as a mediator
           in Zimbabwe;


      (2)   whether South Africa will be taking any further action to
           address (a) the crisis in Zimbabwe and (b) the recent escalation
           in the number of illegal immigrants to South Africa; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             NO1884E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, with regard to these
questions about Zimbabwe, let me start by reminding the hon members of the
response I gave in this House earlier this year regarding the mandate given
to us on the matter of Zimbabwe by the Extraordinary SADC Summit of Heads
of State and Government that convened in Dar es Salaam in March of this
year.

Amongst other things, I said then that both the government of Zimbabwe and
the two factions of the Movement for Democratic Change, the MDC, had
unconditionally accepted the decisions of the extraordinary summit,
including our role as facilitator; that the Zimbabwean interlocutors had
agreed that all of us should avoid conducting dialogue through the media as
this would be counterproductive and have the potential to imperil the
negotiations; and that the discussions themselves were proceeding very
well.
In terms of the brief given to us by the SADC summit, we were required to
report on the work of the facilitation of the dialogue between government
and the MDC to the organ of SADC, which we did during the course of the
SADC summit in Lusaka, in that indeed numerous engagements had taken place
between the interlocutors and the facilitation team and that these
engagements had run smoothly and that some progress had been made.

The summit was also informed of the fruitful interface that had taken place
between the facilitation team and representatives of civil-society
organisations from Zimbabwe. This interface with the civil-society
organisations occurred with the support of the parties to the dialogue –
the parties that beforehand had concurred with the facilitation that some
interaction with members of civil society was essential. This was so, if
only, to ensure that any final outcome of the dialogue would enjoy the
support of all the people of Zimbabwe and lead to the creation of an
environment conducive to free and fair elections.

It is now a matter of record to quote from the communiqué of the Lusaka
summit - that the summit welcomed the progress and encouraged the parties
to expedite the process of negotiations and conclude the work as soon as
possible so that the next elections are held in an atmosphere of peace,
allowing the people of Zimbabwe to elect leaders of their choice in an
atmosphere of peace and tranquillity. I wish to reiterate what I mentioned
when I addressed this House on the same matter last June in that, as was
the case with regard to the Dar es Salaam summit, President Mugabe
participated in the recent Lusaka meeting and was therefore party to the
decisions taken by the summit.

The hon Dudley will also recall that our assignment was limited to the
facilitation of dialogue between the Zimbabwean government and the two
factions of the MDC, and that it did not include dealing with what she
describes as the economic meltdown in Zimbabwe. She will also be aware that
the extraordinary summit in Dar es Salaam had asked the SADC Executive
Secretary to undertake a study on the economic situation in Zimbabwe and
propose measures on how SADC can assist Zimbabwe to recover economically.

I can inform the National Assembly that the executive secretary presented
his report to the troika of the SADC Organ for Politics, Defence and
Security which, in turn, reported on the Lusaka summit meeting which
directed the SADC Ministers responsible for finance to use the report of
the executive secretary to draw up, in consultation with the government of
Zimbabwe, an economic plan to support Zimbabwe.

With regard to the second part of the question, in particular the reference
to whether we will take any further action to address the crisis in
Zimbabwe, I would like to say that we will act within the mandate and the
decisions of our regional body, SADC. These include the process to identify
measures that SADC should take to help with the recovery of the Zimbabwean
economy.

Finally, it is quite evident that to the extent that some Zimbabweans have
been illegally entering our country, our law-enforcement agencies have been
and will continue to respond in accordance with the relevant laws of our
country. I thank you, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, hon Acting Speaker. Mr President, you and others
have clearly said and we would agree that the Zimbabwean problem is a
problem for an African solution, and it must be solved by Zimbabweans
themselves. But the question that is on many people’s lips is what exactly
you are meaning by this. I say this because when the people of Zimbabwe see
themselves as having tried every possible peaceful means to bring about a
solution, it’s rather confusing. If democratic, free and fair elections are
not going to be an option, what actually is left for them to do? And I
can’t believe that you are suggesting civil war or reverting to struggle
tactics, etc. Even the SADC guidelines for free and fair elections - and
they are guidelines that South Africa and Zimbabwe are party to - recognise
that conditions in the run-up to elections are as important as the
conditions on the day.

What are Zimbabweans to do, Mr President, when opposition leaders are
beaten and killed; the rule of law is ignored; human civil liberties are
abused; the voters’ roll is hugely questionable; the electoral body and the
media are government controlled; gatherings are outlawed; and even prayer
matters are shut down and people are thrown in jail. This even violates the
SADC protocols. Where must they turn? Are measures in place? We would like
to ask and hope to ensure that the conditions for free and fair elections
will exist within the next few months, considering that elections are in
six months’ time. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, we need to listen to
the Zimbabweans on this matter. I think they must lead us in terms of what
happens to Zimbabwe. The leading political parties - I was just saying now,
responding to the hon member’s question - that is the ruling party and the
two groups of the opposition MDC are meeting, have been meeting and will
continue meeting to address, among other things, the need to create the
necessary climate to ensure that the elections that are scheduled for March
next year, presidential and parliamentary, take place in the proper
atmosphere, that they are free and fair and so on. The Zimbabwean political
leadership is quite convinced that it has the possibility to come to an
agreement that would produce that outcome – that’s the Zimbabwean political
leadership. You may think that they are wrong, but they don’t think they
are wrong.

I just indicated in this response that we also met with Zimbabwean
representatives of civil society, because they requested to participate in
the negotiations, but it had been our view as a facilitator that they
indeed needed to be involved but not necessarily in the manner in which
they suggested.

Therefore we needed to engage them, and indeed they came. We engaged them
and spent many hours with them discussing the totality of these things.
They agreed that they would support this negotiation process that was
taking place; that they agreed with the agenda that was put in place by the
political leadership of Zimbabwe; that they would continue to maintain
contact with the facilitation; and they were generally supportive. I’m
saying that the Zimbabwean leadership, both political and NGO/civil society
seemed to me, from all our interactions with them, quite convinced that
they could and would agree among themselves on how to handle their
situation, among other things, to ensure that they did indeed have free and
fair elections.
Now I believe the Zimbabweans about their own country.

I think when you don’t - you may very well not - when the leadership of
Zanu PF, when the leadership of the MDC, and when the leadership of civil-
society organisations all say that it is possible for us to get to this
outcome and we are working together to get to that outcome, I believe them.
We will continue to work with them - the ruling party, the opposition
parties and civil society - to assist them to facilitate the outcome of
that.

Indeed, as I was saying, when we reported to the SADC summit now in Lusaka,
this is the reason why the summit welcomed the progress and encouraged the
parties to expedite the process of negotiations and conclude work as soon
as possible so that the next elections were held in an atmosphere of peace,
allowing the people of Zimbabwe to elect the leaders of their choice in an
atmosphere of peace and tranquillity. That’s what the region is addressing
and that’s what the people of Zimbabwe are addressing. The ACDP may be
addressing something else, but I think on this issue of Zimbabwe, let us at
least have the humility to be led by the people of Zimbabwe. Thanks, Madam
Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr T J LOUW: Acting Speaker, Mr President, good afternoon to you, sir.
Recently, I led a delegation of the DA people up to the border of Zimbabwe.
We went to Beit Bridge; we went to Messina; and we went to other areas
around there. We interacted with a lot of people from Zimbabwe who live in
the area. I can tell you, sir, that we spoke to brutalised, terrorised and
often beaten people.

You say that we must listen to the people of Zimbabwe, sir. But the people
that I spoke to and listened to told me stories of fear and hunger. I asked
them why were they here. Why were they coming to this country? They said
they had no food. Now, sir, this is a human tragedy; it’s not a party-
political issue, and the DA, at all times, has sought to make that very
clear. These are our countrymen. We are all Africans. We are neighbours. We
owe it to the people of Zimbabwe and the people of South Africa too to do
something about the problem.

You say that Zimbabwe must resolve its problems within Zimbabwe, sir. But
how does that square up with your position in South Africa? If you look,
our question to you would be this: Prior to 1994, the ANC in exile and in
South Africa used the resources of the world to change its situation here -
and rightly so. But we needed the resources of the world and pressure from
other countries to change the regime here and make this country that we
have today a far better place.

I ask you why can’t that be the situation with Zimbabwe when we have people
literally dying on our border. We were told of people who are dying on
those farms there. To sit back and do nothing, sir, is the worst kind of
thing to do at all. Thank you. [Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, Madam Acting Speaker, let me repeat
this. We are not going to be involved in any regime changes in Zimbabwe. We
are not going to do that. We think it’s fundamentally wrong. We can’t take
on our shoulders the decision to determine who shall govern the people of
Zimbabwe. So, this is not going to happen. If the hon member is suggesting
that - I heard him talking about changing regimes in Zimbabwe - it is not
going to happen. We must be clear about that.

Then there are these comparisons that are made about ... The hon member may
remember this or not. There was a challenging moment here during the period
of our negotiations when we had to deal with the question of sanctions. I
don’t know if the hon member will remember that.

Part of the way that matter was presented was that the sanctions regime
should be maintained until the process of change in South Africa had become
irreversible. That was the word that was used – “irreversible”. How do you
measure that? When does this process become irreversible, because it’s not
a mathematical equation? This is the evolution of the political situation
before the hon Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi decided to participate in the
elections. It was a very difficult situation.

I’m referring to it because indeed in the end the position that we took was
that – and this irreversibility thing didn’t come from here; it came from
outside - rather than kind of say that, we would let the process of the
dismantling of the sanctions regime be part of the process of changing the
country. So, we integrated it in that way.

In the end, hon member, I’m saying that it was responding. This was
responding to the fact that for the first time in centuries, the then South
African government was engaging the rest of the leadership in the country
in discussing change. So, you didn’t need sanctions. That’s why we removed
them.

Now I am telling you that the opposition, the ruling party and NGOs are
involved in this process, engaging one another to produce its outcome
defined here in the SADC summit - and you say that we must impose
sanctions. Why? To do what? To produce what outcome? [Interjections.] No,
you can’t. I mean it doesn’t make sense. Here are Zimbabweans engaging one
another, and you are saying “beat them with a stick in order to engage
them”. They are engaging themselves.

Sure, there is a lot of hunger in Zimbabwe. We are all very familiar with
what has happened to the Zimbabwe economy - which is why the SADC decided
that we needed to take these particular steps, and I saw that yesterday.
Our Minister of Finance here did address this matter to say yes, indeed,
the Minister of Finance in the region would engage this and would produce
various options. He did say, quite correctly, that in the end it would be a
matter of the government of Zimbabwe to decide what it does - but the
finance Ministers will do that. We are responding to the hunger.

We will continue to engage this political process which, among other
things, is focused on this matter of, as stated at the SADC summit,
ensuring that the next elections, parliamentary and presidential, in March
2008 are indeed of the kind and take place in the atmosphere that the SADC
summit described. We will continue to focus on that. We will work on all of
the Zimbabwean’s political and NGOs on that.

I am quite certain that the finance Ministers and the region, including our
Minister of Finance here, will engage this economic challenge so that we
can indeed then identify a specific programme to discuss this hunger
problem that the hon member quite correctly identifies. These are the two
tracks that we are going to have to follow with regard to Zimbabwe with as
much vigour, with as much speed, and with as much of everything else as
possible.

Regime change – no. That route we are not going to take. Beyond these two
interventions, political and economic, I really don’t know what else we
would be expected to do. Indeed, I do believe that to try to cook up some
other intervention will not help us to solve the problem of Zimbabwe.
Thanks, Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Acting Speaker, I concur with the hon President that it is
not the role of our government to actively advocate a regime change in
Zimbabwe, but that it should be done by the Zimbabweans themselves through
the ballot box.

Mr President, the President of Zimbabwe, however, has repeatedly blamed
Western countries, like the United Kingdom and the USA, for Zimbabwe’s
economic woes. Now, the theory is that sanctions are the main cause for
Zimbabwean’s economic woes and not the economic policies of the Zimbabwean
government.

You mentioned economic interventions on the part of our government and, of
course, our nation. But what are the specific measures our government will
be willing to take to assist the Zimbabweans with its failing economy, as
well as the results of such an economy? Here, specifically, I refer to
those who are crossing our borders because of hunger and because they need
to feed their families. I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, as I had indicated,
the extraordinary SADC summit in Dar es Salaam in March asked the Executive
Secretary of SADC to have a look at, examine and study the Zimbabwean
economy with a view to elaborating on steps that the SADC region might take
to assist Zimbabwe to overcome its economic problems. I indicated in my
response that the Executive Secretary of SADC did indeed submit his report
to the SADC Organ on Politics – which is the body that had authorised that
study.

That report was then tabled to the full summit in Lusaka, which then took
the decision that the finance Ministers must elaborate on its detailed
programme of action based on that report and in consultation with the
government of Zimbabwe. So, that is where we are with regard to this
matter.

There are no separate South African government measures that are going to
be taken with regard to the economy – separate and outside of that
framework of the region. As I said, our own wish is that this process by
the finance Ministers move forward as speedily as possible, because I think
all of us recognise the urgency of the economic situation, so that we then
do that detailed programme of action.

It is only after that that it would then be possible to say what possible
specific roles South Africa may play in the context of such proposals as
would have been made by the regional finance Ministers.

The report of the Executive Secretary of SADC is a comprehensive report
about the economy of Zimbabwe. It is about all elements of that economy in
a historical context: when did these problems start, why did they start,
how do they manifest themselves, etc? Of course, it includes references to
the fact – which is correct – that Zimbabwe has really, for all intents and
purposes, lost all access to the international credit markets. So,
everything has to be done in cash and that has an impact on the economy, as
it must.

The impact on the Zimbabwe economy in terms of the response by the rest of
the international community is part of the report. But, certainly, the
report is not based on a notion that all that has gone wrong is sanctions.
It is a comprehensive assessment of what has happened to the Zimbabwe
economy over a period of time in order to arrive at the correct conclusions
as to what you do to respond. That is the SADC position, and that is the
position that would govern the manner in which our government responds.
Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker.

Ms K R MAGAU: Thank you, President, for the response on the Zimbabwe
facilitation by SADC. Would the President agree with me when I say that
perhaps it is about time that SADC looked at ways and means of speeding up
integration of the people of the region in a manageable way, rather than
arresting them, deporting them and putting them into refugee camps which,
in most instances, do not have the desired results? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, hon member, I think to some extent it
is true that the people in the region are moving ahead of the political
leadership. The fact of the matter is that we are focused on Zimbabwe, but
people from other countries in the region and further north are entering
this country from all sorts of areas. I am saying that to that extent
perhaps the people are ahead of their political leadership in terms of that
integration. They are busy integrating themselves while we are busy
discussing this matter in big summits and conferences.

But, you know the decisions that have been taken in the region to address
this matter of integration - specific decisions in that regard. Indeed, I
would agree that we need to move to expedite those, and that includes
economic integration. We need to move with some speed to integrate those,
because I fully agree with the hon member that we do the arrests and the
deportations, but the people are back here the following week. You rearrest
them, send them out and they come back again. This is certainly not the
most effective way to respond to this.

But, certainly, of course, we cannot allow the law to be broken and
therefore must act against people coming into the country illegally, but
there is a more fundamental challenge to address. The people are addressing
it in their own way and will continue to do so. Thanks, Madam Acting
Speaker. [Applause.]

   Promotion of social cohesion in the naming of towns, cities and places

18.   Dr P W A Mulder (FF Plus) asked the President of the Republic:


      Whether, in the light of his reference to social cohesion in his state
      of the nation address this year, he will commit himself and the
      Government to find win-win solutions by giving recognition to the
      background, history and heroes of all communities as expressed in the
      naming of towns, cities and places through which successful social
      cohesion may be promoted; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?
                       NO1888E
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, again, it is not the
first time that we have in this House dealt with this matter of place names
and the manner in which they should help to bring about social cohesion. I
would therefore like to answer this question by reiterating what I have
said in this House in the past - that to find win-win solutions is indeed
to give recognition to the background, history, heroes and heroines of all
communities when dealing with the matter of place-name changes.

So, indeed, government is committed to ensuring that the matter of place
names contributes towards social cohesion. This means that all of us should
accept that when we refer to the matter of South African history, we are
speaking of the history of all the people of this country, including that
rich history which for a long time was suppressed.

The reality is that today the names of towns, cities and many places in our
country reflect mainly those of the minority of South Africans and not of
all communities. As I've said before, in some instances these names give
the impression that South Africa is a European outpost, rather than a truly
African country.

As we speak in this House now, the names of cities, towns and streets in
this country suggest that we are not giving sufficient recognition to the
background, the heroes and the heroines, particularly of the black majority
of this country. Indeed, most place names of cities and towns honour the
history and heroes and heroines mainly of the Afrikaner and English people.

We have seen, in many instances, huge outcries and strong resistance from
those communities whose names dominate the South African landscape whenever
there is an initiative to recognise the history and heroes and heroines of
the majority in our country. Clearly, this is an obstacle to the attainment
of social cohesion because of this refusal to acknowledge the history of
all the people of the country.

I am certain that members of this House would agree that the transformation
of our landscape through place-name changes is not only an inevitable
consequence of a healthy democracy, but is necessary in order to restore
the dignity of all South Africans.

As we have said before, the current process of determining geographic and
place names is important for our nation-building. Because of this, we have
ensured that it is in line with United Nations resolutions on naming places
and is also consistent with our Constitution.

This process, as we know, is guided by laws passed by this Parliament - the
South African Geographical Names Council Act and the Local Government:
Municipal Structures Act. I really do believe, hon members, that if we can
work together, not for narrow interests, but for the good of the country,
we can use this matter to achieve the social cohesion to which the hon
member refers.

Government is giving the necessary attention to this important matter of
social cohesion. Again, as I’ve said, in our recent Cabinet lekgotla we
once again deliberated extensively on this issue and agreed that we had to
finalise an implementation framework for necessary campaigns and programmes
that will strengthen our cohesion as a society. But this constitutes only
government's contribution to what should be a national campaign involving
all sectors of society.

Earlier this year, during my response to the debate on the state of the
nation address, I proposed that this House did something on this important
question of social cohesion, and I do trust that Parliament will attend to
this important matter. Thank you very much, Madam Acting Speaker.

Dr P W A MULDER: Acting Speaker and President, I broadly agree with what
you are saying, if I hear you correctly. I’m not a European, so I suppose
you’re not talking about Afrikaner names not being indigenous to Africa.

Yesterday we had a motion from the ANC in this House emphasising the
importance of every cultural heritage of everyone being recognised in South
Africa. The FF Plus totally agrees with that and we’ve said it more than
once, and therefore I agree that everybody must be accommodated in South
Africa.

But on Tuesday I was outside the court in Pretoria and I saw how strong the
emotions were around these issues, with people becoming very emotional. Mr
Blanco Mabaso, ANC secretary for that region, said they were going to
change all the Afrikaner names and move all the Afrikaner statues.

This morning in an opinion poll in Beeld, 90% of the people said that the
name of Pretoria should not be changed – on the other side. The point I
would like to make, sir, is that what we are saying here - and what we are
trying to solve here because we know the emotions out there - is not
happening out there.

My question would be this: Isn’t it possible to create some mechanism to
solve these problems, because I’m worried that the normal processes as they
are out there – the laws that you mentioned – are not going to solve this.
We’re going to be in this sort of debate for the next 20 years, struggling
from Witbank to Nelspruit to Mpumalanga or wherever, in one fight after the
other, and that’s not going to solve our problems in any way. So, isn’t it
possible to get some mechanism that is going to solve it in a win-win
situation in which everybody can feel accommodated so that we can continue
with more important things than this. Thank you, sir.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Well, again, Madam Acting Speaker, I think
it would be very good if the hon Pieter Mulder could indicate what this
mechanism could be. Certainly, I wouldn’t object in principle to the
establishment of some system or mechanism which would produce the sort of
agreed outcomes, which I think all of us want, but what that mechanism
might be beyond what is provided for in terms of our legislation, I don’t
know.

I must emphasise this point: there are certain realities which we must
confront together so that you have a situation in which the hon Pieter
Mulder should say, “Standing, as I am, in the shoes of an Afrikaner, I
believe that Pretoria must remain Pretoria.” And then the hon Pieter Mulder
must say, “But now I’m going to put myself in the shoes of somebody else
who is not an Afrikaner, and if I stand in his shoes I would say Pretoria
must become Tshwane.” So the hon Pieter Mulder must then say, “Well, how do
we resolve this problem?”

I’m trying to say that I think it’s critically important that in addressing
these matters we don’t come at them as representatives of factions, but as
having a common task to encourage national reconciliation and social
cohesion. Necessarily that has to mean give and take. It can’t be avoided.

I don’t know whether people in Grahamstown love the name of Grahamstown. I
don’t. I think the name Grahamstown must be changed, because Colonel
Graham, after whom that town is named, did terrible things – bad things –
in that conflict on the Eastern Cape border. But Colonel Graham was a
member of the Scottish aristocracy. I would imagine, if there are any Scots
in the country, they might feel very offended if we changed the name
Grahamstown, in the same way that I’d be very, very offended that the name
continues of this fellow who was a butcher. How do you square this circle?

I’m trying to say that I think that really to address this matter, let’s
not come at it as saying, for example, “I am the special representative of
the Venda people and I must fight to the death for this”, you know -
whatever. This is because if we come at it like that we’re not going to
solve this problem.

I must be able to say, understanding very well the concerns, passions and
interests of the Afrikaner people, that this is what we must do, and not
say that I’m delegating that matter to the hon Pieter Mulder. Can we come
at it like that? Is it possible to have a mechanism that would enable us to
achieve all that? I don’t know.

But I would most certainly appreciate any proposals, hon Pieter Mulder,
about this thing, understanding that there’s an objective reality here
which conveys a lot of the pain of the past, according to which an 1820
settler in the Eastern Cape would say, “Viva, Colonel Graham” while I would
say, “Down with Colonel Graham.” [Applause.] What do we do about that,
together?

Maybe, hon Pieter Mulder, some mechanism that you might propose could help
us to address this. Thanks, Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Acting Speaker, hon President, thank you for your
comprehensive reply. My question is: What can we as leaders, but also
ordinary South Africans, do to enhance that which we have in common with
one another – what you referred to in the state of the nation address as
“promoting a common sense of belonging, reinforcing the glue that holds our
nation together”?


Recognising the impact of apartheid, with particular reference to separate
development, and recognising the significant progress that the majority of
South Africans have made in building social cohesion since 1994, social
cohesion must be seen in the broader context, not only in terms of city,
town and street names. This House will, in due course, also discuss the
issue of social cohesion as a member’s motion.

In this broader context, we must build a national identity and reach a
national consensus as a nation, learning from one another, understanding
our own past and together understanding our common future, and reach what
you’ve just called an objective reality. I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Acting Speaker, I would agree very
fully with the hon Koornhof in terms of this approach and, indeed, I’m very
glad that he raised this matter again of a discussion that will take place
here in Parliament to address this to be able to generate this national
consensus that we need. And I really do hope that we would indeed address
these challenges.

Our Constitution, for instance, says that we must build South Africa as a
nonracial country. As a constitutional imperative it binds all of us. No
doubt, Madam Acting Speaker, as you would know very well, all of us here
and millions of South African’s outside of here, are all nonracialists, all
committed to the creation of this nonracial society. I don’t know if there
is anybody who would say otherwise. But once you go beyond the statement of
“Yes, we want a nonracial South Africa,” once you come to the question,
then what are you going to do practically to bring about that nonracial
South Africa? Then we go in many different directions.

So I’m saying that I do hope that, indeed, as we engage to produce that
national consensus, we would look at questions such as that.

Not long ago I had a meeting here in Cape Town with a broad section of what
was called the institutional leadership in the province; not the political
ones, but various social and other institutions in the province. One of the
people there presented a very detailed and passionate account of how the
coloured population in the Western Cape was being discriminated against,
particularly by the provincial government.
So I said to him, “You know, on the speech that you’ve just made, I can get
somebody from Khayelitsha who would make exactly the same speech and
instead of coloured have African, but it would be absolutely exactly the
same speech, talking about how that population group is being discriminated
against in the province.” That’s a reality. And so, what do we do?

We can only respond, hon Koornhof, in the manner that you’ve indicated:
that we do work together to try to build a national consensus about all of
this, because if we confront this issue of social cohesion from these
particular trenches, whether they are racial or ethnic or regional or
whatever, we wouldn’t solve it. To build that national consensus on this
matter may very well be easier said than done, but let’s try. I do hope
indeed that Parliament would attend to this. It would help a great deal.
Thanks, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker. Mr President, we all
know that we are now living in a new democratic South Africa and the DA
acknowledges that all names cannot simply remain the same and that change
is necessary. But this change must include heroes and icons of all sectors
of our society. The naming of our cities, towns and streets must be dealt
with in a sensitive manner, and we cannot rush this important symbolic
issue, which, if well handled, can be an important milestone of
reconciliation and nation-building.

We agree with Mr Mandela when he said in 1997, “You can’t build a united
nation on the basis of revenge.” But the reaction of your ANC colleagues –
the mayor and an ANC party secretary in Pretoria, after the High Court
decision against them on Tuesday - smacks of revenge.

Is the President prepared to consider consulting with the political parties
who care about the matter to see whether we can perhaps reach consensus on
an operational framework that will be reasonably acceptable to most South
Africans?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I had hoped, Madam Acting Speaker, that we
were coming to some agreement about how to proceed with this, one of them
being that Parliament would engage this matter with a view to seeing what
proposals can be made. All the political parties are here. Let’s use this
important institution to do that consultation and, indeed, government would
then be very keenly interested to participate, follow and implement
decisions that may come out of here.

I thought we were coming to that conclusion. I thought we were also coming
to the conclusion that, as the hon Pieter Mulder indicated, it might be
possible to elaborate some mechanism which would help us to move forward
faster and in a less conflicting way on this matter and that indeed he
would work on this. Perhaps that could also be put into this parliamentary
process so that we produce this.

So, I really do want to think that that might be the best way to go rather
than to organise some meeting between the President and the political
parties. Let’s all sit here and think the matter through. I’m saying that
I’m quite certain that government would want to listen very, very carefully
to what the legislature might say on what is indeed a very important
matter. Thank you, Madam Acting Speaker. [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 16:42.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

         (a)     National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 36 –
              2007] (National Assembly– proposed sec 76) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 30142 of 3 August 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

2.    Translations of Bills submitted

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Wetsontwerp op die Suid-Afrikaanse Regterlike
              Opleidingsinstituut [W 4 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).



              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the South
              African Judicial Education Institute Bill [B 4 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).

     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Herroeping van die Swart
              Administrasie Wet en Wysiging van Sekere Wette [W 34 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).
              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Repeal
              of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
              Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

     (3)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Strafreg (Seksuele Misdrywe) [W
              50 – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75).

              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2003]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
         Centre for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 133-2007].

2.    The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
         Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority (FoodBev-
         Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 65-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
         Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 67-2007].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
         Education and Training Authority (Services Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 88-2007].

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Finance, Accounting,
         Management Consulting and other Financial Services Sector
         Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 63-3007].

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
         Education and Training Authority (Agri-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 56-2007].

    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education
         and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 57-2007].

    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
         Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 77-2007].

    (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail
         Sector Education and Training Authority (W&R-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 78-2007].

    (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
         Sector Education and Training Authority (HW-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 66-2007].

    (j)     Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training and
         Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority
         (ETDP-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 62-2007].

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
         Bloemfontein for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
         Theatre for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 156-2007].

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
         South Africa (NAC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 186-
         2007].

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 161-2007].

    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
         Language Board (Pansalb) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         174-2007].

    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
         Gallery for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


4.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia Wetland
         Park Authority for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment
     of Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 34 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec
     75), dated 28 August 2007:

         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the subject of the Repeal of the Black
         Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B
         34 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         endorses the classification of the Bill and reports the Bill
         without amendment.


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Transport
     Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27- 2007] (National Assembly-
     sec 75), dated 29 August 2007:

         The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the subject
         of the Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27 - 2007]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 27A - 2007].


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Convention for
     the Control and Management of Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments - 2004
     (Ballast Water Management Convention), dated 29 August 2007:

         The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the Convention for the Control and
         Management of Ship’s Ballast Water and Sediments - 2004 (Ballast
         Water Management Convention), referred to it, recommends that the
         House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the
         said Convention.

     Request to be considered.


