---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-09-13
---

THURSDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we proceed with the business of the House, I
have to announce that the vacancy caused by Ms F Batyi’s loss of seat with
effect from 28 August 2007 has been filled by the nomination of Ms I E
Jenner with effect from 11 September 2007. Ms Jenner made and subscribed
the oath in the Speaker’s Office this morning.

We welcome the new member to the House. [Applause.]

                              MATHEMATICS WEEK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv A H GAUM (ANC): Deputy Speaker, Mathematics Week started on 3 September
and ended on 7 September, 2007. Events were planned in some cities to
showcase the subject, but unfortunately they went unnoticed by the media.

The aim of Mathematics Week was to showcase mathematics as a subject,
thereby encouraging learners to take the subject in their curriculum.
Mathematics is becoming more and more one of the pre-requisites for
entrance at most tertiary institutions, not only for those who opt for
natural sciences, but also for those who would like to pursue management
and business studies as well. Among degrees that require mathematics are B.
Admin, Business Management, Economics, Engineering, Medicine, etc.

It is therefore clear that the war on the skills deficit cannot be won
unless schools do everything in their power to offer mathematics as part of
their curriculum. We have become aware that while there are schools that do
good work to promote the subject, there are those who, in the quest to
raise the pass rate profiles in grade 12, deprive students of mathematics
and track them to non-scarce skills subjects. This produces negative
effects for both students and the development of the country.

I would like to take this opportunity to encourage all schools to offer
mathematics as part of their curriculum. We would also like to urge
educators who teach this subject to be patient with those learners who,
through no fault of their own, are slow to grasp the noble subject called
mathematics. Thank you. [Applause.]

         RACIST REMARKS ABOUT WHITE FARMERS BY SENIOR MEMBERS OF ANC

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A H NEL (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, what happened here yesterday was a
disgrace, and not worthy of this House. I say this because a senior member
of the ANC stood up and made racist remarks about white farmers who assault
their farmworkers; not some farmers, but all farmers.

If I had made the same general statement about black farmers, I would have
been called a racist, asked to withdraw, and probably asked to leave the
House. When I complained about the behaviour, the Deputy Minister of
Agriculture and Land Affairs went further and threatened farmers who put
farmworkers off their land with expropriation.

Legal retrenchments can be made by all businesses, but if farmers do that,
they are threatened. What sort of message are these senior people in the
ANC sending out to farmers who are overwhelmingly positive about land
reform and about South Africa? What is also disturbing is that senior
members on that side and even the presiding officers let this happen
without any comment.

The responsibility to stop these biased and racist comments is the duty of
especially the senior members of this House. Thank you. [Applause.]

                             CORRUPTION IN SAPS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): The IFP believes that the time has come for a Jali
Commission-type inquiry into allegations of corruption within the Police
Service of South Africa. On a daily basis, we hear and read of numerous
allegations of corruption, maladministration, nepotism, intimidation and
other improper conduct within the metro police and SA Police Service.

The Independent Complaints Directorate, an independent mechanism
established to ensure that policing in our country takes place within a
human rights ethic and that those officers who do not uphold the rule of
law are held accountable for their actions, is unfortunately not doing its
job properly. The situation has become so extreme that we cannot turn a
blind eye any longer.

We need to appoint an independent judicial commission of inquiry to try and
investigate all allegations, and make comprehensive recommendations in this
regard. Thank you.

                      RENOVATION OF HOUSES IN MSOBOMVU

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu S E ASIYA (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, abantu abaphantsi kolawulo
lukaMasipala waseMsobomvu benza umbulelo ongazenzisiyo kurhulumente
kaNdlunkulu, owePhondo kunye nowezeKhaya, ngokuthabatha isigqibo
sokuhlaziya ilokishi endala ebekukho kuyo izindlu othi xa ungaphakathi kuzo
ujonge edongeni, ubone umntu ohamba ngaphandle. Ezi zindlu ziya kuba
ngamawaka amabini ubuninzi. Le nto iza kubuyisa isidima sabantu kwaye
ngethuba ezakhiwa ngalo kuya kuvuleka amathuba emisebenzi. Abanye baya
kuzuza izakhono apho nekati isuke eziko.

Kwakweli phulo abantu baya kubandakanywa ekwakheni izindlu zabo ngokwabo. I-
ANC inethemba nenkolelo yokuba inkqubo yebhunga ledolophu yokunika abakhi
abachongiweyo iithenda ayizi kuyilibazisa inkqubo yolwakhiwo. Singulo
mbutho wesizwe sinethemba lokuba noko ezi ziya kuba zizindlu ezicacileyo
nezibonakalayo. Enkosi. [Laphela ixesha.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s
statement follows.)

[Mr S E ASIYA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the people under the authority of the
Municipality of Msobomvu extend their sincere gratitude to the national,
provincial and local governments for taking the decision to renovate the
old township where there were houses, where one could stand inside and see
someone walking outside through the walls. There will be 2 000 houses. This
will bring back the dignity of the people and, at the same time, open up
job opportunities. Some will get skills and no longer live in poverty.

In the same project, people will be involved in building their own houses.
The ANC hopes and believes that the programme of the town council to give
selected builders tenders will not delay the housing project. This national
organisation hopes that these will be proper and quality houses. Thank you.
[Time expired.]]

        EXECUTION OF PROTECTION ORDERS AND WATTANTS OF ARREST BY SAPS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S N SWART (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP is deeply concerned
that police are failing to arrest abusive partners who violate court-issued
protection orders in domestic violence cases, despite a High Court ruling
that found that failure to do so amounted to negligence.

In this particular case, the police failed to protect a 50-year-old woman
from her abusive ex-husband, despite a valid order, resulting in her being
abused and raped. After a four-year battle, she succeeded with the civil
action. Had the police done their job properly, she would have been spared
the trauma of rape and abuse, and taxpayers would have been spared the
considerable costs of a civil case.

When we passed the Domestic Violence Act, we hoped that this Act would
provide protection to the most vulnerable of our society, our women and
children, against abusive partners. It is therefore with considerable
concern that the ACDP has learnt learns that there is a policy stating that
despite a warrant of arrest being issued, police can only make an arrest
when there are signs of imminent danger to a complainant. Why must most
vulnerable women be made to suffer abusive partners who violate court
orders and then, when seeking police assistance, be told to wait until
their lives and those of their children are threatened by imminent danger.

In view of the high level of domestic violence and child abuse in our
country, the ACDP calls on the SAPS and the Minister to ensure that
protection orders and warrants of arrest are executed before imminent and
life-threatening situations develop. I thank you.

                              FLOOR – CROSSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Deputy Speaker, this is the second floor-crossing
period of my short political career. I now understand why the public has so
little respect for politicians. Our democracy has been reduced to a circus,
and we must fix this.

The ANC has also revealed its true colours during this period. Our once-
proud liberation movement is now willing to sacrifice its few remaining
principles on the altar of power. Instead of firing Travelgate MPs, it
takes on more! Instead of condemning the bribery and extortion of the NNP,
it considers going into an alliance with them simply to remove a government
that it doesn’t like. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member!

Mr L W GREYLING: Then you have the protestations of the ANC National
Chairperson, welcoming conservative members into its ranks, and calling
them genuine patriots simply because they joined the ANC!
Let me state today: I am a true patriot, and I don’t need to sit on that
side of the House to prove it! [Applause.]

An unknown ANC source is reported as saying, ``Every politician has their
price.’’ The ANC Western Cape Whip defends floor-crossing by blaming the
electorate. Minister Lekota asked us on this side of the House to reflect
on the usefulness of staying in political parties that can only criticise,
and that the only positive way to expend energy is to get behind the
majority in the ANC. This is the scant respect that the ANC shows towards
multiparty democracy in our country!

I have reflected, and I can tell you that what our country needs most is
principled leaders who are willing to stand by their voters, rather than
abandon them for personal gain. The ANC should also be warned that your
abandoning of principles will eventually lead to the voters abandoning you!
Thank you. [Applause.]

                       COMMUNITIES’ RESPONSE TO CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Deputy Speaker, hon members, the ANC believes that
our response to crime must be based on a clear understanding of the causes
of crime and the various forms that it takes across society. Our response
needs to be well-considered, effectively co-ordinated and comprehensive.
More importantly, it needs to be sustainable and its progress measurable.

All our people are concerned about the scourge of drug abuse. However, the
war against drugs must not be fought in a manner that exposes communities
to attacks by heartless drug dealers. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! We are not going to allow that.
[Interjections.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: On a point of order, may I ask: Are we being forbidden
from heckling? Is that forbidden in the House?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are forbidden ... [Interjections.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: I’m sorry; I can’t hear because of the noise on my
left.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to appeal to you, hon member, that in terms of
the Rules that support you to do anything that you want to do within your
responsibility as a member of this House. I am not going to allow you not
to respect the Chair. If that is the attitude you want to display today, we
can deal with it. For now allow me to do what I am supposed to do. Is that
clear? [Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: We have acknowledged that the Police Service and other
government agencies cannot fight crime alone and that it requires the
involvement and active participation of all communities and all sectors of
society to meet this challenge.

The ANC calls on all members of our communities to make every possible
effort to decisively tackle the challenge of crime, drawing on the
resources and capacity of all sectors of society in a united front against
crime. Thank you. [Applause.]

                      VIOLENT BEHAVIOUR AT OUR SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Deputy Speaker, imagine a scenario where innocent
children come to school fearing that they may become the latest victims of
ruthless learner behaviour at that school. Learning cannot take place as
children fear harm on a daily basis.

Imagine further a more dreadful scenario where such children decide that
since nothing is being done to quell the violence at school, they too have
to adopt the patterns of violence as a form of protection, and therefore
violence at schools escalates and the cycle continues. These are not
imaginary scenarios but real occurrences at our schools.

On the other hand teachers are caught in the cycle of violence and as
school disciplinary measures have failed to make a difference, the learning
environment is left to deteriorate into war zones, which ultimately lead to
teacher absenteeism with negative consequences for children.

As a result of the violent crimes at our schools teachers and parents are
beginning to wonder whether the banning of corporal punishment is really a
wise policy move. Given the trauma of violence inflicted on teachers and
innocent school children and that the current disciplinary measures do not
provide adequate protection, there can be very little argument against the
effectiveness of corporal punishment to instil discipline in learning.

The FD calls on the Minister of Education and the department to review the
policy of the banning of corporal punishment at our schools. Thank you.

                    RACIST PROCUREMENT PROCESS IN TSHWANE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): The ANC-controlled Tshwane Metro Council has enacted a
racist procurement process that is an affront to our hard-won democratic
freedoms. According to the contents of a lead report from the Tshwane City
Manager, an instruction has been issued that the council may no longer
procure goods and services from so-called white-owned firms.

This form of exclusionary discrimination is not only entirely
unconstitutional but also flies in the face of guidelines from the National
Treasury, which states that no procurement procedure can exclude certain
categories of bidders. This is a form of naked racism introduced by the
ANC. It cannot be tolerated and the citizens of Pretoria can rest assured
that we as the DA will use all available avenues to fight this matter.
Thank you.

          COMMEMORATION OF 30TH ANNIVERSARY OF DEATH OF STEVE BIKO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC would like to join
hands in commemorating the 30th anniversary of the death of Bantu Steve
Biko. Steve Biko was a noted anti-apartheid activist in South Africa in the
1960s and early 1970s. He was a student leader who espoused the
perspectives of the Black Consciousness Movement.

While still alive, his writings and activism enriched our culture of
thought. He coined the slogan “black is beautiful” which he described as
meaning “you are ok as you are, begin to look upon yourself as a human
being.”

Steve Biko will always be remembered for his long-standing fight against
inequality, discrimination and oppression. Long live, the spirit of Bantu
Steve Biko! [Applause.]

                BRUTAL KILLING OF FOUR WOMEN IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP notes with shock and
horror the brutal killing of four women aged between 18 and 36 years in the
KwaZulu-Natal area. Three bodies were discovered last week and the fourth
body was discovered on Wednesday. All four were badly decomposed. Worst of
all, one of the bodies found had been decapitated and the head was missing.
The head was later recovered when a dog wandered through Shayamoya with a
head in its mouth.

The IFP recommends that thorough investigations be undertaken and if these
actions of this serial killer can be pinned to a person, that person should
be removed from society immediately and be given a sentence befitting this
crime. Thank you.

       BRAVERY OF MR ZONKE AND OTHERS ON FIRE TEAMS DURING VELD FIRES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C C SEPTEMBER (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC is aware that many parts of
South Africa have experienced veld fires that have been described as the
worst our country has experienced since the 1990s. The fires caused great
suffering to the people in the affected areas. The teams organised by the
Working on Fire Programme performed sterling work to help fight these
fires.
A case in point is what took place in the Ceylon plantation in Sabie in
Mpumalanga. A team that was part of the Working on Fire Programme was
preparing to leave an area which had become dangerous owing to changes in
wind speed and intensity. When the team head count was done it was
discovered that three workers were missing. After dropping the others at a
place of safety, two members of the team and a brave farmworker went back
to try and locate and save the missing workers. After 15 minutes they
managed to locate and rescue them. As they were moving out of the danger
area one of the workers panicked and jumped out of the bakkie. Mr Zonke
jumped out of the vehicle, ran after her and brought her back. The ANC
commends the extraordinary bravery displayed by Mr Zonke and, indeed, the
continuous commitment of the working on fire teams. Thank you.

      COMPLAINT AGAINST CHAIRPERSON OF COMMISSION FOR EMPLOYMENT EQUITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A M DREYER (DA): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die DA het vanoggend ’n klag
by die Openbare Beskermer teen die voorsitter van die Kommissie vir Billike
Indiensneming, Jimmy Manyi, ingedien. Volgens die wet oor billike
indiensneming stel die Minister van Arbeid hierdie persoon aan om hom te
adviseer oor beleidsake. Hiervolgens is Manyi wetlik verplig om onpartydig
op te tree en nie by aktiwiteite betrokke te raak wat die integriteit van
die kommissie ondermyn nie.
Die DA meen dat Manyi die kommissie se integriteit reeds in gedrang gebring
het deur sy partydige uitsprake en verder ook deur sy deelname aan en
bevordering van ander belangegroepe wat in konflik met die kommissie is.
Manyi se openbare uitsprake is rassisties en verdelend van aard. Hy stel
wit teenoor swart, mans teenoor vroue en nou ook vrou teenoor vrou.

Die laaste strooi is Manyi se verslag wat hy by die Parlement ingedien het
om beleidmaking te beïnvloed. Hierdie verslag berus op onvolledige opnames
en wemel van feitelike foute. [Tussenwerpsels.] Manyi erken dit self in sy
verslag. Onafhanklike oudits bevestig dat geen waarde aan Manyi se verslag
geheg kan word nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die Parlement durf nie so ’n verslag
gebruik om hulle beleid te beïnvloed nie, en Manyi self behoort die reg te
verloor om in so ’n belangrike liggaam te dien. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Ms A M DREYER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, this morning the DA lodged a
complaint with the Public Protector against the chairperson of the
Commission for Employment Equity, Jimmy Manyi. In terms of the Employment
Equity Act, the Minister of Labour appoints this person to advise him on
policy matters. According to this, Manyi is legally bound to act
impartially and not become involved in activities that undermine the
integrity of the commission.

The DA is of the opinion that Manyi has already jeopardised the
commission’s integrity with his biased opinions as well as his
participation in and promotion of other interest groups that are in
conflict with the commission. Manyi’s public statements are racist and
discordant. He sets white up against black, men against women and now woman
against woman as well.

The last straw was Manyi’s report that he submitted to Parliament to
influence policy-making. This report relies on incomplete surveys and
bristles with factual mistakes. [Interjections.] Manyi himself acknowledges
this in his report. Independent audits confirm that no value can be
attached to Manyi’s report. [Interjections.] Parliament daren’t use such a
report to influence its policy, and Manyi himself should lose the right to
serve on such an important body.]

                  IMPROVEMENT OF LIVES OF RURAL COMMUNITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S HUANG (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Department of Public Works is
improving the lives of the rural communities. I want to congratulate the
department on its good relationship with the People’s Republic of China,
which led to the initiative that benefited institutions like the Magoshi
Primary School in Limpopo through the intervention of Deputy Minister
Ntopile Kganyago who, accompanied by a representative of the Chinese
Embassy, Mr Zhou Yxiao, handed ten computers and printers to Mr Malose
Manamela, the principal of Magoshi Primary School. These computers, which
were described by many speakers as resources for skills development in the
area, were received with great excitement by the community.

The Extended Public Works Programme has exceeded its gross job creation
target of 130 000 jobs. Over the year, more than 220 000 jobs were created.


The department has completed the R4,3 million Inkosi Albert Luthuli Legacy
Project in KwaZulu-Natal and handed it over to the Department of Arts and
Culture.

In the Western Cape, the R103 million refurbishment project of 90 Plein
Street for the use of Parliament was completed and delivered on schedule.

Thank you. [Applause.]

              STATUS OF WTO DOHA ROUND NEGOTIATIONS IN TROUBLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof B TUROK: Madam Deputy Speaker, the current World Trade Organization’s
Doha Round negotiations are in danger of collapse. The US and the EU are
once again demonstrating their self-serving approach, ignoring the inequity
of world trade. They are subsidising agriculture so that their products are
sold world-wide below cost, thereby undermining African agricultural
exports. African governments have been prohibited from subsidising their
own agriculture by the IMF and the World Bank, and this is grossly unfair.

The US and the EU want access to African markets for their services and
manufactured goods and want us to lower tariffs still further. This will
lead to the further destruction of Africa’s industries and services.

We call upon our government to resist these efforts and to mobilise public
opinion in support of fair trade, not free trade, globally. Parliament
should also play an important role in pressing for a new and fair world
order in trade which will allow developing countries to grow their
economies.

Thank you. [Applause.]

                               FLOOR-CROSSING

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Deputy Speaker, perhaps hon member
Greyling should remember that his leader, the hon Patricia de Lille, is an
original floor-crosser. [Applause.] And we accepted her bona fides when she
formed her own party. I think it would be good in this House if we accepted
the bona fides of members who have crossed the floor.

I know that the DA were also applauding most vociferously, but they
actually were among the biggest beneficiaries of the first floor-crossing
that led to the demise of a political party. So, let’s accept that members
who have crossed the floor have done so because they wanted to do so and
have good reasons for doing so. Let’s not impute unnecessary
characteristics to that.

Secondly, it would help Mr Greyling if he didn’t shout, because then he
wouldn’t be out of breath when he sits down. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

      MATHEMATICS RACIST REMARKS ABOUT WHITE FARMERS CORRUPTION IN SAPS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I notice the hon Greyling
is walking out rather than crossing the floor. [Laughter.]

I thank the hon member of the ANC for having raised the matter of maths and
the need for our society to really encourage young people to take up
mathematics as a subject of study and also, of course, our teachers to
ensure good academic rigour in the content understanding of the subject and
its teaching. So, we certainly would endorse this view that has emerged and
would say the steps we are taking both to ensure that we have qualified
teachers in schools as well as to expand the schools that focus on
mathematics and science in the country – the Dinaledi Schools – are all
part of supporting this initiative to increase mathematics success in South
Africa.

I would like, very briefly, to say that I did not notice any racism on the
part of a member of the ANC yesterday and I am a little surprised at that
comment, especially when the hon member was interpreted in his follow-up
question as having said the hon Deputy Minister was speaking nonsense. It
might have been a misinterpretation by the interpreter but I thought that
language in itself would have been classed as unparliamentary. But to say
that there are farmers who evict workers, and that the majority of those
farmers who evict farmworkers are of a particular race group in our country
is not to be racist; it is stating what happens in South Africa.

I think we need to be alert to that fact and as members of this House who
have passed legislation which seeks to protect farmworkers, who are the
most vulnerable in our society, whatever party we come from we should seek
to protect those vulnerable people. It doesn’t matter whether we are ANC,
DA, IFP, if there is a farmworker who has been exploited or abused by any
farmer, it is our duty, whatever their colour, to ensure that that
farmworker is protected. That is what we should all be standing up and
saying in this House. [Applause.]

I think on the matter of crime, certainly the SA Police Service should from
time to time be commended from this House. It is our community and the
population and the criminals out there that we should criticise. The police
services are stretched at ensuring they investigate crime and that they
resolve crime and if there is corruption it will be dealt with. But let us
not read the story and then assume that the story is actually true.

One of the things Parliament and its members have to promote is the issue
of the exercise of the due processes of the law. We seem to read the story
and assume guilt before we allow the due processes to be concluded. I think
it’s very important that we absolutely send out a message that we do reject
and stand against corruption and act against it in this House but also that
when there is an accusation a person must be, as the law says, presumed to
be innocent until proven otherwise. So, the assumption of guilt when it is
public officials is something that I do think we should object to.

Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

      COMPLAINT AGAINST CHAIRPERSON OF COMMISSION FOR EMPLOYMENT EQUITY
                            (Member’s Statement)

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to say to the
House that the hon member Dreyer should be aware that the Employment Equity
Act is the law of this House, passed by this House, and that if she reads
it she will realise that it provides that women are a designated group -
all women. The ANC, which is the majority party in this House, has not
changed from this position. I am a member of the ANC, a disciplined and
very loyal one for that matter.

Jimmy Manyi is the Chairperson of the Commission for Employment Equity.
Jimmy Manyi was expressing the views of that commission, which is
completely independent and autonomous. He has a right to express his views
as a South African, for he is allowed by the Constitution to do so. He also
has a right to be a chairperson of the Commission for Employment Equity and
I have absolutely no qualms about that.

However, any member of the ANC knows and understands how policies are
developed in the ANC. We have just returned from the policy conference and
we are now moving to the national conference of the ANC in December. So,
anyone who has a view that he wants to express, who wants the ANC to change
its policy, should please participate in the processes. They can do so in
the branches of the ANC, in the regional conferences of the ANC or they can
approach any ANC member if they want us to change those policies. Members
are also welcome to cross the floor so that in December we allow them to
participate in our conference. The media does not develop policies for the
ANC. [Applause.]

       BRAVERY OF MR ZONKE AND OTHERS ON FIRE TEAMS DURING VELD FIRES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would
like to join the hon member Connie September in commending the
extraordinary bravery of Mr Zonke, who definitely saved his colleagues from
certain death.

We all know that this country has experienced the worst fires that we have
experienced in the past 20-30 years. Just between May and September this
year my department, through the Working on Fire Programme, attended to 240
fires. The impact of the fires on forestry and commercial agricultural
plantations has been estimated as high as 100 000 hectares, with forestry
indicating that 64 000 hectares of commercial forests have been burnt.

Soon after these fires started, Minister Mufamadi, myself, the provincial
representatives and the municipalities of the affected areas visited some
of the worst hit areas. What we saw there was total devastation, really
caused by a situation of very dry weather conditions, where the grass, the
trees and everything was so dry that the intensity was something that had
never been seen before. We visited many of the victims that were affected
to ascertain the damage.

What this House must be aware of is that if it was not for the bravery and
the efforts not only of the Working on Fire firefighters but also of the
local firefighters, the local fire brigades and the owners of properties
that were on fire, the situation would have been much, much worse. Our
firefighters have put their lives at risk and several of them were injured.
Some of them died during this period. What is clear is that we owe them
dearly for the manner in which they risked their lives to save the lives
and property of others and just the professionalism displayed as they were
fighting fires.

People died during this incident. Hectares of grazing land and livestock
were burnt, environmental damage, soil erosion and a whole lot of other
things were caused. Sawmills burnt down, which will have a major impact on
the availability of timber in the country as we move towards construction.

What I would like to do today is to congratulate all of those who were
involved but also, on behalf of the government and my department, to extend
our condolences to those who lost their loved ones and to wish those who
are still in hospital a speedy recovery.
Having just come to the end of Women’s Month, I think it is worth noting
that this programme I am talking about – Working on Fire – with 28% of its
firefighters being women, has the highest proportion of female firefighters
of any known formal fire-fighting capacity in the world. [Applause.] It’s
over three times the number of women, for example, that are in the
structural fire–fighting teams in the USA and we are working towards
increasing this number so that it is in line with our national targets.

I thank you. [Applause.]

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend
moving the following motion:

   That this House calls for a debate as soon as possible on the Domestic
   Violence Act, specifically with regard to the failure of the SAPS to
   properly execute protection orders, which results in further domestic
   violence. The reasons for these failures need to be fully explored and
   proper steps must be taken to identify areas for improvement in the SAPS’
   training and supervision, and the consistent application of the Act
   across all provinces as well as any other possible factors that may lead
   to the improper implementation of the Domestic Violence Act.

               MUSLIM, HINDU AND JEWISH RELIGIOUS CELEBRATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

1) notes that -
         (a)      this weekend sees the beginning of a very auspicious
               period in the Hindu, Muslim and Jewish calendars;


         (b)      Muslims worldwide began the month of Ramadan today upon
               the sighting of the new moon last night;


         (c)      Hindus commence the Purtassi and Pithar Paksh Fast; and


         (d)      members of the Jewish faith observe Rosh Hoshanah;


      2) further notes that it is a period of introspection, discipline and
         abstinence from worldly pleasures; and


      3) wishes all Muslims, Hindus and Jews well over this auspicious
         period.
Agreed to.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS -
                RECOMMENDATIONS FOR APPOINTMENT TO SABC BOARD

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, members, colleagues,
comrades and our guests, during April 2007 the Portfolio Committee on
Communications undertook an oversight visit to the Gauteng province and met
with, amongst others, the SA Broadcasting Corporation Board.

A matter that came out of our engagement with the board was the realisation
that their term of office is coming to an end at the end of the year; hence
the need to have a new board in place from the beginning of 2008. The new
board will be approved for a period not exceeding five years as provided
for in the Broadcasting Act.

We further discussed and agreed with the current board members that they
would have a hand-over plan in place two to three months before the end of
this year. The new chairperson, Comrade Ishmael Vadi, and the Portfolio
Committee on Communications will need to followup on this matter as soon as
possible to ensure a smooth transition at that level.

Amongst the names recommended for the portfolio committee process are six
current members, which is 50% retention for continuity, and six brand new
brooms – to proverbially sweep cleaner than the old. The SABC is a key
strategic asset for any country, especially for a young democracy like
ours.

I wish to thank the South African public for their enthusiastic
participation in the process, and in particular for nominating excellent
candidates for Parliament to choose from. We were not short of options and
we did not have difficulty in putting together a list of skills, expertise,
experience and qualifications for the short-listing.

It was in June this year – just to remind members - that Parliament
referred the nomination process to the portfolio committee to deal with. I
must thank members from all parties, who participated in this process, for
their dedication and commitment throughout this process.

As is the norm in our political life, we did not necessarily agree on
everything, for example, a few names included in the final list. We do,
however, agree that this process was open and transparent, fair and
credible, and that the committee had sufficient, if not absolute, consensus
on the majority of candidates recommended for approval by Parliament.

The President is charged with the responsibility to appoint the 12
nonexecutive members of the SABC following the parliamentary process.
Amongst the names recommended, the President will appoint the chairperson
and the deputy chairperson, in line with the provisions of the Broadcasting
Act.

Let me also point out that after the advertisement was placed in the
national papers in June, and even before the closing date, the committee
was approached for an extension to the closing date by the Freedom of
Expression Institute and the SA Council of Churches. These requests were
granted and the outcome was indeed impressive.

We then received 143 nominations, and after a rigorous process of short-
listing, the portfolio committee agreed to interview 37 candidates. Two
amongst this 37 withdrew their candidacy.

We therefore table the outcome to Parliament for consideration and approval
and wish to thank all the candidates who participated in the interviews,
the print and electronic media for keeping the South African public
informed throughout this process, the committee staff comprising of Ms Rita
Schaafsma, Tyhileka Madubela, John Rossouw and Nwabisa Mbelekane, the
chairperson’s secretary, Nina Pasensie, assistant to the ANC Whippery,
Cathy Grosch, and researcher, Soraya Booley.

Let me finally express my heartfelt appreciation to my comrades and
colleagues in the ANC, as well as hon Dene Smuts, who is the longest
serving member of this committee, Adv Swart of the DA and the hon Sue Vos
of the IFP for their co-operation, support, commitment and dedication
throughout this elaborate process.

To the new chairperson, Comrade Vadi, you are invited to lead an excellent
team across all parties; with some adjustments on the ANC. Hon Randy
Pieterse is the longest serving ANC member of this committee. [Applause.]
You also have the stalwart, Mme Storie Morutoa, who is an excellent person
to have in this committee ... [Applause.] ... the young lion, Comrade Eric
Kholwane, the ever composed Mme Nkuna, the combat-ready Lumka Yengeni...
[Applause.] [Laughter.] ... and the rural scientist, Sam Nxumalo.

I also wish to congratulate Comrade Reuben Mohlaloga and Khotso Khumalo on
their appointments as chair and Whippery respectively. As for me, aluta
continua!

Ms M SMUTS: To the hon Godfrey Oliphant, we bid you a fond farewell. We do
so with a little bit of jealousy since you are now going to be dealing with
a square kilometre array in science and technology.

Chair, we have seen and heard some of South Africa’s best and brightest
during the interviews for the new SABC Board. We like our outgoing
chairman. We would like to thank all the individuals in our organisations
who rose to the crisis and the challenge and who nominated these
candidates, and we thank the candidates also.

The great majority of the candidates put before the House today are such
people – our best and brightest. What is more, we believe that if our ANC
portfolio committee colleagues had had a free hand, all of the nominees
would have been such people. But there is an elephant in the room. This
“olifant” is now leaving the room. But my hon colleagues, there is an
elephant in the room and it is no good pretending that it isn’t.

That elephant is not only Mr Smuts Ngonyama’s Elephant Consortium which
bought itself a sizeable slice of the Telkom pie a few years ago. The
extraordinary Gloria Tomatoe Serobe, who is nominated today, is herself a
driving force in the Elephant Consortium. Now, she no longer has the direct
conflict of interest between Telkom and the SABC on which we questioned her
because the SABC and Sentech, as of a day or two ago, withdrew from the
race for a subscription TV licence. But other conflicts exist around such
issues as “must-carry” rules.

We must point out that Ms Serobe herself, in an elegant and rather detached
interview, made it clear that she didn’t really mind whether we appointed
her or not - she sits on a whole lot of boards. We think that somebody,
some place, did care very much whether she was appointed or not, and that
place is Luthuli House – it’s the only possible explanation.

But the big elephant in the room is the sitting Deputy Chair of the SABC
Board, Ms Christine Qunta. She is the long-standing Africanist associate of
our sitting President – she is not even a member of the ANC as some of my
colleagues had not known. We cannot support her because we have never
supported the racial prism through which she views all criticism –
criticism of the President, criticism of allegations of corruption against
black South Africans covered in the general media and now, upon our
questioning, all criticism of the SABC.

This trend was confirmed - her thinking has not changed - during her two-
hour interview with us when she averred that criticism of the SABC covered
by the so-called commercial media had a racial bias. In addition, she
confirmed, on our questioning, her confidence in the man we are convinced
is the source of much of the trouble at the SABC - the news head, Mr Snuki
Zikalala.

This is a better board, and I hope that the excellent editorial staff at
the SABC, so embattled, will draw some courage. But to include Ms Christine
Qunta in it, denies the crisis at the SABC. It is our fear that the hon
sitting President will now appoint her as the chairperson. By doing so, he
will perpetuate some of the crisis. We therefore oppose this list today.
[Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Deputy Speaker, the IFP will record its objection to the
appointment of this highly contentious and politically biased board for
many reasons. While we could fully support seven candidates in all -
whether they were clearly ANC-aligned or not was irrelevant to the IFP -
given their various fields of expertise, the entire package of 12 put
together by the ANC tells a story of toxic and cynical political
manipulation.

Numerous outstanding candidates who, in a balanced collective, could have
contributed greatly in promoting confidence in the public broadcaster by
ensuring independent journalistic excellence, good governance, integrity
and a total commitment to local talent and local television and radio
production, were rejected outright. The ANC would not allow opposition
parties to negotiate alternatives to their decision in any way whatsoever.

I can tell there was no ubuntu in that committee at all. This was a final
list cast in stone, which obviously descended on the committee from above
and beyond this House – and I see you smiling, Comrade Pahad. There was no
ubuntu in the portfolio committee.

An SABC Board weighted with the right stuff and political muscle was
clearly required by those with power in the ANC to meet the needs of the
forthcoming Polokwane process and the 2009 general elections. It is nothing
short of tragic that candidates worthy of selection, who overwhelmingly
impressed the entire committee during the interview process, were so
ruthlessly ignored.

The public put their confidence in us by submitting the names of more than
140 candidates. Like the Curate’s egg, this board is good in parts and bad
in parts. But in its totality, it may well prove to be a disaster and
clearly time will tell. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the SABC has lurched from crisis to crisis,
ranging from political blacklisting to the PSL broadcasting debacle and now
the dispute with the SA National Editors’ Forum - Sanef. Whilst the public
broadcaster can and should raise legitimate concerns regarding perceived
declining standards of journalism, for the group CEO to label certain
editors as “enemies of the state” is irresponsible and totally
unacceptable. The very real danger of the statement is that it sets up a
justification for those eager to restrict the media.

Regrettably, the very board that should have held the CEO accountable
failed to do so. The question that arises is whether the newly proposed
board will adopt a different approach. Regrettably, many of the existing
board members will be retained, and therefore the ACDP cannot support these
nominations. I thank you.

Dr P W A MULDER: Agb Adjunkspeaker, die VF Plus glo dat die SABC op die
oomblik in ’n baie kritieke stadium is in sy ontwikkeling en dat dit uiters
belangrik is dat dit ’n geloofwaardige raad kry om hom deur hierdie stadium
te loods. Hierdie raad sal byvoorbeeld duideliheid moet gee oor die
praktiese implikasies van die verhouding tussen die organisasie se openbare
funksie en sy kommersiële funksie, waarmee ons nog altyd  worstel om dit te
balanseer.

In die tweede plek glo ons dat die SABC se geloofwaardigheid as
nuusinstelling, veral as openbare instelling, in die gedrang is en dat daar
ál meer kritiek uitgespreek word dat die instelling slegs ’n
propagandaspreekbuis vir die regering word. Hierdie raad sal moet bewys dat
hy dit kan omkeer.

Sedert 1994 was ek elke keer volledig deel van die aanstellingsprosedure.
Dit was ’n opwindende prosedure wat geëindig het met ’n gee-en-neem proses
waar ons dan onderhandel het. Mnr Fritz Kok is byvoorbeeld só in die raad
aangestel as Afrikaanssprekende.

Ek kon egter, vanweë my leiersverantwoordelikhede, nie hierdie keer
volledig deelneem nie, wat my in ’n slegte posisie plaas, want dis nie
billik om gedeeltelik deel te neem nie. ’n Mens moet volledig deelneem en
ek was dus nie volledig daar nie, maar dit lyk my dieselfde proses is
gevolg, waar daar van bo af name deurgegee is. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus believes that the SABC is
presently in a very critical stage of its development and that it is
crucial that it is given a board that has credibility in order to steer it
through this phase. This board should, for instance, give clarity regarding
the practical implications of the relationship between the organisation’s
public and commercial functions, which we have always been battling to
balance.

Secondly, we believe that the credibility of the SABC as a news
institution, especially as a public broadcaster, is at stake and that more
and more criticism is being levelled at the institution as merely being a
propaganda mouthpiece for the government. This board will have to
demonstrate that they can turn this around.

Since 1994, I have been part of the appointment procedure in its entirety
every time. It was an exciting procedure which ended in a give and take
process during which we then negotiated. Mr Fritz Kok, for example, was
appointed to the board in this manner as an Afrikaans-speaking member.

However, because of my responsibilities as a leader, I could not fully
participate this time, and this has placed me in a poor position as it is
not fair to be partly involved. One should participate fully and I was
unable to be fully involved, but it seems to me that the same process was
followed, where names were handed down from above.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Dr P W A MULDER: Dis vir die VF Plus uiteindelik onaanvaarbaar en ons gaan
ook teen hierdie ding stem. [Tyd verstreke.] [Ultimately, this is
unacceptable to the FF Plus and we will accordingly vote against it.[Time
expired.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: The MF takes this opportunity to wish all the nominated
candidates well in the posts they have been granted. May you serve in the
corporation with composure and with our South African principles and
values, as enshrined in our national Constitution.

It appears that the appointments to these posts has been conducted freely
and fairly by the department. We are especially pleased to see the balance
in the gender and racial divide being exemplified in these nominations. We
have confidence in the department’s apt and efficient selection of the
candidates. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, the previous political dispensation’s
propaganda and misinformation helped shape the collective intelligence of
the nation of that era which contributed to much racial hatred and
violence. We have a new political dispensation, and it will be the grossest
injustice if no lessons have been learned from the past, and the SABC
allows itself to become a political tool of any government.

We cannot judge the performance of the new board before they have actually
engaged in the steering of the public broadcasting corporation. They are
all very qualified individuals who will bring to the SABC the skills and
management prowess required for a developmental state, yet being keenly
aware of the global interest of this country.

The FD therefore congratulates those members who were nominated to serve on
the next SABC Board. We will support the list. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That Ms N Bulbulia, Ms A Gilwald, Mr D K Golding, Mr B
Khumalo, Ms F Lagadien, Mr A Mbeki, Ms K Mkhonza, Ms C Qunta, Ms G T
Serobe, Adv P Tlakula, Mr A Trikamjee and Mr B P Vundla be recommended for
appointment as non-executive members of the SABC Board.

Division demanded.


The House divided:


   AYES - 184: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Asiya, S E; Balfour, B
   M N; Baloyi, M R; Beukman, F; Bloem, D V; Botha, N G W; Carrim, Y I;
   Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chohan, F ; Combrinck, J J; Cronin,
   J P; Dambuza, B N; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M;
   Doidge, G Q M; Fihla, N B; Gaum, A H; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N;
   Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M;
   Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A ; Hendricks, L B;
   Hlangwana, N; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B;
   Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P;
   Kholwane, S E; Khunou, N P; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z;
   Lekgetho, G; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Luthuli, A N; Maake, J
   J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Maduma, L D;
   Madumise, M M; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S;
   Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K;
   Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile,
   B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela,
   M L; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N
   D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, I S; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B
   M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S;
   Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J;
   Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Moloto, K A; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M;
   Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I;
   Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N;
   Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndzanga, R A; Nefolovhodwe, P J;
   Nel, A C; Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E;
   Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W;
   Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z;
   Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L
   P; Nxumalo, M D; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A
   G H; Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P;
   Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S ; Ramgobin, M;
   Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M; Schippers, J; Schoeman, E
   A; Seadimo, M D; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J
   B; Siboza, S ; Skhosana, W M; Smith, V G; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sotyu,
   M M; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P;
   Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Xolo,
   E T; Yengeni, L E; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 40: Blanché, J P I; Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M; Chang, E S; Cupido,
   H B ; Davidson, I O; Dreyer, A M; Gibson, D H M; Groenewald, P J; Julies,
   I F; Kalyan, S V; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Mars, I; Masango,
   S J; Minnie, K J ; Morgan, G R; Mpontshane, A M; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W
   A; Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A H; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C;
   Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Sibuyana, M W; Singh, N; Skosana, M
   B; Smuts, M; Swart, S N; Trent, E W; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Dyk, S M;
   Vos, S C; Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G.


   ABSTAIN - 2: Fubbs, J L; Hogan, B A.

Question accordingly agreed to.

                     ASTRONOMY GEOGRAPHIC ADVANTAGE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members,
the purpose of the Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill is to provide for
the preservation and protection of areas within the Republic that are
uniquely suited for optical and
radio-astronomy.

The objects of the AGA Bill are to provide measures to advance astronomy
and related scientific endeavours in the Republic, develop the skills,
capabilities and expertise of those engaged in astronomy and related
scientific endeavours in Southern Africa, identify and protect areas in
which astronomy projects of national strategic importance can be
undertaken, provide a framework for the establishment of a national system
of astronomy advantage areas in the Republic, ensure that the geographic
areas in the Republic which are highly suitable for astronomy and related
scientific endeavours due to, for example, high atmospheric transparency,
low levels of flight pollution, low population density or minimal radio
frequency interference, are protected, preserved and properly maintained,
regulate activities which cause or could cause light pollution or radio
frequency interference or interfere in any other way with astronomy and
related scientific endeavours in those areas, provide for the declaration
and management of astronomy advantage areas and enable the Minister to
participate in efforts to preserve the astronomy advantage of Southern
Africa and co-ordinate astronomy within this area.

Towards the end of 2005, the Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill was
approved for consultation by Cabinet. Subsequent to this approval,
extensive consultations were conducted with governments departments, public
sector entities, national operators including role-players in
telecommunications and broadcasting and other identified key entities.

The overall consultation process included meetings with municipalities and
communities that are going to be directly impacted by the AGA Bill. To
ensure continuation of consultations with a wide array of interested
parties, my department has established a stakeholder forum and a Regulation
Advisory Committee.

The following are some of the benefits that could be derived through the
implementation of such a Bill: Firstly, to protect large-scale global
investments already made in astronomy; secondly, to preserve an environment
for a global astronomy hub that will continue to attract international
investments; and thirdly, to provide a competitive advantage for South
Africa to become the preferred host of the full Square Kilometre Array.

Indirectly, the declaration of astronomy advantage areas, which will
preserve suitable astronomy observation sites, will have an impact on the
following: The development of the human capital in astronomy and related
areas in science, technology, engineering and innovation; and the laying
out of the relevant infrastructure nationally with concentrated efforts in
the Northern Cape.

Finally, it is worth noting that the astronomy facilities are best located
in very low population density areas to minimise their impact on South
Africans and to maintain low interference to the telescopes by human
activities.

Southern Africa has made significant strides in participating meaningfully
in large-scale astronomy projects. These include the South African Large
Telescope in Sutherland, the High Energy Stereoscopic System in Namibia and
the current initiatives to host the Square Kilometre Array.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to Deputy
Minister Derek Hanekom, the portfolio committee that is led by the outgoing
chairperson hon N Ngcobo, Director-General Dr Mjwara, the management team
and the staff of the department for working as a collective in the drafting
and consultative process of this Bill. I now commend the Astronomy
Geographic Advantage Bill to the House and request approval thereof. I
thank you.

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers and
hon members of the House, please allow me to present to this hon House a
piece of legislation for adoption as an Act of Parliament by this House.
This piece of legislation is known as the Astronomy Geographic Advantage
Bill. It is about the construction and conceptualisation of one of the
largest and most sensitive radio telescope ever conceived in this world
before, known as the Square Kilometre Array telescope.

SKA stands for Square Kilometre Array and the name is derived from the
design concept of this fascinating radio telescope in that the telescope is
intended to have a collecting area of about one square kilometre for radio
wave signals from outer space.

Array in particular refers to an array of radio wave collecting dishes,
each of which will have a diameter of about 10 to 15 metres. In total the
joint receiving areas of collecting dishes and panels will add up to about
1 million square metres. That is because there will be a core area which
will be about a square kilometre and a central geographic advantage area,
which will be about 50 kilometres, and the rest which will be the co-
ordinated area which is going to be about 150 kilometres in diameter. The
rest will be scattered around the region, especially in the neighbouring
states and the African region.

The Square Kilometre Array plans to operate at frequencies of between 0,1
and 25 gigahertz - those are bandwidths within which it can operate. But is
it also foreseen that at a later stage the band will be widened to between
0,06 and 35 GHz. This will make it 50 times more sensitive than the
currently used instrument.

The construction costs of these projects are estimated at €1,5 billion or
R12 billion in local currency. The investment will come from partners
around the globe and these teams are already working on studies to trade-
off the costs against the performance of this instrument.

The SKA will be able to create images of distant radio sources using a
special method known as Aperture Synthesis. This is a method which is used
to add waves, either to result in new bigger waves or lesser waves, and
enables scientists to see how other objects have interfered with radio
waves that come from outer space.

Construction is scheduled to begin in 2010 with initial observations
expected by 2015, while by 2020 the instrument is expected to be fully
operational.

South Africa and Australia have been short-listed by the world community of
nations with particular interest in this technology, whilst China and
Argentina have been dropped from the list of potential bidders for this
radio telescope. If built in South Africa the core of this SKA will be
situated in the Karoo region of the Northern Cape Province. Outer stations
will fan out from the core advantage areas in a spiral pattern with an
array of proposed remote stations in several other African countries and
neighbouring states, as I have just pointed out.

On human resource development, the SKA will be a highly flexible instrument
designed to address a wide range of fundamental questions with regard to
scarce skills in the field, such as Astrophysics, Fundamental Physics,
Cosmology, Astrobiology, Particle Astrophysics, etc. A number of key
projects will also emerge as spin-offs of this SKA project, as well as the
development of previously unthought of talents from amongst our children.

The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, through the instrument
of public hearings, was able to narrow the gap for minor misunderstandings
between the Department of Science and Technology and the affected
stakeholders such as Telkom, Eskom, Transnet, the National Association of
Broadcasters, Icasa, the Department of Communications, the Northern Cape
Province, etc.

In particular, Transnet was concerned that their rail communication network
systems would be greatly affected in the designated geographic areas, where
they may either be expected to cease their services and operations or
upgrade them at high costs to meet the requirements of the Bill.
On the other hand, the National Association of Broadcasters was concerned
that the Bill sought to challenge the constitutional mandate of Icasa if it
gave the Minister of Science and Technology sole control of radio
frequencies in the designated geographic advantage areas and felt that such
authority by the Minister of Science and Technology would greatly affect
their broadcasting operations.

Through the very useful input from the Icasa delegation, we were able to
close all gaps of such doubts and concerns. Furthermore, through
constructive advice from the portfolio committee, the Department of Science
and Technology was able to establish an informal forum for interaction and
negotiation with all the affected stakeholders in order to narrow the gap
between them. This worked very well and the portfolio committee, together
with the Department of Science and Technology, were able to satisfy the
stakeholders involved to buy into our understanding as to both the local
and international value of the Bill.

At this juncture it is unnecessary for me to add that the SKA telescope is
expected to unravel the mysteries of the origins and age of our universe.
It will be able to answer fundamental questions about the laws of nature as
based on currently known laws of physics. The study by astronomers of dark
energy and dark matter using radio waves reveals that our universe was in a
gaseous form before the formation of stars and galaxies.
The mere fact that the electromagnetic radiation or, simply put, light rays
from this period of dark travelled at a fixed speed of 1,1 billion
kilometres per hour should be able to make it possible for us to observe
today very distant objects such as they were in that distant past.

The SKA telescope is the only tool conceived so far by means which, through
the intensive study of the magnetic effect on radio waves passing through
distant magnetic regions of the outer reaches of our universe, we will be
able to look back in time to the early stages of evolution of the universe.


It will indeed mark a radical breakthrough in our understanding of modern
science and the extent to which our human mind can be overstretched to
bring the distant past of the early days of the Big Bang, which led to the
formation of our universe many billions of years ago, to our present day
life.

We trust that this hon House will therefore support this Bill in line with
the desires of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Speaker, legislation to provide for the
preservation and protection of areas within the Republic that are uniquely
situated for radio and optical astronomy instruments, makes one proud of
South Africans and their achievements in the exploration of the universe.
By putting this Bill on the Statute Book, who knows how many South Africans
like Mark Shuttleworth, we will inspire to open up new science and
technology frontiers.

Whilst considering sites earmarked for these instruments, the committee had
to take note that the instruments could sterilise the economic growth of
the surrounding communities and telecommunication service providers.
Therefore, we spent much time interviewing all the role-players operating
in designated areas to ensure that whilst adhering to the requirements of
the astronomers, we will allow the locals not only to benefit from their
presence, but at the same time ensure that local business and the community
are not detrimentally affected by silencing the existing communication
installations.

The Bill puts Africa’s remote areas on the world map and brings South
Africans into the arena of the modern technology used in astronomy. It also
proves our point, that we do not need machine guns to lead the nation to a
better future. By opening up opportunities in science and technology, you
inspire them to take up their rightful place in the midst of developed
nations.

We should also congratulate our staff, who negotiated with the various role-
players to assist us to identify areas where the astronomy instruments can
be placed. These often weigh hundreds of tons. They did a sterling job in
doing the groundwork to bring role-players to the table, so that Africa can
move beyond the era of boasting, only to have Hartebeeshoek and the South
African Large Telescope-SALT.

They even steered the politicians away from naming the sites after
politicians. One of the observation sites will be called Meerkat.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

Prof E S CHANG: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, I am
delivering this speech on behalf of my colleague, John Bhengu. To ensure
South Africa remains ahead of worldwide scientific and technological
developments, the IFP has always encouraged international co-operation in
all matters relating to research and development.

South Africans should promote high technology investment in space science
to ensure that local researchers and students are able to participate at
the cutting edge of international astronomy.

The IFP wishes to commend all the stakeholders such as Telkom, Transnet,
Eskom and Vodacom who made presentations to the committee. Indeed, without
their input, the Bill would not have been the good product that we trust it
is. I happily support the Bill. Thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP welcomes and supports the
Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill before the House today. South Africa
has a rich history of having played an important role in international
astronomy projects. Geographically, our country is well situated and highly
suitable for astronomy and related scientific endeavours, due to high
atmospheric transparency, lower levels of light pollution and minimal radio
frequency interference.

Astronomy projects must be seen as of national strategic importance and be
protected accordingly, and at the same time be accessible to public
participation and managed as a tourist attraction. In doing so, interest in
astrology should be stimulated among the youth and adult nation.

One of the objects of this Bill would be to develop skills, capacity and
build the expertise among those involved in astronomy and related
scientific endeavours in Southern Africa. The ACDP will support the Bill.
Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, as a nation we need to educate
ourselves on the valuable link between astronomy, science and human life.
Astronomy, which may be defined as the study of the universe beyond the
earth’s atmosphere, needs to be endorsed as a field of study in our country
that appears to be a perfect platform for investigation.

South Africa is said to have 65 astronomers, of whom only six are blacks.
It would also be interesting to note how many are female. The lack of black
astronomers has been associated with the limited supply of science
educators. The MF hopes that the highlighting of astronomy in October and
this Bill will encourage people to pursue careers in this field.

The MF is extremely proud that South Africa has been short-listed to host
one of the world’s biggest radio telescopes ever, the Square Kilometre
Array. This will pave the way for the great advancement of astronomy and
will encourage many research initiatives from abroad to visit our country.

Historically, South Africa has had a great influence on mapping the stars
of the southern hemisphere. The study of astronomy in South Africa is
growing as an interest. The Bill appears to be the instrument to provide
for efficient management and research in this sector. The MF supports the
Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, it remains for me to
thank the members who participated in the debate, as well as the portfolio
committee in the run up to the presentation before this House, in the work
they did with all role-players, all interested parties that came to the
hearings and contacted us through other means to express their interest in
what is being presented. The portfolio committee did a sterling job work
and I wish to thank them very much for that. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                    HUMAN SCIENCES RESEARCH COUNCIL BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon members, by agreement, there
will not be a debate on this Bill. However, some parties have requested an
opportunity to make declarations of vote. I now give them the opportunity
to do so for up to two minutes each. Members are requested to approach the
waiting benches if they wish to make a declaration of vote.

Declarations of vote:

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Hon Chair, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, and hon
members, please allow me again to present to this hon House another piece
of legislation, known as the Human Sciences Research Council Bill. The aim
of the Bill is to ensure continuity of the Human Sciences Research Council
in the field of research on human sciences, in order to improve the
understanding of social conditions and the process of social change in the
post-1994 era in our country.

The Bill further seeks to ensure the highest quality of human science
research in South Africa and elsewhere in Africa and the rest of the world
through networks and joint programmes of research on pressing social issues
relevant to human welfare and prosperity. These social issues relate to
pressing challenges of our time such as HIV/Aids, poverty and unemployment,
skills shortages, social violence, housing etc.

The Bill was not at all contentious, so much so that we only had one
submission for a point of note, and this came from the National House of
Traditional Leaders. In their submission, they only highlighted the need
for proper consultation whenever the HSRC researchers do research in their
areas of jurisdiction so that unnecessary social tensions do not develop as
a consequence of such research mandates.

So, on behalf of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, I
therefore appeal to this hon House again for its support of the Human
Sciences Research Council Bill. I thank you.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Chairman, all around the globe, the world’s leading
democracies have proved that where the leaders turned to scientifically
researched solutions instead of ideology to guide their policy decisions,
they achieved much greater success in creating sustainable development,
wealth and, on top of it, boosted the economy of the region. To prove this
statement, one only has to refer to regions such as Scandinavia, Europe,
North America and South Africa where, since its inception, the HSRC has
played a major role in being the politicians’ adviser on many terrains of
human endeavour.

It is for this reason that the DA supports the objectives of the Bill. It
empowers our scientific community to play a role in reporting on the
challenges of the region. The nations from the regions which I have named
have established science councils, promoted research and trained their
people to master science and technology. They have proved themselves to be
the role models of democracy and development around the world.

The Bill opens doors for the HSRC to research four looming threats to our
young democracy. The first issue is global warming and how it will affect
Africa. A dedicated unit should be established within the HSRC to
continuously advise Parliament and the government on this matter. The
second issue is poverty, and how and where we should focus our efforts to
eradicate it. The last time this was done was in 1928, when the Dutch
Reformed Church, through the Carnegie Commission, researched ways to end
poverty in South Africa. That led to the establishment of the welfare
department and many nongovernmental organisations. The third area of focus
is food production and what we must do to remain self-sustainable in the
era of climate change that lies ahead. The fourth issue is how Africa can
stop the scourge of Aids and other diseases. In order to do all this, South
Africa will require many more graduate researchers to assist the government
to develop workable policies to address the challenges which I mentioned.

Ek wil vir die RGN sê hulle moenie wag op instruksies voordat hulle
voortgaan met die ontwikkeling van Afrika nie. Hierdie wetsontwerp is hulle
mandaat om dit te doen. Hierdie wetsontwerp skep ’n beter toekoms, nie net
vir Suider-Afrika nie, maar vir die héle Afrika. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I want to say to the HSRC that they should not wait for instructions
before they continue with the development of Africa. This Bill is their
mandate to do that. This Bill creates a better future, not only for
Southern Africa, but for the whole of Africa. I thank you.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I’ve listened carefully to the previous
speakers. I agree with most of what has been said. The Human Sciences
Research Council is indeed one of the foundation stones of South Africa. If
one thinks of the wonderful research they conducted in the past, and can
still do in future, then one can think of the challenges they may have, not
only on global warming and poverty issues, as the previous speaker
mentioned, but also other problems that confront our country like
migration, poverty, HIV/Aids and others. Therefore, we also
enthusiastically support this Bill. Thank you.
There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

      MIGRANT WORKERS, PEOPLE TRAFFICKING, XENOPHOBIA AND HUMAN RIGHTS

                 (Debate on Inter-Parliamentary Union topic)

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Chairperson, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, in 1994 the
international community stood in awe and marvelled at our country’s
transition from apartheid to a democratic order. It marvelled at our
ability to reconcile. But, above all these, it marvelled at our
affirmation, the ANC-led government’s affirmation, that human rights were
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated.

This affirmation rooted in the Freedom Charter remains our commitment. We
go further and declare that human rights remain one of the foundations for
collective security and wellbeing, and that the promotion and protection of
the full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all are
essential to advance development, peace and security.

However, every day people throughout the world face enormous obstacles to
realising their human rights. While legal standards have been agreed that
define the rights of individuals and the responsibilities of governments,
such a setting of standards, including our own, has not automatically led
to the realisation of these rights. Major impediments to the full enjoyment
of human rights for all, as the Freedom Charter demands, remain.

One of these impediments is xenophobia. And, in searching for the
historical roots of xenophobia in our country, with Mark Switch – the
researcher of the ANC here - I ask who is here to challenge the assumption
that apartheid, social engineering and indoctrination entrenched a system
in which every person, black or white, South African or foreigner, was
ghettoed and assigned an inflexible ethnic or racial label or identity.
Groups were socially isolated and assigned exclusive rights to a
geographically bound territory, with only limited and highly regulated
access to other areas.

As the bearer of the torch for the respect for human rights and human
dignity we in the ANC fought relentlessly to advance this cause, proclaimed
by the Freedom Charter, that all national groups shall be protected by law
against insults to their race and national pride, the preaching and
practice of national, race or colour discrimination and contempt shall be a
punishable crime.

Consistent with the Freedom Charter, the preamble of the South African
Constitution states: “South Africa belongs to all who live in it.” It is
imperative for us to note that there is no reference to place of birth or
citizenship status. At the core of the South African democratic
dispensation, lie the values of human dignity, the achievement of equality
and the advancement of human rights and freedoms.

As an advocate of universal human rights and Pan-Africanism, the ANC
advocates regional integration, social and economic, for the success of
Nepad and the African Renaissance. The ANC believes that national
development and skills in-migration are compatible. The growth and
development of South Africa is interdependent on an integrated continent.
Against this backdrop, whilst we concede that no country can claim to be
free from racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, there is a particular despair with the rising levels of
xenophobia evident in our own country.

We applaud the IPU initiative to get the parliaments of the world to
aggressively address and fight xenophobic tendencies. As South African
parliamentarians we are aware of the particular role and responsibility
that our democratic Parliament, as a guiding institution, has had and still
has in our fight against racism, racial discrimination and related
intolerance.

Our Parliament adopts laws, approves the national Budget and oversees the
Executive branch of government. I believe we as members of this guiding
institution have a personal responsibility to use our influence on public
opinion to promote the values of diversity, tolerance and co-existence.

It was in pursuit of these values that we as South Africans hosted the
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance, in 2001. Today, it is my hope that the IPU will not
only encourage national parliaments to review and evaluate progress in
relation to the objectives of the world conference but will also urge them
to provide special mechanisms to monitor and ensure effective
implementation of programmes to fight xenophobia.

Since the IPU already has a pledge, in pursuance of the world conference
recommendations, it has to go forward to ensure the implementation of and
adherence to relevant international treaties, in particular the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Convention Relating
to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol.

Earlier on I made the observation that no country can claim to be free from
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. I say it
again, because our own country is not free from these antihuman rights
tendencies. But, I take solace that our Parliament, our government, is
determined to fight these tendencies. Why else would President Mbeki in
2000 have requested the SA Human Rights Commission to hold a National
Conference on Racism?

One of the outcomes of this conference that was most relevant to non-
nationals affirmed South Africa’s commitment to providing sanctuary to
refugees and asylum seekers and highlighted that their presence in our
country had led to unacceptable levels of xenophobia in our communities.
The role of public institutions like the police and the Department of Home
Affairs was identified as key in combating xenophobia.

Why else would our Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs,
together with the SA Human Rights Commission, have held open hearings on
xenophobia in November 2004? It is because we as Parliament will not
tolerate the intolerance of xenophobia.

Among the several recommendations that emerged in these hearings was that
political leaders should take a principled position by unequivocally
denouncing xenophobia, and that the allocation of resources for measures to
combat xenophobia should be made and that newly arrived asylum seekers
should be supported and integrated by assisting them to learn local
languages, cultural practices and ways of life.

These recommendations were made in the face of the aberrations of members
of our own police service and officials of the Department of Home Affairs
and security officers at the Lindela Repatriation Centre, whose actions of
arbitrary arrests, detention of foreigners, bribery, corruption,
unacceptable delays in processing applications and whatever else
cumulatively violated and violate the human rights principle enshrined in
our Constitution. These we are committed to correct.

However, the correction needs the participation of civil society as
partners. This Parliament can take heart with the knowledge and
participation of the hon Minister of Home Affairs at this very hearing who
is on record as saying:

   The scourge of xenophobia needs to be condemned because it is based on
   prejudice, is frequently violent and most of the time, racist – there is
   no way that as the South African government and as a nation we can
   tolerate or justify xenophobia.

Xenophobic behaviour does tremendous harm and injustice to the believers of
ubuntu. It militates against the history of the ANC, which sought the
liberation of our people right up to the Limpopo. It further does injustice
to our Constitution, which is our supreme law and is the manifestation of a
kind of morality and spirituality, which for me is more profound than any
dogma or religiosity.

Xenophobic behaviour, sometimes accompanied by brutality, both negates the
moral correctness of our cause and threatens to be an instrument that will
negate our human rights culture.

In conclusion, for as long as we - I repeat ‘we’ including me - allow the
purveyors of xenophobia to stalk our streets, we indeed become conspirators
in allowing hatred and fear of foreigners and strangers or their culture,
their politics and /or their religion to grow. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, this IPU topic certainly covers a lot of
ground – migrant workers, people trafficking, xenophobia and human rights –
some of which has been covered by the previous speaker.

Today I would like to focus on a growing scourge in Southern Africa, namely
trafficking in people, chiefly women and children. There is widespread
evidence that trafficking is on the increase in our subcontinent. The
International Organisation for Immigration contends that there is one long
grass pathway between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Cape Town, with
minimal border control. The main destination of victims of trafficking from
sub-Saharan Africa, is South Africa.

At the 49th session of the UN Commission on the Status of Women, South
Africa co-sponsored a resolution calling on governments to take action to
address factors that encourage trafficking for prostitution and other forms
of commercialised sex, and to take steps to criminalise trafficking in
persons. Our delegation at that session insisted that reference should also
be made to Cedaw and other key international instruments, as well as
trafficking’s contributory factors, such as poverty and unemployment.

The final text of the resolution also addressed gender inequality as well
as external factors that encourage trafficking for prostitution and other
forms of commercialised sex, and called for steps to criminalise
trafficking in women. However, in spite of this, we have not yet got our
own house in order.

In spite of the fact that the UN Protocol to Prevent Trafficking in Persons
is in force in South Africa, and has been for some time, as I stand here,
we do not have any legislation in operation which specifically outlaws
trafficking in persons, especially women and girl children, for the
purposes of sexual or any other form of exploitation. Some progress has
been made, but it has all been very slow.

The SA Police Service has, for years, been calling for a specific law to
outlaw trafficking. Early last year, Saps’ Sexual Offences and Child
Protection Units, as well as specialists in sexual offences from the
National Prosecution Authority, briefed Parliament. Both deplored the fact
that South Africa has no specific legislation outlawing trafficking in
persons in spite of years of requests from these authorities.

The NPA points out that it is extremely difficult to prosecute successfully
for trafficking in the current legal environment. Saps also makes the point
that sexual exploitation appears to be the main form of trafficking in
South Africa at this point in time, though this may change.

For the past four years, the DA has been campaigning in Parliament for
legislation to be passed outlawing the trafficking of women and children
for the purposes of sexual exploitation. In April 2003 we submitted a
private member’s Bill to amend the Child Care Act to render trafficking in
children a criminal offence. This was approved by the Standing Committee on
Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions and forwarded
to the Departments of Justice and Social Development for implementation.

The new Children’s Act now does contain a comprehensive provision outlawing
trafficking in children. However, although the Act was passed in 2005,
these sections have still not been implemented.

When the Sexual Offences Bill was before the Justice committee in 2003, the
DA proposed, and it was agreed, that a provision be included outlawing
trafficking in women and children for the purposes of sexual exploitation.
This has been included in the revised Bill, which was eventually passed by
this House in May this year.

It was then referred to the NCOP, and I understand that the NCOP received
its first briefing on this legislation by the Justice department only this
week. The reason for this delay is entirely unclear.

Parliament’s approach to the legislation outlawing trafficking has thus
been somewhat piecemeal and very slow. The DA believes it is important to
get the prohibition of trafficking contained in the Sexual Offences Bill
and the Children’s Act implemented in order to give the police that extra
weapon to fight the scourge.

Ideally, antitrafficking legislation should cover the full gamut of
trafficking for domestic work, other forms of labour, forced marriages,
adoptions, organ sales and so on. The SA Law Commission is working on
comprehensive legislation that we would all like to see, but thus far the
commission has only published a discussion paper on trafficking in persons,
for comment. It may be years before we have draft legislation covering the
full spectrum of offences.

In the meantime, because sexual exploitation of women and children is the
main form of trafficking in South Africa at this point, according to the
police, we should push ahead and implement the interim provisions contained
in the Children’s Act and the Sexual Offences Bill. We, in the DA, appeal
to government to get a move on with this. Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, the ominous challenge of rapidly
increasing global migration, xenophobia, people trafficking and human
rights is affecting countries around the world, and not only South Africa.
The issue we are debating is, therefore, an international issue.

In the European Union, one issue has been about increasing migrant labour
to do work which citizens prefer not to do. Thus, the European Union has
had to give attention to integration as well as assimilation.

South Africa’s most pressing migration concern is the large number of
foreigners in search of the very thing that is already scarce in our
country, namely work. It is estimated that around 3,5 million Zimbabweans
are currently in South Africa. Some observers say there are more than 10
million foreigners in our country.

The presence of this large number of foreigners has various negative
implications – social, economic and criminal. We have seen local
communities become violent against foreigners. Many ordinary people think
foreigners are hijacking their jobs, exacerbating our high crime rate and
putting pressure on our Public Service.

The challenge, therefore, is: How do we prevent massive migration into
South Africa? One answer is for South Africa to help solve the problems
that migrants experience in their countries of origin. It is unrealistic to
expect foreigners to return to their countries to face the very problems
that drove them out.

South Africa and the world, therefore, urgently need a universal strategy
to deal with migration, in terms of which the principles of ubuntu and self-
protection are balanced and where the international community plays a more
decisive role in solving the problems in those countries where the main
problems are.

Next year, as we know, the 118th International Parliamentary Union meeting
will be held in Cape Town. It is going to be a very historic moment, in
April next year, when more than a hundred parliaments of the world will
come to Cape Town, with around 1 500 parliamentarians from all over the
world.

We, South Africans, should be able to choose who comes to South Africa,
what they do whilst they are here and how long they are to stay. Our
immigration law lays a good foundation for this ideal. The real problem,
however, is in relation to those who come here illegally and those who
traffic foreigners in.

The point is that, next year, when the International Parliamentary Union
sits in Cape Town, this problem should be addressed by all the parliaments
in the world. We should address the problem of migrant workers, of people
who are hungry, people seeking work, people trafficking, the problems that
Mrs Camerer alluded to – xenophobia, human rights and ubuntu. It will be
the ideal moment next year, when all the parliaments of the world are here
in South Africa, to address these issues and identify and devise a proper
strategy.

In conclusion, let us respect the human rights of all, but let us firstly
protect our own people. Thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, this year marks the abolition of slavery 200
years ago. South Africans seem to be ignorant of this.

Human trafficking, which is modern-day slavery, thrives because of
ignorance and profitability. Many of us don’t know the dangers of this
practice. Studies have shown that children are kidnapped, handed over or
sold into prostitution, or are working as slaves. Those who are lucky
enough to escape are often too ashamed to return home, so the reality of
trafficking rarely reaches us.

Research also indicates that traffickers today face a low risk of arrest
and prosecution. They can become well-organised into armed syndicates that
bribe their way past law enforcement, immigration and judicial officials.
This practice must be halted now, and for this we also need adequate
funding to implement the necessary legislation.

In our preparations for the 2010 Soccer World Cup event, we must put
measures in place to prevent all forms of human trafficking. South Africa
cannot let this evil practice flourish; we must prepare our Police Service
to prevent it. Thank you.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, Deputy Ministers, hon members, distinguished
guests, through the International Labour Organization, international
communities have agreed to entrench in law basic standards to protect
migrant workers. Accordingly, the ILO conventions on migrant workers have
become an international instrument to set minimum standard of treatment for
migrant workers’ rights.

Furthermore, through the adoption of the 1990 International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families, there has been an expanding trend in respect of the extension of
migration and of human rights principles in general. In addition, through
the appointment of the UN Special Rapporteur on human rights in respect of
migration in general, there has been a more specific focus on the
application of human rights to migrant workers.

Without a doubt, as governments continue to grapple with the new
realisation of their multi-ethnic societies, there has been a marked
increase in discrimination and violence against migrants by extremist
groups in many parts of the world. These kinds of discrimination and
violence against migration in general and migrant workers in particular,
find expression in a propensity for certain predominantly western societies
to discriminate against people, based on religion, race, sex, economic
situation and xenophobia.

This is at variance with the basic tenets of human rights and respect for
human dignity. In contrast to this propensity to discriminate against
people on the basis of religion, race or economic status, human rights
recognise that certain principles are true and valid for all people in all
societies under all conditions of economic, political, ethnic and cultural
life.

This is the position that the ANC has always advocated and continues to
espouse, not only within South Africa but also in its engagement within
Africa and in the world. This would inevitably be the same kind of approach
that the ANC will adopt when engaging at all international forums like the
IPU.

The post-apartheid years have seen a resurgence in pan-African and regional
initiatives with the aim of encouraging African-led regional and
continental development through co-operation and integration. South Africa
has played a leading role in the development of Nepad, perhaps illustrating
South Africa’s new commitment to continental and regional organisations and
development since 1994. The country hosted the first Pan-African Parliament
under the aegis of the AU in September 2004.

South Africa is also a member of SADC. SADC aims to promote regional
development through regional co-operation and integration. A number of
initiatives and protocols have been drawn up to promote this aim, some with
implications for migration and migration policy. Any discussion of
migration to and from South Africa, as well as its legislation and
policies, needs to be located within the context of South Africa’s
commitment to the region and the continent.

Currently, South Africa’s situation exemplifies the ILO’s 2004 observations
about the significance of intra-regional labour movement in the new global
economy. South Africa has been a migrant-receiving country for decades. The
majority of those migrants were and are from neighbouring countries within
the southern African region. Until 1994 South Africa was also a destination
for white immigrants from Europe.

The most significant change in the last twenty years has been the virtual
cessation of immigration from Europe and a dramatic increase in the number
of skilled immigrants leaving South Africa for those destinations.  South
Africa continues to receive migrants from neighbouring countries, but in
greater numbers. The migrant stream has also become far more diverse. For
example, South Africa has begun to receive immigrants from developing
countries further afield, including the rest of the continent. And, as we
know, we are currently seeing this within the Asian region in particular,
where one finds lots of people coming from the East.
Since 1994, there has seemingly been a hardening in policy attitudes
towards immigration and migration globally – it is not only a problem in
South Africa but a global problem - or a rise in xenophobia.  These
changing attitudes are likely to be reflected in changes in a political
dispensation, where the majority of people in the world can now have
expectations of their government and their state, as well as changes in
patterns of migration, which may be troubling for the government, given its
commitment to the region and the continent. African migrants appear to be
most affected by these changing attitudes, as other comrades and members
have mentioned around the issue of xenophobia. These are tendencies that
you find globally; it is not only a South African problem.

South Africa provides an extremely pertinent case study of the challenges
that face national governments which are burdened with the legacy of an
immigration system that was racially exclusive, ignored its location in
Africa and exemplified all the worst features of temporary labour
migration. At the same time, the government is faced with the legacy of
apartheid on its own population and developing a policy which reflects its
own commitment to the continent and the region.

The challenges are many and complex. For example, South Africa is allowing
unskilled workers into the country, where domestic unemployment is at about
30-40%. Why should one sector - the mining sector - enjoy exclusive access
to foreign migration and be allowed to determine how many migrants it will
employ and from where? Should such a privilege be denied to other
employees? Will greater legal access to the South African labour market
dampen irregular migration? What should the consequences be of greater
freedom of access of migrants to the South African labour market? How can
departure of skilled immigrants, or the brain-drain, be reduced and its
impact ameliorated? How, to sum up, does a country receiving a large number
of unwanted migrants at the bottom end of the labour market and exporting a
large number of skilled migrants at the top end of the market through a
sizeable brain-drain, turn migration into a win-win situation?

As we all know, the current situation is that most of our skilled South
Africans are being deliberately recruited by developed countries, because
they are faced with the challenge of their own communities not being able
to provide for their economies. Therefore, South Africa and the continent
find themselves at the receiving end, because when these developed
countries recruit the skills that they take from the continent, they are
not ploughing back anything or helping these countries that have produced
doctors or engineers. These developed countries are unable to do that.

Therefore, I think it is a challenge that, as we move forward, we need to
look at what procedures we need to put in place to begin to get those who
are recruiting our skills out of the continent to plough something back,
possibly by helping to develop and build education in our country so that
we are able to sustain and build our own economies.

The challenges of managing migration in South Africa are rendered more
complex by the fact that the ending of apartheid opened up the country to
new forms of global, continental and regional migration. As the mine labour
system has gone into a prolonged period of decline, so the South African
government has had to confront a regional migration regime that has become
more varied.

Furthermore, these challenges are located in the context where South
Africans show high rates of hostility or xenophobia towards non-nationals,
and particularly African migrants, before examining the South African
response to these policy changes. It is important to review the changes in
migration that have occurred in the last 10 to 15 years.

Changes resulting in policy change in respect of migration have been set in
motion by globalisation, the collapse of apartheid and economic and social
crises in other parts of Africa, as well as perceived opportunities in post-
apartheid South Africa.

In order to establish exactly what has changed since 1990, it is important
to briefly outline the development of labour migration to South Africa.
This exercise also highlights the legacy of the apartheid period.
The defining characteristics of regional labour migration to South Africa
before and during the apartheid era were that it was sectoral-based, with
gender differentiation, irregularity in exploitation and racist migrant
selection. Each of these pillars needs brief elaboration for combined, the
constitute the  constitutional and legal inheritance that confronted the
country’s first democratic government and its social partners in 1994.

Historically, white labour migrants from Europe and decolonising African
countries, often regardless of skills, were welcomed by the apartheid
state. Black African labour migrants could only enter under contract and
were concentrated in the South African mining industry. The precise mix of
source countries for African mine migration varied over time. Mozambique,
Lesotho, and until the 1970s, Malawi, were the major suppliers of this
unskilled labour which was mostly concentrated in the mines.

For African migrants, legal entry into South Africa was on a temporary
basis or fixed contract and governed by bilateral treaties between South
Africa and the supplier states. All migrants were recruited by a single
industrial financial monopoly - the Employment Bureau of South Africa -
which operated an extensive network of recruitment offices in supplying
states. At the end of the contract migrants had to return home to renew it
and if they became ill or disabled - a common occurrence - they were sent
back home without even being given a proper permit.
As we really deal with the issue of globalisation we need to look at
ourselves as South Africa, and what we need to do is not what Koos has
said, namely that we need to protect our people. What we need to do as
South Africa, is ask ourselves what we can do to attract the skills that we
need and protect those that we are able to recruit and integrate them into
the same areas that we expect them to come and perform in. One of the
biggest challenges is that even if we can recruit skills from outside, the
problem of xenophobia will still play a role, in that people will be
labelled as outsiders and that of itself will impact very negatively on the
development of the economy and the country.

The challenge that Africa should focus on is how best to protect ourselves,
not only in South Africa but as a continent, to ensure that the skills that
we are training and developing are maintained and we can keep them for some
time. To keep the skills that we need, we must create conducive conditions
for our skilled workers to remain in the country and give them the
necessary resources or remuneration that can really sustain themselves and
their families and ensure the development and wellbeing of the continent.
This is a challenge that we must face head-on as a continent. It is a
challenge that all of us must come together and address. Thank you very
much. [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the phenomenon of migrant
workers is universal and their treatment patterns are almost the same,
regardless of which country one can think of.

Migrant workers are treated like slaves. They are made to work 12 hours
daily; seven days a week, at low wages. In a civilised world such
exploitation should be stopped right away. We note that the United Nations
is investigating a rash of human rights violations, including abusive
working conditions, nonpayment of wages, arbitrary detentions and
collective illegal deportations.

Jorge Bustamante, the UN Special Rapporteur on human rights of immigrants,
has written to culprit countries on the abuse of human rights of
immigrants, namely Australia, Japan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Korea, South
Africa, Canada, the Philippines and the United States of America. It should
concern us that South Africa is the only country in Africa that has been
pointed out as leading in the violation of the rights of immigrants.

Ill-treatment of immigrants at border posts, deaths as a result of
excessive use of force by the police, summary expulsions, gender violence,
and withholding of passports are among the common abuses migrant workers
are made to suffer. The African Union, in their Migration Policy Framework
for Africa, have noted that a rise in discrimination and xenophobia against
migrants is a great concern to the 54-member union.
The untoward treatment meted out to people who hail from elsewhere in
Africa has to be addressed, that is with reference to South Africa. A
simple example is the outcry that followed the appointment of the new chief
executive officer of the Premier Soccer League. Despite the fact that the
position was advertised, there was a feeling that the position should have
been given to or occupied by some son of the soil. This is a clear-cut
indication of the xenophobia in this country.

Every effort has to be made to combat racism and xenophobia, because Peter
Sutherland, the UN Secretary-General’s Special Representative on
International Migration Development, has said that, at least, if selections
were made regarding migrants based on their skills and not their race,
gender or religion, it would be much better. There is also an argument to
the effect that while states have a right to control their borders, they do
not have a right to make irregular migration punishable by law.

In conclusion, perhaps we can learn a lot in terms of giving effect to what
we believe – at least some of us – namely that a human being, regardless of
origin, background, race, gender, creed or social status, should be loved,
respected, served, consulted and tolerated. In that way we hope we can make
a better planet for us all. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, it is estimated that there are 12 million
people, mostly children, entrapped in slavery around the world. Some 150
million people, which is 3% of the world’s population, are said to be
outside their country of origin. Be it a child labourer, a female
prostitute or a migrant worker whose passport has been confiscated to gain
ownership of that person, this is a grim picture and we need to rescue our
people.

A factor contributing to people trafficking has been the limitation placed
on immigration. South Africa is reported to have a large population of
illegal immigrants and our local citizenry has become xenophobic over the
presence of immigrants, often resulting in physical abuse such as that
endured by the Somali residents in South Africa over the past year.

Our people need to be enlightened and need to have empathy for our
neighbours and the degrading situations they have been forced to endure.
During the apartheid era many of our neighbouring countries served as an
exile ground for our activists. Africa is home to all Africans, to whom no
boundaries exist, as a people.

While our democratic South Africa may have a great number of human rights,
we need to contain the situation in terms of human trafficking, migrant
labour and xenophobia. While legislation in this regard may sustain
legalities, it is South Africa’s fabric of people, human conscience and
mindset that will eradicate domestic concerns in this regard. I thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, I concur with the sentiments expressed by the
hon Koos van der Merwe on the need for our government to control migration.

The need to migrate is linked to a number of factors, as Zimbabwean
migrants bear testimony. Many societies are not usually prepared to
assimilate the dynamics that go along with migration. Migration may, of
course, be controlled where a country makes huge attempts to import skills
and other scarce human resources, while migration can also become
uncontrolled and disruptive as a result of people fleeing from war-torn,
politically or economically unstable areas into neighbouring countries.

South Africa’s Constitution states that we aim to build a united and
democratic society. However, not very far into our democratic history, many
citizens from abroad and from Africa have taken refuge in our country.
Thus, we find ourselves still trying to build a united nation, dealing with
suspicions and alienation in our own multiracial society. We have an influx
of migrants adding more demands on our young democracy, while they are
looking for democracy. Perhaps, as a result, we might have witnessed
instances of xenophobic attacks from communities around South Africa.

How do we deal with human rights demands from others when our nation is
still struggling to establish a human and social rights culture? Maybe this
is the debate that we are going to have to take forward at the IPU
conference. I thank you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, I know it is courteous to inform a member when
you are going to address them during your speech. Unfortunately, before I
could extend that courtesy to the hon Camerer, she has left the Chamber.
Since she has not displayed the courtesy to sit through the debate that she
participated in, I will be uncourteous and continue to address her. I am
sure she will receive the message – Mr Blanché will relay it to her.

The hon Camerer has created the impression that human or people trafficking
started with the ANC government. I would have liked to ask her, had she
been here, what she did about the issue of human trafficking during her
period as Deputy Minister of Justice. All that the hon Camerer has done
today is to display that she has no understanding of the complexity of the
problem of human trafficking.

People or human trafficking – as it is also known - is a very old
phenomenon and dates back to the beginning of history, based on reports on
bondage and slavery. It is only in recent years that the international
community has arrived at a common definition of human trafficking.
Trafficking is broadly defined, in order to protect victims from a full
range of exploitation. This exploitation, in effect, degrades the victim’s
human dignity.

The three main elements which are part of the definition of trafficking
are: the actions making up trafficking or the recruiting phase; the
transporting phase and the means used to maintain the victim’s co-
operation; and the purpose of the process phase or, more specifically, the
actual exploitation phase.

Exploitation can refer to economic exploitation through forced labour,
sexual exploitation or prostitution, illegal adoptions, recruiting children
into armed conflict or even the removal of human organs – it is not just
simply about sexual exploitation. A danger in the debate on human
trafficking is the overemphasising and simplification of trafficking as
just sexual exploitation as the main aspect of human trafficking, at the
cost of other purposes for trafficking people.

With the adoption of the United Nations Protocol on the Trafficking in
Persons, of which South Africa is a signatory, countries visibly improved
their political commitment to combat human trafficking. On our continent
this commitment is displayed through the 1990 African Charter on the Rights
and Welfare of the Child.

In 2002 the African Union reaffirmed the commitment of the countries of
Africa to the fight against human trafficking by identifying the
elimination of child trafficking as a priority. Currently, South Africa
does not have specific legislation to deal with human trafficking and
aspects of it are dealt with through other pieces of legislation.

Interestingly enough, countries like Australia only passed legislation on
human trafficking a year ago. The Children’s Act which was passed recently,
for instance, criminalises child trafficking. However, South Africa has
committed itself to develop specific legislation to combat trafficking
within, to and from South Africa.

In order for us to pass legislation that will deal with the problem
effectively, it is necessary that we understand the extent of the problem.
We still find confusion about the difference between human trafficking and
illegal immigration. We have no official figures regarding the extent of
the trafficking of people into, out of and through South Africa.
Unofficially, an article on Independent Online has estimated that more than
600 000 people are trafficked through South Africa each year. The truth is
that very little is known about the scope and characteristics of human
trafficking in South Africa.

It goes without saying that, in order to properly combat human trafficking
and to pass effective legislation in this regard, we need to understand the
structural factors that facilitate trafficking. A common aspect which does
exist and which has been mentioned in available research studies is the
push and pull factors present in human trafficking.

On the push side, there are factors such as poverty, lack of opportunities,
dislocation - for instance, circumstances of street children, gender,
racial and ethnic inequalities as well as the break-up of families. The
pull factors include the promise of a better life, consumer aspirations,
not knowing that there are risks involved, patterns of migration and porous
borders. Though this provides us with some information and assists us to
understand human trafficking a bit better, clearly there is a need for more
sophisticated and South African-specific information.

Another aspect of trafficking that requires more research is to understand
why the victims remain in exploitative situations. The reasons available to
us for these are diverse. Some remain in this situation because they are
threatened by their employers that they will declare them as illegal
immigrants to the authorities and thus they find themselves in a position
where their passports are being withheld or where they are threatened with
deportation. This is especially true where a work permit is coupled to a
named employer.

Others are told that they need to repay the passage to the destination
country. Often, especially in cases of organised crime, the victim is
threatened that relatives remaining in the country of origin will be harmed
or even killed.
We also need to understand the trafficker better. Very little is known
about the trafficker. And, how do you effectively combat human trafficking
if you do not have sufficient information about those people behind it?
Again, we find that more is known about people behind human trafficking for
the purpose of sexual exploitation than about those involved in human
trafficking for the purpose of cheap labour.

In the case of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation, it is
found that it is a fairly organised phenomenon and that these people often
form part of organised crime syndicates. What little is known about labour
trafficking indicates that such trafficking often takes place under legal
cover through private recruitment agencies, contract work or even through
the abuse of seasonal work schemes.

It is interesting that a study of the International Labour Organisation,
2003, entitled: Trafficking in human beings - new approaches in combating
the problems, found that crime networks make huge profits hiring out their
infrastructure, including transport, corrupt officials, safe houses, etc
for the illegal movement of contraband and people.

In so far as the proposed draft South African legislation is concerned, the
above factors and many more should be taken into account. The Portfolio
Committee on Safety and Security conducted a study tour to Australia last
year to investigate human trafficking. Through this tour we learnt a couple
of valuable lessons that can be put to use in the South African situation.
I want to address just a few of them, and the full report is available.

In the field of legislation, one of the most important aspects is that
legislation should address the issue of reducing the demand. The draft Bill
ensures that buyers of the services of victims of trafficking will be
guilty of an offence, and this must be supported. Legislation should
include financial or other penalties against brothel owners. Legislation
must be premised on the protection of women and children as a human rights
issue rather than a criminal justice issue. Strong recommendations should
be made to include higher penalties for the trafficking of children.

In the area of investigations, training for the police must include a
compassionate, victim-centred approach. Training should include innovative
training techniques which alert the police to the vulnerability of the
victim and nuances of exploitation. In training, use should be made of
people working in the sex industry so that the police can have a better
understanding of freedom of choice and debt bondage.

As human trafficking is a phenomenon that is cross-border, intercontinental
and regional, international collaboration by the police is important. Such
an agreement should preferably be formalised. It may happen that an
investigation requires a concurrent investigation in the home country.
There are more recommendations in this regard, but these are contained in
the full report.

Regarding the areas of prosecution, it might be necessary to hear cases in
the specialised sexual offences court, and then efforts should be made to
ensure that all prosecutors and magistrates attached to these courts
receive appropriate training. Currently, the draft Bill refers only to
training for the SAPS and Home Affairs officials. In the light of that
Australian experience, training for the prosecution and those that hear the
cases is strongly suggested.

It is clear that we cannot deny that we are affected by the phenomenon of
human trafficking. It is clear that it is a problem that fundamentally
challenges and violates the dignity of victims involved. It is a complex
and extremely involved type of crime. It requires the co-operation and
involvement of many different government departments and it requires
international co-operation.

This is a highly emotive and politicised issue. We need to engage in this
battle with our emotions and politics under control, and with clear heads
and utter determination so as to realise the intentions of our Constitution
and the Freedom Charter. The Freedom Charter states clearly that everyone
has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and
protected. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

           CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE - EXPENDITURE
           IN FIRST QUARTER OF 2007/08 FINANCIAL YEAR

Ms L L MABE: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Members of the House, I’d like to
start by referring you to the correct version of the Joint Budget Committee
Report, which is before you on your tables. That report was published in
the ATCs of 10 September 2007. I’d like to indicate that the report that
was presented on 10 September was the wrong one and the correct one is the
one before you. It will be printed tomorrow and you will find it in your
offices.

I want to indicate at the beginning that we really appreciate the effort
that Parliament has taken to ensure that this committee can do its work
much better than was the case previously. Firstly, there was the
appointment of a permanent committee secretary as well as a permanent
committee researcher. On several occasions I have raised the problem of not
having a dedicated researcher for the committee and at least this time I
want to thank the people who made that effort to ensure that we have a
dedicated researcher. That dedicated researcher has helped us, and I want
to indicate that you have given us an energetic young man – he is very
energetic. He is also willing to work with us and also contributes a lot to
our committee.

I’d also like to indicate that these two individuals that were appointed
have assisted us to do our work by ensuring that at least for the very
first time we are able to report within a month after the presentation of
the first quarter report. For the very first time we are able to report
within a month’s time. At the same time we were also able to address follow-
up questions to the departments when we were not satisfied with their
performance or their spending. At least we could follow-up so that they
could come back to us. In future we hope that we will start to interact
with the portfolio committees so that we can make them aware of what the
problems are within their specific departments.

This has also assisted us to change the format of our report. From time to
time we want our reports to be user-friendly so that members of this House
will find it easy, within your busy schedules, to go through our reports.
One of the changes that we have effected in the committee’s report is to
remove all tables and put them at the back of the report as appendixes, so
as to ensure that at least you can quickly go through the report. If you
want further references then you can go to the back of the report where you
will find the tables.

What I am going to do for now is to focus on general spending and spending
by specific departments. We took a decision that we are not going to look
at all departments’ spending, but instead we will take a few of them, focus
more on them so that during the next quarter we will take another batch and
focus on them and we can then inform the portfolio committees on what is
happening in those departments. That is work in progress and I’ll also
report on work in progress with regard to the National Treasury.

In our report, hon Dambuza, hon Wang and hon Mashigo will take up the
reports on those specific departments, but I’ll deal with general spending,
capital spending, current spending, as well as transfer payments. With
regard to general spending, the trend is the as in previous years in that,
at the beginning of the financial year, most of the departments have
underspent. As usual, come February they will start to spend. We are
appealing to members of this House to take this into consideration so that
they make follow-ups in terms of why departments are not spending during
the first three quarters of the year. In that way you will at least be able
to know: Are the departments able to deliver or not?

With regard to current spending, which includes compensation to employees,
this is creating a serious problem for the committee because, if there are
vacancies in departments, how will those departments be able to monitor
implementation of policy? Secondly, how will they be able to deliver
services to the people? Vacant posts imply that there are no people to do
the work, whereas there is money allocated for those vacancies for people
to be employed to do the work.

At the same time we also have a problem with entities such as public
enterprises.  We appeal to the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises to
please have a closer look at these entities and public enterprises, because
from time to time they come back to Parliament to ask for funding. Engage
them and probe them more so that you will know what the problems are that
make them come back to Parliament and ask for more funding. In our
engagement we realised at the end of the first quarter that the Department
of Public Enterprises would possible come to Parliament and ask for more
money because at that stage they had already spend 109% of their budget.
They had overspent already in the first three months of the year.

I’d also like to indicate that it is our intention to further engage with
the National Treasury, the Department of the Public Service and
Administration, the Public Service Commission and other parliamentary
committees in terms of what is really happening in these departments, so
that from time to time we can have that kind of mutual relationship as
committees of Parliament.

I’d also want to indicate what recommendation we have come up with, hon
Chauke. The Departments of Home Affairs, Transport, Education, Sport and
Recreation and Housing are to provide recent details on progress with
regard to the number of posts in those departments per level of employment
which are not occupied. How long have these posts been vacant? It is
important for us to know whether they have been vacant for a year, for
three years or how long. We must also know what measures these departments
have taken to reduce these vacancies in this financial year and in the
medium term.

With regard to transfer payments, the transfer payments are not
commensurate with delivery in the provinces. That is a problem. Our
recommendation is that the departments which are referred to in section 2
of our report will have to provide a breakdown of spending by economic
classification and programme to the committee on a quarterly basis so that
we will be able to do targeted oversight. As I said earlier on, during the
next quarter we will then look at other departments so that we can focus
more closely on what those departments are doing.

Capital spending is the key driver for economic development and job
creation in a developmental state. What is taking place right now is that,
like in previous years, departments are not spending on capital. They are
not spending and when we looked at the first three quarters, from 1 April
until the end of December, departments were not spending. They were
spending far less than 10% and suddenly you find that in February or March
a department would spend more than 50%. One then wants to ask: What is
happening? These are some of the issues that we need to engage with so that
the departments can tell us exactly why they must spend more than 50% in
one month. How is that possible?

I would also like to urge members to probe these departments to budget for
maintenance. They don’t budget for maintenance and that is why when you go
to the provinces, for instance, in the case of road maintenance, you need
to ask: What is happening? Why do we have roads that are deteriorating? The
department does not budget for road maintenance and this should be looked
into. Our recommendation is that all departments must budget for
maintenance.

I’d like to discuss the Department of Sport and Recreation, which is the
centre department with regard to 2010. The department has a huge percentage
of vacant posts. The question that we ask ourselves, hon Komphela, is: If
they have a lot of vacancies, how are they going to monitor spending in
terms of 2010? Secondly, how are they going to monitor whether the
programmes are produced on time? These are some of the things that need to
be taken into consideration. We expect that at a later stage, they would
come and say that they don’t have capacity to do monitoring and go to
different projects so that they can be in a position to report to the
portfolio committee in terms of what is really happening on the ground.

Hon members, we have also taken pains with the section 32 reports, which do
not give us much information as Parliament. We have engaged the with
National Treasury and they are revising those section 32 reports, so that
they can give you more information to enable you to do better oversight.
Without information it is difficult to do oversight. We will report back to
this House in terms of how far they are with that and whether we are
satisfied with the kind of information given by them to ensure that we do
better oversight.

With more information on section 32 reports, committees will have more
power to do their work. Committees will have more information that they can
engage with to ensure that the departments deliver. It is important for
departments to deliver services. We don’t want to see the protest actions
that we see from time to time, because money is available and departments
must deliver. Let us engage them and check whether they are delivering or
not.

Finally, I’d like to congratulate my colleagues the hon Dambuza, hon
Chikunga and hon Dithebe on their redeployment by the ANC to become Whips.
I want to say: Bravo! With the effort that you put into this office, I am
confident that you will be able to do your work better and I want to thank
you for your energy and all the hard work that you put into the work of the
committee. I’d also like to thank hon Fubbs. I wonder where she is. Hon
Fubbs, thank you very much for insisting that I must push that our reports
are debated in this House so that members will start to understand what we
are doing. Thank you, very much for being a pain in the neck for that. I’d
also like to thank the co-chairperson Mr Mkaliphi for our mutual working
relationship, to ensure that we are able to report to Parliament on time.

Dr Rabie, Mr Stephens, I also want to thank you for your contributions in
the committee. You have been working very well with us and your
contribution will be missed. I hope that you will pass on the message to Mr
Swart - he should work well with us. We had no partisan views in the
committee. We looked at whether the departments were doing their work and
whether they were spending or not. Thank you very much for that.

I’d also like to indicate at the end of my speech that the Minister of
Finance has released this book last week. This book is going to help you.
Utilise this book. It is referred to as the Provincial Budgets and
Expenditure Review. This book helps you to know what is happening in the
departments within the provinces. It gives us information about delivery in
the provinces. At the end of the book, there are tables which will indicate
to you how many land claims have been completed in each province; how many
nurses you have in your provinces; how many ARVs are provided to people in
your province; how many emergency vehicles there are in your province or in
your constituency – this is a useful book that all of us need to use so
that we can do better oversight, as we continue with our work as
Parliament.

I want to quote from this book. On the first page of this book the Minister
of Finance reports that “service delivery information is not always readily
available to stand against expenditure data, for efficiency of spending to
be assessed”. The information that we get is not commensurate with the
money that we allocate to the departments. He acknowledges that despite the
undeniable progress ... I present this report for adoption. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, just this week, the Minister of Housing,
Lindiwe Sisulu, threatened residents of Joe Slovo in Langa when she said
that she would remove their names from the housing list, one by one. This
was her response to the angry masses for demonstrating their frustration at
her department’s inability to manage government’s response to the housing
needs of our country. Shots were fired and blood flowed.

Today we stand here in Parliament, safely ensconced behind high security
gates, to consider the Joint Budget Committee’s Report on First Quarter
Expenditure. From the report it appears that our housing empress, despite
all her huffing and puffing, is, in fact, quite naked. The report reflects
that the Department of Housing, for the first quarter, has spent only 16,9%
of its total allocation for the year and only 30% of the allocation for
capital expenditure. Closer scrutiny reveals that this was R300 million
less than the amount stated in the approved drawings on the National
Revenue Fund.

If anything, this confirms that, while the hon Minister is lavishing her
pet N2 project with attention, she is not focussing sufficiently on the
provincial housing departments who are failing in their responsibility to
deliver housing to the people. We hope that the overall poor showing of the
department, under her executive leadership, will be sufficient cause for
the Minister to exercise a little restraint when next she hurls abuse at
our people. We also trust that the improvement in expenditure shown by her
department is a sign of better things to come.

The Joint Budget Committee’s report reminds us that the Department of Home
Affairs has the responsibility to protect and regulate the interests of the
inhabitants of the Republic. That this department has not been doing so for
some time now, is a well known fact. That the Minister who led this
department to near collapse is still in her job is a disgrace and clearly a
result of her political loyalty to President Thabo Mbeki, rather than her
competence.

Yesterday, a Mr Viljoen, an elderly gentleman from Green Point, visited our
research office to explain his frustration at the weak functioning of our
Department of Home Affairs. His concern was that, despite all the talk
about the turnaround of the department, very little has happened.
Unfortunately, we had to explain to Mr Viljoen that we did not expect too
much to happen in the near future, since its staff has voted with their
feet.

At the end of the previous financial year, it recorded a vacancy rate of
almost 30%. Given the fact that this department managed to spend only 1,6%
of its capital budget for 2007-08, the Joint Budget Committee was
undoubtedly justified in registering its concern. How unfortunate then that
the Department of Home Affairs did not deem it necessary to dignify further
queries from the Joint Budget Committee with a timeous response!

Unfortunately Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula’s department was not the
only one to show its disdain to Parliament in this manner. The Departments
of Water Affairs and Forestry, Science and Technology, and Correctional
Services have all been equally uncooperative.

Korrektiewe Dienste het net 11% van sy kapitaalbegroting spandeer. Minister
Balfour, dit lyk my u gaan op hierdie swak bestedingsbasis van verlede jaar
aan. Met die vorige boekjaar het u R603 miljoen vir die Tesourie terug
gegee, omdat u nie vakante poste kon vul nie. U het R197 miljoen vir die
Tesourie terug gegee omdat u nie die drie tronke kon bou wat 12 000
gevangenes sou huisves nie. Minister, hoekom spandeer u nie die geld wat
die Tesourie vir u gee nie? Miskien moet u maar bedank. Dalk gaan dit dan
beter in die departement! (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Correctional Services spent only 11% of its capital budget. Minister
Balfour, it seems to me that you are continuing on this bad spending trend
from last year. In the previous financial year you returned R603 million to
the Treasury because you could not fill vacant positions. You gave back
R197 million to the Treasury because you could not build the three prisons
that would have accommodated 12 000 prisoners. Minister, why don’t you
spend the capital that the Treasury allocates to you? Maybe you should
resign. Perhaps things would then improve in the department!]

The Democratic Alliance is also increasingly concerned over the Department
of Transport’s seeming inability to spend its budget in the execution of
its tasks. The Joint Budget Committee notes that this department has fallen
short of the 25% spending benchmark for the first quarter and
contextualises its concern against a history of underspending and bad
financial planning and management.

Not too long ago, the Minister of Transport, Jeffrey Thamsanqa Radebe,
alarmed our voters when he said that there was a R50 billion shortfall for
transport infrastructure over the next five years. Are we to believe that,
were the shortfall not there, this vital delivery department would be able
to spend it?

Our taxpayers simply do not deserve to have to spend more and more time
trying to get onto the commuter trains and stuck in road traffic jams while
the Department of Transport plays catch-up.

Waar is die ministers vandag? Waar is die Minister van Behuising, die
Minister van Korrektiewe Dienste en die Minister van Binnelandse Sake? Die
feit dat hulle nie eens vandag hier is om hulle departemente se swak
bestedingstendense te bespreek en te debateer nie, wys vir ons hoe min
hulle omgee vir die belastingbetaler. Hulle is nie eens hier om dit aan te
hoor nie! Miskien moet die Speaker in die toekoms hierdie ministers verplig
om in die Parlement te wees wanneer die begrotingsbestedingsdebatte gevoer
word.

Minister Manuel vorder ongeveer R29 miljard meer belasting in - die
sogenaamde oorskotbelasting - wat hy liewer in die ekonomie moes los. Dit
terwyl Suid-Afrikaners met hulle 28,2% koers, van die hoogste belasting
betaal ter wêreld!

Gegewe dat die belastingbetaler dus leeg gemelk word, sou `n mens verwag
dat die Tesourie geld aan die departemente gee volgens behoorlike
besigheidsplanne. Die vraag is egter: wat doen die Tesourie om toe te sien
dat hierdie departemente hulle geld dienooreenkomstig effektief spandeer?
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Where are the Ministers today? Where is the Minister of Housing, the
Minister of Correctional Services and the Minister of Home Affairs? The
fact that they are not even here to discuss and debate their departments’
poor spending trends, indicates how little they care about the taxpayer.
They are not even here today to listen to this! Maybe the Speaker should
oblige these Ministers to be present when the budget spending debates are
held in future.

Minister Manuel collects approximately R29 billion more in taxes – the so-
called surplus tax – which he should rather have left in the economy. This
when South Africans with their 28,2% rate, pay some of the highest taxes in
the world!

Given that the taxpayer is being milked dry as a result, one would expect
that the Treasury would allocate funds to departments according to proper
business plans. The question is however: what is the Treasury doing to see
to it that these funds are accordingly spent effectively?]

There may well be some good news as well. Overall expenditure has improved
and capital expenditure has also increased in a number of important areas.
But if we do not get our vital delivery departments on track, our
government will remain lopsided and so will its performance.

As we have seen on the N2 when approaching Cape Town, there is a limit to
the amount of pain our citizens are willing to stand. There is a point at
which the smoke-and-mirrors identity politics that the government so loves
to engage in, will no longer stop the dissatisfaction of our citizens from
being felt by the ANC at the ballot box.

The DA agrees with the report. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, I see it’s the first time that the hon Skosana has
taken the Chair, and I hope he will allow me some time for those
compliments and not take it off my allotted time.

Chairperson, I must admit right at the outset that I have not had the
benefit of attending any of these committee meetings, as I am a new member
in the House. I must say that I am looking forward to attending and being a
member of the Joint Budget Committee under a very dynamic chairperson.

In fact, when the chairperson addressed the House, you would not say she is
from the ruling party. There was no politics involved in what she said. I
think it is important that, as members of this Joint Budget Committee, as
is the case with Finance and Public Accounts, we do our job without fear of
any contradiction. It is our responsibility to ensure that the taxpayers
get value for their money and that the respective departments spend their
funds effectively and efficiently.

I read the report in detail and welcome the crucial role that this Joint
Budget Committee plays in exercising oversight over government spending
throughout the course of a financial year. As the chairperson said, this
exercise helps to identify shortcomings in budgetary control of certain
departments, and early warning systems can be put in place to effect
changes in approach.

I’m sure it’s not going to be a very popular committee, but the work has to
be done. In particular, what is welcomed is the fact that there will be
targeted oversight of certain departments as indicated in the
recommendations. We certainly support the recommendations that are
contained in the report, but must express some concern with some of the
departments.

In fact, one of the concerns relates to capital expenditure. If one looks
at page 5 of the report, one will see that the Department of Arts and
Culture didn’t spend any money in the first quarter on capital expenditure
– well, it’s a small amount – but as regards two departments – Transport
and Home Affairs – the committee has expressed serious concern over the
fact that they have only spent 0,95% and 33% of their respective budgets.

Now we do know the state of the roads in our country and in many of the
provinces. We have heard the hon Minister of Transport say that there
aren’t sufficient funds to repair some of the roads for capital works, but
then this does not give us a good picture. I’m sure that the Department of
Transport must really do something about it.

Another area of concern is the Department of Safety and Security, where we
note that they have not spent money on automated vehicle location systems
and funding of CPFs and payment for reservists. Once again, the hon
Minister of Safety and Security has time and again said in this House that
communities need to work with the Department of Safety and Security to
ensure that we can keep the criminals at bay. If we don’t empower those
communities through funding CPFs and through making sure that there are
reservists on the ground that are paid, then we are not going to meet that
objective that the hon Minister says should be met by the community out
there.

The whole question of vacancies is also a cause for concern. A number of
departments are not filling vacant posts. Is it because there is not enough
training? Should we not consider a Public Service Academy, run by
government, so that people can be trained? Is it a question of not high
enough salaries for the people that we are paying in the Public Service?
These are things that need to be addressed.

The Department of Home Affairs has announced their turnaround strategy. We
do hope that the strategy works, because it is a cause for concern that
they are not spending the money and they are not filling vacancies. Under
the Head of Department who, I am told, has assured the Portfolio Committee
on Home Affairs that things will begin to move, we just hope that things
will happen.

There is an MTEF budget and departments should use the MTEF. They do not
have to wait for the beginning of the year to start deciding what they want
to do. So they should be spending in the first quarter of the year. Thank
you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, may we also, on behalf of the ACDP, congratulate
you on your appointment. Whilst spending has continued to improve across
government, the ability to spend effectively and produce the desired
outcomes remains a challenge. We, in this House, are all aware of the
problems facing Home Affairs and the low spending for this quarter suggests
that they will again be underspending, which was as you will recall
recorded last year, at R206 million or 8%. This would be unacceptable and
must be avoided.

It is particularly deplorable that this department and other departments
such as Correctional Services failed to respond to the Joint Budget
Committee’s queries within the required timeframes. These departments must
be held accountable. Portfolio committees need to monitor departmental
expenditure on an ongoing basis. The development of “in year monitoring”
and “early warning systems” will prevent surprises of over- or
underexpenditure at the end of the budgetary year.

The ACDP wishes to commend the Joint Budget Committee on its excellent work
and will support the report and urges all Members of Parliament, MPs, to
continue monitoring the ongoing expenditure of the departments. Thank you.

Ms R J MASHIGO: Chairperson, I believe if you had been seated up there, my
chairperson would definitely have congratulated you. So, I am doing it on
her behalf. We also welcome the hon Mr Van Dyk to the Joint Budget
Committee, where we work as a collective and look at the issues from the
same perspective as our predecessors have done. I am referring to Dr Rabie
and the others, but we hope that you’ll join us and look at all these
problems from the same perspective.

I am going to speak on the first term report, particularly, based on Home
Affairs and Education. A lot has been said about Home Affairs and I’ll also
express my disappointment because had they come to the portfolio committee
we would have looked at the challenges together and agreed on how to
approach them, as Parliament is the one that had sat down here and voted
for their budget in accordance with their strategic plan.

We hope that their portfolio committee will do exactly that, because this
is a very important committee based on the fact that from birth to death we
depend on documentation. We would like to have correct documents to
identify us, to have access to all available facilities, which would
possibly lead all South Africans to a better life for all.

Their current spending was very dismal as has already been stated, and as
our Chairperson has already mentioned the fact that this is one of the
issues of capacity that will be attended to by the committee, I won’t
repeat it.  But, we really feel that this department should do something in
order to make sure that people live with dignity and respect.

Their capital expenditure was also very bad, based on the fact that they
did what was called “repair and maintenance” during the first phase. They
were supposed to do the same in the second phase, which they mentioned was
affected by tenders, but we hope that they will do something about it in
January, as they had promised. Our regular contact with them will help us
understand their problems, as we can see that they have problems.

Capital spending is really important in that department. Control borders
should be upgraded. That should be started with right now, that is the
upgrading of facilities and putting in of relevant machinery, so that by
2010 we won’t have problems in controlling the influx of people who will be
coming here from neighbouring countries to watch their favourite teams.

I have already mentioned documentation, because there is a lot of fraud.
There are lots of fraudulent marriages and poor services in that
department. We would have appreciated it if the department had come to us
and addressed the issue of the Home Affairs National Identification System,
Hanis, which is a good tool to monitor and improve the services from the
department, as it is going to co-ordinate all the documentation and details
of the people who are South African citizens as well as all those who are
visitors and even monitor and assist in the benefits of those people who
interact with government.

We hope that the new director-general, who we all know is committed, whose
commitment we have all seen, will do something about this department, and
we hope that their audited report will be unqualified.

I would like to state that 5,4% of our gross domestic product, GDP, goes
towards education, which is very good and shows that our government has
realised the importance of education in the economic development of our
country, and 95,41% of all the transfers from the national department are
being transferred to higher education, public entities and the provinces.

The provinces get their allocation from the National Revenue Fund through
two channels. Their allocation is through the transfer of equitable shares,
which are not conditional grants. They are actually given for specific
purposes and will have to be used in accordance with the grants as
prescribed by the National Treasury. The amount of these transfers to
provinces for the financial year is R202,8 billion. The provincial
education expenditure is R88 billion. On top of that we also have
provincial infrastructure grants which, among others, fast-track the school
buildings’ infrastructure.

If we look at the capital spending of our departments, we will see that
something needs to be done because, according to the state of the nation
address last year, our President mentioned that no child must be taught
under trees. Our question is: Do we still have children being taught under
trees? Is there correct transportation for children? Do we also have proper
sanitation and water at the schools? I don’t think we have. We should look
into that in conjunction with the provinces because they are the ones that
have been given all this funding, and they have the power to do everything.


Our National Treasury is not excluded, because as I have already stated
there are conditions and they have to do their monitoring. We know that
when it comes to these equitable shares the departments might have some
differences when they don’t want to account, but the National Treasury as a
national department has to do something to make them accountable for the
sake of proper education and accessibility to education.

I’ll also like to mention that in the current spending we know that to have
children educated we should have educators, and these educators have to be
present every day of the school year, but really, is it proper for the
Department of Education only to spend a small amount of money in their
current expenditure because what they spent was R87 million in the first
quarter, which when it is related to the capacity that goes to school every
day, indicates that something is not being accounted for. I think our
department must take that into account.

Do our schools have libraries? Do they have laboratories? I don’t think
they do.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Mohlompehi, Mme Mashigo nako ya hao
e fedile. [Hon Mashigo, your time has expired.]

Mme R J MASHIGO: Nako e tsamaile? Ke ne ke ise ke bue ka thuto e kgolwane,
fela le tla buisa tsebe 244 ya Tekanyetso ya Madi a Bosetšhaba [Estimated
National Expenditure] gore le tlhaloganye gore dilo tse re buang ka tsona
ke dife. Nako e fedile, salang sentle. [Nako e fedile.] (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Ms R J MASHIGO: Has my time expired? I have not even started talking about
higher education, but you may read on page 244 of the Estimated National
Expenditure so that you can have a better understanding of the things that
we are talking about. My time has expired, goodbye. [Time expired.]].

Mr B E PULE: Chairperson, spending trends in government departments have
always been a serious challenge. Poor spending has always been attributed
to lack of skills and capacity, and this cannot be allowed to go on. The
establishment of the Joint Budget Committee has therefore been a very wise
decision.
It is of great concern to note that the Departments of Arts and Culture,
Transport and Home Affairs, Parliament and the Department of Minerals and
Energy have the lowest spending on their capital expenditure. Parliament
and the Department of Transport appear under lowest spending on both
capital and current expenditure.

The high rate of vacancies that cuts across almost all government
departments also has a share in the underspending. Departments are advised
to take this very seriously. Many of our graduates are roaming the streets.
The departments should consider the advisability of in-service training.

It would not be acceptable for Parliament to exercise oversight when its
own institution is a culprit in spending trends. It must be seen to be
exemplary. For those departments with the highest spending ... [Time
expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chair, I also congratulate you on your appointment.

The MF is pleased to note that spending has improved across government.
However, it would be most gratifying if we were able to achieve the
effective spending required to produce results. We agree with the committee
that regular oversight and reporting by departments can assist in
addressing this long-overdue shortfall.

The MF is discouraged by departments who require this assistance, and have
an inability to respond within required timeframes. This inefficiency
strains our attempts to improve this situation. With poverty, unemployment
and a skills shortage being some of our major challenges, and with
countries like the United Kingdom headhunting our professionals at double
the salary, we can’t afford this.

We need to seriously address the human resource challenges in our
departments’ planning of our resource sectors. The MF suggests that the
committee’s recommendations be given serious consideration and be
implemented. The MF supports the Joint Budget Committee first quarter
report. I thank you.

Mr Y WANG: Hon Chairperson, I also want to congratulate you on your new
appointment.

Hon members, today, as was pointed out by the hon Mabe earlier, I would
like to zoom in on two of those departments that the committee expressed
concern over regarding their spending in the first quarter, namely the
Department of Public Enterprises and the Department of Safety and Security.


Before I get to Public Enterprises, to celebrate our heritage month, I have
decided to deliver part of my speech in Mandarin. Yes, it’s not an official
language in South Africa but it’s a language I’ve proudly inherited. In
case you have not noticed, I am of Chinese descent. So, Public Enterprises
...

[pic](Translation of Mandarin paragraph follows.)

[... the Department of Public Enterprises has jurisdiction over the affairs
and performance of state-owned enterprises. It aims to provide an effective
shareholder management system, where the department acts as the shareholder
representative of government, while ensuring the state-owned enterprises
are commercially viable and contribute to the growth of the country’s
economy. Furthermore, the department ensures that SOE business strategies
are aligned with our sector departmental policies and regulatory
frameworks.]

Channel one will be in English. You can test if your device is working.

[pic]

[pic]

[pic]
(Translation of Mandarin paragraphs follows.)

[To carry out its mandate, the department’s budget for 2007-08 was R1,064
billion. By the end of the first quarter, they have spent R1,052 billion,
or 98,84% to be exact. The main item included in this amount was the
Transfer Expenditure of R1,025 billion, where R400 million was allocated
for Denel and R625 million for the pebble bed modular reactor. An over-
transfer of approximately R500 million was also noted.

The committee stresses that further funding requests are also expected
during the remainder of this financial year, in addition to the special
appropriation allocated to Denel, PBMR, and Alexkor yesterday in the House.
If approved, it is understood that these SOEs are likely to be funded from
the R3 billion set aside as a contingency reserve in the national Budget.

Parliament and the committee also noted the performance and sustainability
of certain enterprises on a number of occasions. The committee therefore
agreed to seek additional clarity on the apparent deviation from approved
drawings on the National Revenue Fund, the potential use of contingency
funds to support the SOEs and the question of how transferred funds are
best monitored during the year.]

Coming to the Department of Safety and Security, the key strategic
priorities of the SA Police Service are to combat organised crime, violent
crime, prevent crime against women and children, and improve the general
services of the SAPS. Of course, the department also plays a critical role
in providing security for the hosting of the 2010 World Cup.

In the first quarter, R7,7 billion, or 21,47%, of its total budget of R36
billion was spent, of which R7,4 billion was current expenditure, namely
personnel costs and the procurement of goods and services. The department
explained that the lowest spending in the first quarter was influenced by
the annual cost of living adjustments that normally occur in July. Hence
personnel expenditure is expected to go back to normal during the year.

Now, for budgets allocated on capital assets, R217 million, or 11%, of the
allocated R2 billion for the year, was spent in the first quarter. The
department explained that the slow spending was mainly due to more than 50%
of the capital assets being for purchasing of vehicles for which payments
and delivery are expected only later in the year.

While the department has generally managed to spend its budget according to
its projections, the committee nevertheless identified a few areas
affecting its spending. The areas of budgetary concern requiring further
examination include the payments for reservists, the implementation of the
automated vehicle location system and the expansion of the funding of the
community police forums.

Lastly, in order to tackle the effective monitoring of budget spending,
especially on the transfer expenditures, the committee wishes to stress
again that all departments and state-owned enterprises receiving transfers,
in particular, must submit the cash flow projections to the National
Treasury and to Parliament so that the relevant portfolio committee and
Joint Budget Committee can monitor and measure the spending pattern more
accurately.

I hope you’ve enjoyed your heritage as much as I did. Special thanks go to
my interpreter, Ms Ellen Chu, sitting in the interpreting booth. I thank
you, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): The hon Wang has introduced a
twelfth language! It’s quite a challenge.

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Modulasetulo [Chairperson], hon members and guests – if
they are still there - this report serves to unpack government expenditure
during the first quarter of the current fiscal period. As part of the joint
budget mandate, it is required that departments constantly monitor whether
their spending is in line with their expenditure plans in order to
accomplish government’s objectives and report to Parliament on a quarterly
basis.

For the Joint Budget Committee - JBC - to successfully effect its mandate,
they should adhere to in-year monitoring and evaluation practices. This
tool helps to pick up possible over or under expenditure, to detect
deviations, especially where planned expenditure is not consistent with
what actually transpired, and mostly gives an opportunity for specific
interventions and to take corrective action to overcome challenges of
fiscal dumping at the end of the financial year.

This time around, it has been observed that some departments have
encountered a challenge in managing their allocations as planned. Amongst
them are the Department of Transport and the Department of Housing. The
Department of Transport has a fundamental responsibility of ensuring that
it improves transport infrastructure and leverages it as a catalyst for
economic growth, poverty alleviation and social cohesion. To date, the
department has spent 20,75%, which translates into R3,3 billion of its
total budget, and that is a concern, as the expenditure benchmark is 25%
per quarter. This effectively means that the department has underspent.
This is even more of a concern because of the underspending of
approximately R380 million by the department in the previous year.

In addition, the department spent 11,81% and 9,5% of its current budget and
capital budget respectively during the quarter. The department spent 6,21%
of the allocated budget on personnel. This is R45 million less than what
the department projected. In addition to that, 9,65% of the annual budget
for goods and services was spent. This is also R79 million less than what
was projected.

It is indicated that there are a number of vacant posts due to the
restructuring of the department as well as the high number of resignations
in the past financial year. It would be critical to get more clarity as to
what the restructuring entails and how it will impact on expenditure as
well as where the resignations are taking place or at what level of the
staff complement.

The goal of the Department of Housing is to meet housing needs by providing
integrated human settlements and to clear shacks by 2014. In this context,
the department recorded an expenditure of R1,5 billion which translates
into 16,97% of its total budget during the first quarter. This translates
into R300 million less than the amount stated on the approved drawings of
the National Revenue Fund. With regard to current expenditure, the
department’s performance is as follows: On programme 1, which is
administration, an expenditure of R23,2 million, which translates into 20%
of the allocated R116,4 million, was noted. The department underspent by
R2,3 million of the R25,4 million drawn for this period. This was
attributed to the ordering of goods and services for which delivery
invoices remained pending.

On programme 2, which is housing, policy research and planning, an
expenditure of R4,5 million or 5% of the allocated R90 million, with a
reflection of 3% on goods and services and 8% on the compensation of
employees, was attributed to a delay in the service level agreements with
Seta. Whilst noting the explanation given, the committee registered a
particular concern with the delays in the finalisation of payment, which
reflects a weakness in project and financial management.

We have noted in capital expenditure on programme 2 that 5% of the total
budget was spent, showing 7% less on both equipment and software. Programme
4 reflected a zero spending on equipment and software. Programme 3 and 4
reflected 10% and 17%.

It must be noted on Housing Implementation Support that the department
spent R15,5 million or 10% of the allocated R147,9 million. This was
reported as a consequence of the slow implementation of accreditation on
municipalities’ projects. The department indicated that expenditure was
expected to accelerate during the year as the necessary business plans were
received, reviewed and approved.

When reflecting on housing expenditure, it should be noted that 98,1% of
the department’s budget of R8,5 billion was appropriated to programme 4 –
that is housing development finance - where the integrated housing and
human settlement grant of the operational budget for the various public
entities is allocated. Of this, R1,4 billion or 17% was spent during the
period under review. The department indicated that this was in line with
the projected expenditure, with the transfer of funds to provinces based on
inputs received from different provincial governments and project life
cycles.

Regarding the monitoring of transfer funds, the department indicated that
together with meeting the prescripts of the Division of Revenue Act, it
assisted and visited provincial departments to review expenditure. Given
the fact that the department under-spent its budget by R171 million or 2,3%
at the end of the previous financial year, the portfolio committee agreed
to continuously engage the department. We all have a collective
responsibility to ensure improved service delivery to our people.

Xa ndisithi sonke ndithetha thina bongameleyo kunye nabo benza umsebenzi
ngokwabo. [When I say all of us I mean those who are in charge and those
who actually do the work.]

We all have a collective responsibility to address issues related to ICT
capacity, compensation of employees and lack of infrastructure within the
department.

In conclusion, the portfolio committee acknowledges and appreciates the
improvement in the housing subsidy and the significant increase in the
delivery of housing units by the ANC-led government.

The ANC adopts the report. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.
Report accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SAFETY AND SECURITY –
                        NOTIFICATION BY PRESIDENT IRO
  ENTITIES INDENTIFIED BY UN SECURITY COUNCIL IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 25
                              OF ACT 33 OF 2004

Ms M M SOTYU: I thank you Chair. Chairperson, South Africa is a signatory
to the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267 of 1999 and related
resolutions. In 2004 South Africa enacted its international and regional
obligations through the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against
Terrorist and Related Activities Act, Act 33 of 2004. This embodied in law
all conventions, protocols and obligations pertaining to terrorist
activities.

The Protection of Constitutional Democracy Act, as it is known in short,
provides for a critical role for Parliament. This role is a supervisory
one. This role will become even more involved should the list of terrorist
organisations published by the United Nations Security Council include or
directly affect South African citizens or organisations.

Section 25 of Act 33 of 2004 determines that the President must, by
proclamation in the Gazette, and other appropriate means of publication,
give notice that the Security Council of the United Nations ... has
identified a specific entity as being (a) an entity who commits, or
attempts to commit, any terrorist and related activity ... or (b) an entity
against whom Member States of the United Nations must take specified
actions.

This information is then distributed as determined in the Act, for example
through the financial intelligence centre to banks and other financial
institutions. Relevant state departments, such as Home Affairs, are also
informed or provided with a list of undesirable or prohibited persons.

Implementation, compliance and monitoring take place through an inter-
departmental counter-terrorism working group, chaired by the Department of
Foreign Affairs. All relevant departments and the financial intelligence
centre and the Reserve Bank are represented in this group.

The Committee for Safety and Security therefore recommends to Parliament
that the report be adopted in terms of section 26 of Act 33 of 2004. I
thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.


Motion agreed to.


Report accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL
  GOVERNMENT - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO KGALAGADI, ALEXANDRA AND MALUTI-A-PHOFUNG
  NODAL MUNICIPALITIES, AND INTERNATIONAL OVERSIGHT VISIT TO KERALA, INDIA

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, thank you and congratulations on the seat you
are occupying there behind me. We welcome your presence there. Chairperson,
this report on our oversight visit to these three areas was an attempt on
our part to look at the integrated sustainable rural development programme
as well as the urban renewal programme and their implementation in those
three specific areas.

This is an important presidential project and we thought it was crucial for
us to look at what’s coming out of there. The report could be better. We
would like to acknowledge that from the outset, with regard to the way in
which it is presented, but we think the observations we made there are
crucial. One of these is that we would like to see improved
intergovernmental relations in the implementation of those two programmes.

We also noticed a very interesting and useful experience in Alexandra.
There is a co-ordinated approach inside that area, where a single office
has been established for all departments and officials. The timeframes were
brought down dramatically and the turnaround times for doing things were
speeded up dramatically, suggesting that in fact it is doable - it is
possible to speed up the delivery of services.

We were also pleasantly surprised by the number of projects that were in
various stages of implementation but obviously the question of
consultation, or rather effective communication, was raised as an issue. We
were given the assurance by councillors that we met, including forums from
inside the community, that indeed there are regular meetings but because of
the nature of the area and the continual arrival of people in the area,
there are problems with the newness of people coming in, people missing
meetings and soon. Our emphasis is on the fact that we need to intensify
our communication and the involvement of people in these issues.

Most importantly, we observed that the absence significant involvement by
other departments of those areas was a major hindrance, in other words not
all departments had a presence in those areas as is required, firstly, by
the integrated development plans and also because these are presidential
nodes. We would have thought that people would have seen this as a crucial
area to be involved in, because it was and still is meant to provide the
lesson of government working together in an integrated fashion. This was
the significance of those areas and of intergovernmental relations.

Another significant observation, if we may share this, relates to the
relationship between the local municipality and district, such as in Maluti-
A-Phofung. Where there is tension and there is a problem, we are convinced
that things will not work as harmoniously as we expect them to. We would
have liked to have seen better a relationship there, and this, of course,
obviously includes our concern with the turnover of senior management in
municipalities. This is a concern for us in Maluti-A-Phofung and we thought
that this is an important area to look at.

Clearly, we only went to three areas.  It was clear, in briefings that we
received subsequent to this oversight visit, that some of the observations
we were making could be applied across the board. There are departments, if
I may give one example, the DTI, that really need to increase the pace and
speed at which they get involved in those areas. Where we saw it coming in,
even if it was late in Kgalagadi, the difference it made was very
significant and crucial. In other areas we would like to see them getting
more involved as well.

If I may move to the next report, Chairperson. The visit to Kerala in India
was significant for two reasons. Firstly, public participation is at the
heart of our governance system in the country, and it is in the
Constitution, but also it is the basis on which this country was liberated.
It was very clear to us in the study group that when you speak about
service delivery, one of the prominent issues is how effective our public
participation systems are on the ground and how they are being experienced
by the public. India, in particular Kerala, which is in the South of India,
has a history and a reputation in this area that we felt contained lessons
for us that are crucial, that we could learn from and integrate in our
practices and indeed some of the observations we made there were very
interesting.

Just to make one significant point about this visit, before we left for
India we also searched around and found that the Portfolio Committee on
Social Development had actually visited the area. As part of our briefing
going there we integrated some of their report, whose observations around
poverty eradication strategies, underpinned by very significant people
involvement, we incorporated because we had confirmed them.

One of the highlights of our observations there was the deliberateness of
political mobilisation of communities to be involved, and this is what
determined the success of this public participation involvement. In other
words, it does not matter what the law says or what it does not say, if
people are not mobilised, it’s not going to work. That is a very
significant observation.

The other very interesting observation was that the three spheres of
government played a very significant role. The constitutional amendment
allowed for devolution but only certain states took advantage of that and
Kerala is one of them. They devolved not only funds but functionaries as
well as functions to municipalities. So you had important work being done
by a local municipality at a local level, with officials from higher levels
of government, operating under the political leadership of the councils.
People’s views, their contributions and their management of their
development were seen as very important and illustrated the work that has
been done there.

We are quite aware that places like Kerala in India, as we were advised by
some of the people who were involved in the design of the system of public
participation, have a long history of political work with high levels of
literacy, which make the quality of involvement very significant. This
makes a difference, because people recognise that they are making a
difference if they control money and budgets directly. It enables them to
see the significance of coming back, because they can see the result of
their work. If changes are to be made, for example, it requires the
agreement of the people who are involved with the projects that have been
designed for development in those areas.

Members, this report is not only significant for what it recommends but
also for the observations that we make. The comparisons that are made are
very significant ones and I think we have a lot to learn. One of the things
we recommend from a skills experience point of view is the Kerala institute
of administration, which has a long history of capacity-building for both
councillors and officials, in a number of languages spoken in the area.

This question of language, members, is a critical one. It’s clear that we
can’t claim democratic practice if all the work we do is only in one
language and not in the language of the people who live in the area. So, in
capacity-building initiatives, what we would like to see illustrated is
that language is an important tool.

The quality of developmental processes was impressive and we think we have
some interesting lessons that we have learned which we can adopt as we go
along. Obviously our own experience is useful here. It reinforced some of
our own practices in our country, showing that we were on the right course.
Generally that report is very useful for that and other reasons when you go
through it, in that we incorporated a lot of other material that was
useful.

We enjoyed good treatment by our embassy there. We met some of the products
of Asgisa who have been trained there and the connections were very useful.
We appreciated that visit a lot and we hope that in future, sharing our
experiences with other committees, we can benefit a lot. Thank you very
much, Chairperson.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.
Motion agreed to.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government -
Oversight visit to Kgalagadi, Alexandra and Maluti-A-Phofung Nodal
Municipalities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government -
International Oversight Visit to Kerala, India accordingly adopted.

      Consideration of report of constitutional review committee – anD
 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE – ANNUAL report

Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Hon Chairperson, you have been well inducted into your new
seat but I would like to add my voice of welcome to you.

Two reports emanating from the Joint Constitutional Review Committee have
been tabled – the ATC Report of 13 June 2007 and the ATC Report of 28 June
2007.

Allow me to deal with these reports separately. The first report pertains
to a request by Mr Bruno Druchen, the National Director of Deaf South
Africa, which was received in October 2006. I might add that Mr Druchen is
the husband of our esteemed parliamentarian, hon Wilma Newhoudt-Druchen.

He indicated that his organisation would like to address the committee on
the possibility of the constitutional recognition of South African sign
language as the 12th official language, as it is the primary means of
communication for approximately 500 000 deaf or partially deaf people in
South Africa. If their immediate families are included, at least 1,5
million people communicate by means of South African sign language on a
regular basis.

After listening to the representation of deaf South Africans and on
receiving a comprehensive additional written submission which dealt
extensively with questions from the committee, the Joint Constitutional
Review Committee came to the following conclusions: Firstly, that the
status quo is unacceptable and discriminatory. Secondly, that the committee
recognises that if South African sign language were to be accommodated as
the 12th official language this would have significant logistical and
budgetary implications which would have to be investigated.

Thirdly, that the committee accordingly requests the Minister in The
Presidency to consider convening a task team, in conjunction with the
Minister of Arts and Culture and the Minister of Education, to investigate
this matter. Fourthly, that the committee urges the Pan South African
Language Board to give effect to the instruction in section 6(5)(a)(iii) of
the Constitution to promote South African sign language.

During the deliberations it became apparent that PanSALB had not acceded to
this instruction. It is imperative that it reports back to Parliament
regarding this matter. As a representative of the people we have a duty to
provide for the need for a just and equitable society, especially for those
who are less fortunate and disabled in some way.

By adopting this report we are sending a clear message to those compatriots
who are contributing so much towards our national heritage that we will
always support their just calls for recognition. I therefore have no
hesitation in recommending the adoption of this report.

The Annual Report of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee was tabled
on 27 June. It is self-explanatory, if read in conjunction with the 2006
review report – the ATC Report of 13th November 2006 - and the
recommendation regarding the convergence of electronic media - the ATC
report of 21 June 2006.

The report serves as a fair reflection of the activities of the Joint
Constitutional Review Committee in 2006. Allow me, as the former
Chairperson of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee, to express my
appreciation to all the members who so diligently served on this committee
as well as the support staff. I also urge them to give the incoming
Chairperson, the hon Dan Montsitsi, the same support.
Accordingly, I would also recommend the adoption of this report. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Constitutional Review Committee accordingly adopted.

Report of Constitutional Review Committee – Annual Report accordingly
adopted.

     CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF ACCESSION TO
     FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION ON RESEARCH AND
             DEVELOPMENT OF GENERATION IV NUCLEAR ENERGY SYSTEMS

Mnu E N MTHETHWA: Mphathisihlalo, Musi kaMhlanga, lesi sivumelwano
esihlangene ngaso namhlanje siphathelene nezindaba zokucubungula futhi
kuthuthukiswe ezenuzi kulokhu okwaziwa ngesizukulwane sesine. Isivumelwano
senziwe zingama-28 Nhlolanja 2005 senziwa amazwe amahlanu okuyiMelika,
iNgilandi, i-Japan, i-France ne-Canada.

UMnyango Wezokuthuthukiswa Komthethosisekelo Nobulungiswa kanye noMnyango
Wezangaphandle bakuqinisekisile ukuthi akukho ukungqubuzana phakathi
komthetho wezwe nalowo womhlaba wonkana kulo mkhakha. Uhulumeni wezwe
lakithi uye wasayinda lesi sivumelwano mhla zingama-28 Ndasa 2007 waphinda
uhulumeni wavuma ukuthi uMnyango Wezokumbiwa Phansi Namandla yiwo ozoba
sekhaleni kulo mkhakha.

Lo Mnyango kuthiwa uzodinga izinkulungwane ezingama-62 zamaYuro njalo
ngonyaka kusukela onyakeni wezimali ka-2007-2008 ukukhokhela izindleko
zokulawulwa kwesithangami somhlaba kwezenuzi. Isahluko sama-231
soMthethosisekelo wezwe laseNingizimu Afrika owamiswa ngonyaka ka-1996
sibeka ukuthi emveni kokwemukelwa kwezivumelwano ezifana nalezi uhulumeni,
nePhalamende nalo kumele lithole ithuba elifana naleli. Kungakho sinxusa
iPhalamende ukuthi livumelane nathi ekutheni asiwuthathe lo mthetho.
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr E N MTHETHWA: Chairperson, Musi kaMhlanga, the agreement about which we
are gathered here today concerns issues regarding research and the
development of nuclear energy in the so-called Generation IV Nuclear Energy
Systems. The agreement was entered into on 28 February 2005 by five
countries, namely America, England, Japan, France and Canada.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development as well as the
Department of Foreign Affairs have confirmed that there is no conflict
between the country’s law and that of the international community in this
regard. The government of our country signed this agreement on 28 March
2007 and has also agreed that the Department of Minerals and Energy will
lead this process.

It is said that this department will need an amount of 62 000 Euros every
year as from the 2007-08 financial year to finance the management of the
Generation IV International Forum. Chapter 231 of the South African
Constitution of 1996 states that after the acceptance of such agreements by
government Parliament should also get the same opportunity. That is why we
ask Parliament to concur with us regarding this law. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Are there any objections to the
approval by Parliament of the Accession to the Framework Agreement for the
International Collaboration on Research and Development of Generation IV
Nuclear Energy Systems? No objections.

Agreed to.

Accession to the Framework Agreement for the International Collaboration on
Research and Development of Generation in Nuclear Energy Systems approved.

The House adjourned at 17:48.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bill passed by Houses– to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 13 September
         2007:


         (a)     National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Translation of Bill submitted

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Strafreg (Vonnisoplegging) [W
             15 – 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Criminal
         Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2007] (National Assembly –
         proposed sec 75), as introduced in Parliament.

National Assembly
1.    Membership of Committees

     (a)    Ms P Tshwete has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on the Nomination of Persons to fill the vacancies on
         the Commission on Gender Equality with effect from 12 September
         2007.


     (b)    Ms T V Tobias has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Works in absentia, with effect from 12
         September 2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     (a)    Report of the National Commissioner of the South African Police
         Service (SAPS) for the period 1 January 2007 to 30 June 2007, in
         terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act
         No 116 of 1998).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on the Rental Housing
     Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 12
     September 2007:
         The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having considered the subject
         of the Rental Housing Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2007] (National
         Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 30A – 2007].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy

    An error occurred on the report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
    and Energy under the entry Committee Reports, published in the
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports dated 12 September 2007.
    In the first line of the second paragraph of the actual report it reads
    the “Select Committee on Minerals and Energy” instead of “Portfolio
    Committee on Minerals and Energy”. The following is the correct report:


         Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
         Accession to the Framework Agreement for the International
         Collaboration on Research and Development of Generation IV Nuclear
         Energy Systems, dated 12 September 2007:

             The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having
             considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
             Accession to the Framework Agreement for the International
             Collaboration on Research and Development of Generation IV
             Nuclear Energy Systems, recommends that the House, in terms of
             section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the said
             Agreement.


        Request to be considered.


