---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-03-14
---

WEDNESDAY, 14 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY



                                  ECONOMICS


                                  Cluster 3


MINISTERS:

The SPEAKER: Order! Regarding Question 114, which has been posed by the hon
Cupido, the Minister of Minerals and Energy, regrettably, is not available
to answer questions today, and it was agreed to by the member that the
question stands over.

           Electricity supply to company at Coega industrial port
113.  Mr L W Greyling (ID) asked the Minister for Public
        Enterprises:(Interdepartmental transfer)


        (a) What are the details of the contract concluded with a certain
        company (name furnished) that is to be located at the Coega
        industrial port, (b) at what cost has the electricity per unit been
        determined for the company and (c)(i) where will the electricity be
        generated from and (ii) how will this affect the current challenges
        related to energy supply?  N463E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Speaker, this question, in fact,
relates to the international company, Alcan. The rate that was agreed to
with this customer was based on the principles which have been set out on
the DTI’s Developmental Electricity Pricing Programme. This rate is
determined and based on a globally competitive price for electricity, but
with the proviso that the customer should not be subsidised by other
customers and that the customer himself should not subsidise other
customers as far as is possible.

The contract also includes an annual real price escalation in line with
Eskom’s projected forward price curve. The agreement and rates have been
approved by the National Energy Regulator of SA, Nersa.

The actual rate is a commercial contract which will not be disclosed in
this House, other than that it is guided by the principles that I have
indicated, which would apply to any potential customer on the same basis.
Those of you who are familiar with the pricing system will know that any
customer who would use more than 50 megawatts in a year is eligible for the
Developmental Electricity Pricing Programme. There are no specific stations
that we can identify. The supplier will be from the national grid.

Finally, the project will not affect the current supply conditions in that
area, the Nelson Mandela Metropole.

The project will have a demand of approximately 1 355 megawatts after the
commissioning of both potlines. The potlines will be built in two phases; a
full capacity of 675 megawatts for the first potline will be required in
2011, and a full capacity for the second potline of 680 megawatts will be
required in 2014. I must say we are very pleased with this contract, and it
shows that South Africa remains highly competitive in the international
energy sector.

Mr C H F GREYLING: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon Minister, for
your reply. I am still trying to put together a few pieces, and obviously
it’s a bit difficult without knowing exactly what the price is that they
will be charged. What I do want to say, though, is that aluminium has often
been described as simply electrified energy in that it is so energy
intensive. Also, as you have indicated by your response, it is going to
require about 1 500 megawatts.
In response to a question to the Minister of Minerals and Energy in 2005,
it was stated that iGas, Eskom and Shell were investigating the feasibility
of using imported liquid natural gas, or LNG. Is that still an option, or
will we be getting that from normal coal-fired power stations? If we are
getting this from liquefied natural gas, I would imagine that that would
make the energy costs a lot higher; in which case, who is going to be
subsidising the extra cost that goes to Alcan?

If we are not getting it from liquefied natural gas, we will be getting it
from coal-fired power stations, which will substantially increase our
greenhouse gas emissions. What statement would the Minister like to make in
terms of reducing those greenhouse gas emissions? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I would like to say don’t worry about
putting the pieces together; I will give you the information. The
developmental pricing system will look at the projection of what is not
strictly an economic term but at an approximation that is called the
average price. This looks at the average price of generation from a whole
range of different generating sources, Eskom’s existing portfolio and our
projected portfolio.

We do this because the charge at the marginal price, if you are familiar
with those issues, would be very high indeed. That answers one part of your
question. We would not charge at marginal prices. This would have an impact
on the economy of charging very high prices for any new investment, and I
don’t think that’s wise. We should benefit from our past investment - it’s
one of our great strengths - and we should price that forward.

The average price will continue to rise and quite markedly, I am afraid,
because of the new Bill. It is an average price curve. So as the new Bill
comes in, if we do utilise the opportunity for LNG in Ngqurha, we will do
so. That particular price of that system, be it within Eskom or be it
within an independent power producer, will have the effect of raising the
average price, which is our benchmark price for this contract.

I am sorry about being a bit complex, but really it is very important for
this matter to be well understood. I think it is one of our great strengths
in South Africa in that we can plan well in advance - into the future. In
fact, our ability to sign a contract for 25 years is quite rare in the
world today. Therefore, we will not subsidise this particular project no
matter what we are putting into that area, be it LNG, be it a pebble bed,
or be it a pressurised water reactor. Whatever it might be that we put
there eventually, yes, the LNG projects are being considered. But I think
it is a very stable pricing system, and what I want to stress as very
important is that any project of 50-plus megawatts utilisation can qualify
for the developmental pricing initiative.

The processes are quite rigorous; they have to demonstrate that they have
knock-on effects. I think we’ve developed a quite interesting and unique
pricing system for our projects, and it would be very unwise for South
Africa not to utilise its strength and energy. We are one of the low-cost
producers and we will remain, fortunately, into the future, one of the low-
cost producers in the world.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, an IPP, or independent power producer, such
as those recently reported in the media concerning the Ngqurha industrial
zone, will clearly have the ability to provide considerable base load
capacity, such as the reported approximate 1 600 megawatts of a closed
cycle gas turbine which has been considered for the aluminium smelter still
to be built.

Would the Minister support the notion of IPPs being independent power
producers such as the IPSA, being solely responsible for the provisioning
of electricity for, inter alia, industrial zones such as Ngqurha and other
instances in which Eskom, the responsible parastatal for electricity, plays
a secondary and, in some instances, no role in the provisioning of
electricity? I am referring particularly to the government’s policy on the
70-30 split: 70% by Eskom and 30% by IPPs. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Unfortunately, the member’s question
shows quite a profound misunderstanding of how the system works. I would
like to explain it because, as I have just explained to the hon member,
this is one of our great strengths.
The system works as a total system. An independent power producer, as the
chairperson of Eskom outlined to Parliament, will sell the electricity. In
order to facilitate the IPPs, they will sell their electricity to Eskom
through what is called a power-purchasing agreement. One of the issues that
we are currently debating is how we share the risk of a power-purchasing
agreement. Whose responsibility is it to pay or provide the electricity,
because the PPA is a take-or-pay agreement whose responsibility is it to
pay if that IPP doesn’t produce for commercial or other risk factors?

Your question is misplaced. We would never - it makes no sense for the very
reasons I have argued in the earlier answer, and it would be very silly
indeed - put an IPP into Ngqurha and then supply the users in Ngqurha at
that price, because that price is very high. So we price this at the
average price: average for those of you who are good economists - which I
am sure this whole House is - although this is a slight misuse of the word.
Douglas Gibson says he is an economist, so Christmas must be in September.
[Laughter.]

We are quite comfortable. The Department of Minerals and Energy has
considered the possibility of an IPP into Ngqurha, so what will happen then
is it will supply into the total grid. It will not just be for that. By and
large, an LNG gas-fired station will be a very high cost for base load
capacity. So, generally, we will not consider LNG for base load at this
point. For us, coal - and as we have recently announced - pressurised water
reactors or pebble bed reactors would have a better base load capacity.

I hope I have clarified this. I think it is an interesting possibility. We
would love the private sector to come in, as we have indicated, for 30% of
the generation, but they will do so within the economic and regulatory
model I have just very briefly described.

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Minister, I want to start by
expressing appreciation that you educated the House in terms of how the
national grid works. The question I particularly want to ask you is: Are
there any projects which have been embarked upon by Eskom around that
particular part of the country, in relation to the generation of
electricity? Secondly, what is it that Eskom is doing in terms of ensuring
that we are strengthening our national grid because, I think, that is where
the problem is?

We must strengthen our national grid so that we are able to have enough
capacity to supply electricity. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you, hon member, and thank you
for this chance to further educate the House. As we have indicated very
clearly - and this is a national priority - the structure of the South
African grid is that the base load sits in the north and demand is growing
in the south. As we have also graphically experienced, we have problems
whenever Koeberg goes down, because it is the only base load station in the
south. As we have indicated, we will attempt to increase the base load
capacity in the southern part of the grid.

Currently, we have been putting in two closed cycle gas turbine plants.
These are quite expensive forms of generation. This is roughly 1 000
megawatts: one in Mossel Bay and the other in Atlantis. Fortunately, they
have both come on stream in the Western Cape and the Eastern Cape before
the winter and that, I think, is very important.

The second thing that we will do is light up Danny Oliphant in Atlantis
quite shortly... [Laughter.] The second thing that we will do is strengthen
the grid. We are one of the few countries in the world that are now
building 765-megawatt grids. This is moving closer to the Cape each year.
Our target is some time in the middle of next year. That helps. Also, for
the Ngqurha project we will put in a 765-megawatt grid. There will be
redundancy, so it will come in from both sides and that will allow us to
supply Alcan and other projects. And, as the questioner indicated, we must
consider a further base load project in the south, and, as we have recently
indicated, we will probably consider a conventional nuclear reactor in the
south to give us more base load capacity.

The grid, as you know, is very important. It has to be balanced across the
whole system and this is why base load is very important. Basically, we do
have to put a base load plant somewhere in the Nelson Mandela Metropole
area.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Hon Speaker, hon Minister, in light of the high unemployment
and the need for urgent development in the Eastern Cape, could the Minister
give us the assurance that the contract includes specific conditions or
programmes relating to skills development within the context of Agisa?

An HON MEMBER: Asgisa!

Mr H B CUPIDO: Sorry. Asgisa

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: The conditions of a developmental
contract have to be internationally competitive. They must meet the needs
of major users of electricity. Basically, this works in the following way
because the size of the project is above 50 megawatts, this means it will
have a significant impact on the economy of that area. The Department of
Trade and Industry attempts to quantify that impact, and that impact will
spread knock-on effects and other industries that can be brought in.
Skills, directly, are not a specific component, but we are quite confident
that this will be a knock-on effect.

Remember that international investment has many places it can go to, so to
think that you can set any condition you want in South Africa and still
expect one of the world’s biggest aluminium companies to come here is a
naive notion.

So, if we want jobs, if we want skills, we really have to have investment
in South Africa. In order to do that, we have to have internationally
competitive energy pricing, which we have been able to do in this case.
But, certainly, between the state-owned enterprises of Transnet, Eskom,
Denel and others we are working very actively on developing skills. I think
this will be a wonderful opportunity to do so.

By having such a big project at Ngqurha there will be tremendous benefits
for that area. I think that this is exceptionally positive for the South
African economy. It is really silly to start criticising it when we have
conceived of the thing so well. It will create a new area and create a new
industrial port. I think this is something we in this House should all back
fully.

       Legislation to protect farm workers against evictions and abuse

87.   Mr B A Radebe (ANC) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land
      Affairs:


      (1)   In light of her recent statement regarding the increase in
           evictions and abuse of farm workers, what measures have been or
           will be taken to address this matter;
      (2)   whether her department is considering updating existing
           legislation or introducing new legislation to protect farm
           workers; if not, why not; if so, (a) what is the status of the
           process, (b) what are the stumbling blocks and (c) when will the
           relevant legislation be tabled?              N434E

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, the
Department of Land Affairs is in the process of establishing a land rights
management facility that will, inter alia, provide legal representation to
victims of all forms of land rights infringements, establish a
comprehensive eviction-monitoring system that will include a call centre
with a toll-free number, and provide for a panel of mediators at provincial
and district levels.

The answer to part 2(a) of the question is that the department will develop
a policy separating the management of evictions from the provision of
security of tenure to farm dwellers. With respect to the latter, new
legislation will be drafted in order to provide security of tenure to farm
dwellers through a redistributive process. It is now considered that
existing legislation for land redistribution can be used to provide
security of tenure to farm dwellers and farmworkers.

Concerning the management of evictions, the Prevention of Illegal
Eviction From and Unlawful Occupation of Land Act of 1998 - that is the PIE
- is in terms of Cabinet’s decision to be transferred from the Department
of Housing to the Department of Land Affairs. We therefore believe that the
Extension of Security of Tenure Act – Esta - and the Land Reform (Labour
Tenants) Act – LTA - of 1996 will be incorporated into the PIE for the
purposes of enhancing the management of evictions and creating a universal
procedure for dealing with evictions.

Concerning the policy alluded to above, there are no stumbling blocks.
However, with regard to the legislative process involving the prevention of
illegal eviction Act, the amendment to the PIE driven by the Department of
Housing should not be delayed. Assuming that the amendment to the PIE is
concluded, including the parliamentary processes and public hearings, the
new legislation incorporating provisions of Esta and the LTA for the
management of evictions will be included in the 2008-09 legislative
programme of the department. I thank you.

Mr B A RADEBE: Comrade Minister, your statement was correct when you stated
that there were cases of illegal evictions and abuse on the farms. In my
constituency we have people like Reverend Mfuphi, who was shot and killed
for trying to hold a night vigil. I have in my constituency a Mr Mokoena,
who was shot for refusing to wash the farmer’s car; and Mr Mcirha who was
born on a farm and lived there until he was around 65 years old. The farmer
tried to refuse his burial on that farm. So the statement you made was
correct: there were cases of illegal evictions and abuse on the farms. The
challenge now is for Transvaal Agricultural Union and AgriSA to isolate
those farmers who are abusing the farmworkers.

We know that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white.
We appreciate the initiative taken by the department, of creating the land
rights management facility so that we can protect the vulnerable
farmworkers. The question now, Minister, is: How far is the establishment
of that facility and how widespread is the roll-out going to be? Is it
going to be at national, provincial or local level? Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon Radebe.
Indeed, we all know that evictions are rife all over the country and we
also know that there are serious human rights abuses on some of our farms.
It is hoped that the land rights management facility will be finalised in
due course. We will finish the first half this year.

We are also confident that we are going to work together with various
farmers’ unions. We have had our talks recently, with AgriSA, the Transvaal
Agricultural Union and the National African Farmers’ Union. We have all
agreed that together we have the responsibility not just to guard the
rights of farmworkers, but also to take responsibility and ensure security
and safety in our farming communities, including combating and condemning
the killings of farmers in our rural communities. Thank you.
The SPEAKER: Order! We now come to Question 76 ... Oh, I am only now
getting the name of the hon Nel.

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Speaker, I can assure you, the hon Nel did push his
button some time ago when the first question was called. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Did he want to speak during the first question?

Mr C M LOWE: No, Madam Speaker. The hon Nel pressed his button to speak on
this question, but when the question was called I did see him. Thank you
very much.

Mr A C NEL: Thank you, Speaker. Firstly, I want to ask the Minister if she
based her recent statement regarding abuse and rape of farmworkers on the
alleged rape of a farmworker in Rawsonville. Secondly, do you, the Human
Rights Commission or Mr Radebe know by name any case of illegal evictions
from farms? If you do, you are breaking the law by not giving evidence to
the police.

What I cannot understand - and maybe the Minister can tell us - is why is a
bad apple in the farming community is an agricultural problem that reflects
badly on all farmers? But a bad apple in, say, the ANC is a case for the
police and the person is not guilty until a court finds him or her guilty?
Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I thought Mr Nel was dealing
with the next question.

Firstly, my statement was not a general statement that referred to all
farmers. We have highlighted the positive contributions of farmers in
various parts of the country. We have also highlighted the efforts of
commercial white farmers who have set up joint ventures with emerging black
farmers, who have transferred skills to emerging black farmers and assisted
them to begin to realise production and income as new or emerging farmers.

However, the fact of the matter is that there are human rights abuses.
There are serious human rights abuses on farms and we cannot deny those
abuses. Mr Nel, I have definitely answered your questions in writing,
asking for statistics on evictions, asking for reports that have been
tabled to the department. I have given you written answers to those
questions.

I also want to say that we, as the Department of Agriculture, are not going
to apologise for what we are doing to protect farmworkers. We are not going
to apologise for telling the truth. Thank you. [Applause.]

          Procedural correctness in awarding of new lottery licence

76.   Mr L M Green (FD) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:
      (1)   Why was a certain company (name furnished) ruled out of
           contention for the new lottery licence;

      (2)   whether he was informed of any political office-bearers who have
           a financial interest in a certain consortium (name furnished)
           which received the lottery licence; if so, what are the relevant
           details;

      (3)   whether all the provisions stipulated in the Lotteries Act, Act
           57 of 1997, were followed when the lottery licence was awarded
           to the said consortium; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                 N331E

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Madam Speaker, the response to the first part of the
question is as follows. The selection process for the preferred consortium
to be the operator for the national lottery involves scoring, using various
criteria. Gidani scored higher than the other bidders. It is therefore
incorrect to say that Uthingo was ruled out of contention to operate the
new lottery licence. They were selected as the second preferred bidder
during a process which was regarded as fair and a process that was done
with integrity.

The answer to the second part of the question is as follows. As part of the
process of evaluating the bidders, the Minister of Trade and Industry was
informed in writing that no political office-bearers had a shareholding in
Gidani.

Concerning the third part of the same question, the Minister and the
National Lottery Board were of the view that all the provisions were
followed as required, in terms of the Lotteries Act. Thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon Minister for her
answer. Minister, I am concerned about the process that has been followed
in awarding the licence of the national lottery. The process has revealed
the inner wrangling of powerful consortia and politically well-connected
individuals. Everyone is striving to have stake in this lucrative business
that generates billions of rand every year.

My follow-up question, hon Minister, is: Given the fact that the upkeep of
the lottery is largely done by the poor who, with their limited funds,
engage in chance practices, hoping with ongoing perseverance to make a
quick windfall, resulting in the ongoing cycle of poverty, and given that
the Minister of Finance has now strongly promoted a culture of saving
amongst all South Africans including the poor, would it not be an opportune
time for the Minister to reflect on the great good it would do our nation
in terminating the national lottery? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister for
Trade and Industry): I would like to say that the Minister of Trade and
Industry is on record as having said and reiterated that the process that
was followed for awarding the licence to operate the national lottery was
fair; it was rigorous and done with integrity. In this regard, his
confidence in the work done by the National Lotteries Board remains. That’s
as far as the process is concerned.

Regarding the second part of your question, I think those debates on
whether or not South Africa should have a lottery, on whether or not South
Africa should allow legal gambling, took place and were completed in 1997
when legislation was brought to this House. It was supported by all of you
in that South Africa was going to engage in these processes to ensure that
illegal gambling was kept out of the country and that you get whatever
revenue might be accumulated for developmental processes. So, I don’t think
that question arises now.

But, not being the Minister of Trade and Industry and just being the acting
Minister, I cannot speculate on what the Minister would have said in
response to your question. Thank you.

Dr P J RABIE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, from the DA’s side
we would like to know who is going to pay the legal costs in terms of the
ruling of Judge Willie Seriti regarding the investigation and the
application of Uthingo and Gidani. From the DA’s side we’d like to know who
is going to pay the legal costs. Will it be the Department of Trade and
Industry, or the National Lotteries Board? Finally, who is going to take
responsibility? Is it going to be the Minister, the Department of Trade and
Industry or the National Lotteries Board? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Hon member, obviously, if the judgment says that the
Minister must pay the costs, the department will pay the costs. If it says
that it should be the National Lotteries Board... I don’t know which
respondents have been asked to pay the costs, but the people that have been
asked by the court to pay the costs will do so.

I am not sure just what you are trying to ascertain with your question.

Could you clarify this? I’m not sure whether you said the Minister must
personally pay the costs.

Dr P J RABIE: Yes, I would like to elaborate on that. This is the
taxpayers’ money, and we would like to know whether we get value for it or
whether is it being spent on court cases. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and industry: Through you, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Minister holds
office as a member of the executive on behalf of the South African people.
If his department has briefed lawyers, the department will be the one
paying the costs of lawyers, unless you are saying in this case that the
court ordered specifically that the Minister pay the costs.

Prof E S CHANG: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, and thank you, Minister. We do
not think that the Minister is 100% wrong, but this is now creating a
controversial grey area. Could the Acting Minister of Trade and Industry
give this House an assurance that there will be mechanisms in place in the
future to avoid confusion in terms of the grey area that this situation
created?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Thank you, hon member. I want to avoid talking about
what will happen in the future, because a lot of action is going to take
place or may take place in this case. So the Minister of Trade and Industry
will be guided by the outcome of this case or other cases in terms of how
our courts will interpret the legislation. If there are grey areas that are
exposed through this process, I’m sure that the Minister will consider
taking corrective action. Thank you.

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, we from the DA and the
general public at large feel that the government’s money was
misappropriated regarding legal costs. We feel that the hon Minister owes
the general public an apology regarding this particular appropriation of
public funds. Will he do it or not? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Hon member, if I am taken to court to defend the
government and its position, I don’t understand how you can call that
useless or fruitless expenditure. So I do not agree with you that the
taxpayers’ money was unnecessarily wasted. The Minister had to go to court
to answer to an application that called him to answer in court. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I’m under the impression that we
ask questions because we need answers. But if we ask questions because we
desire a specific answer, then it becomes very difficult for this exercise.

    Withholding tax regime on gross payments to visiting entertainers and
                                sportspersons

88.   Mr B A Mnguni (ANC) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   With reference to the final withholding tax regime on gross
           payments to visiting entertainers and sportspersons which was
           introduced in 2005, (a) what is the SA Revenue Service’s (Sars)
           receipt from this source and (b) what mechanisms are in place to
           ensure that potential revenue from this source is declared and
           collected;


      (2)   whether international entertainers and sportspersons or their
           local representatives have instituted objections against their
           assessments; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   what tax concessions can be expected in respect of the 2010
           Soccer World Cup tournament?
           N435E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker, and thank
you, hon Mnguni, for the question.

The final withholding tax for visiting entertainers and sportspersons was
introduced by the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill in 2005, and the President
signed the proclamation on 28 July last year, so that this became effective
from 1 August 2006.

Since the introduction, the SA Revenue Service has collected about
R10 million in withholding taxes for the first seven months of the
legislation’s operation. The legislation has a compliance mechanism and
also associated sanctions built in. For example, a South African resident
who is primarily responsible for organising an international event in South
Africa must notify Sars of the event within 14 days of concluding an
agreement to organise the event.
This also imposes certain obligations on the organiser, including a joint
liability for taxes unpaid and so on.

Within the large business unit of Sars there is a small dedicated team who
focus on this area, and there is ongoing communication from the team. The
commercial banks involved in promotion normally require a promoter to
provide a tax clearance certificate so that the issues are timeously dealt
with by all parties concerned. There have been no objections to date. Thank
you very much, Deputy Speaker.

Mr B A MNGUNI: Ke a leboha, Tonakgolo ka karabo ya hao. [Thank you, hon
Minister, for your answer.]

In the event that the organiser does not inform the Sars team in time - and
some might like to dodge the tax, and don’t publish in the media or on the
Internet - what measures are in place to recover or to take care of the tax
due?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, the chain works. It’s unlikely
that a promoter will have sufficient cash so that he or she does not need a
commercial bank. You have a mechanism in which the banks are directly
involved. The banks would require that a tax clearance certificate be shown
before they would support a promotion like this.

It deals with a set of relationships, because if the banks fail to act,
they will not be acting in the context of the letter and spirit of the law
and they know that they would invite detailed enquiries from Sars. So they
act, and act correctly. But if the promoter fails to ensure that the
sportsperson or the entertainer pays the tax, then it will be recovered
from the promoter. I have no doubt about that.

I don’t think we have encountered difficulties. What we are doing is not
unique to South Africa. That is why, whilst we may have only introduced the
legislation late and it’s only been operational for a few months, there
haven’t been any complaints or objections to it. The hon Mnguni sits on the
committee. He would know how the section of the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill
went through, and since its operation, it’s operational.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. In respect of the
question asked, I noticed that the Minister didn’t answer the third part
with regard to 2010. I wonder if he could enlighten us in that regard?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: In respect of the provisions applicable on the
withholding tax, no concessions were sought from Fifa. Of course, for 2010
Fifa has sought a series of concessions on other issues, such as the
importation of goods into the country without trade taxes, the ability to
distribute those goods without the imposition of VAT, for instance, and the
idea of tax bubbles where merchandise is sold. But those are dealt with
under different provisions. For instance, there’s no withholding tax that
would apply in respect of the players coming in. Fifa did not ask for this
issue to be dealt with in the negotiations and agreements struck. Thank
you.

              Government policy on taxation in relation to GDP

96.   Mr I O Davidson (DA) asked the Minister of Finance:

      Whether he will make a statement on the Government’s policy on
      taxation as it relates to the level of revenue collected in terms of
      the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)?                  N445E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, and thank you to the
hon Davidson for the question. On 14 June 1996, in this House, we tabled a
macroeconomic reform strategy entitled the Strategy for Growth, Employment
and Redistribution. In that document one of the aspirations we set out was
a tax-to-GDP ratio of 25%. It was then contained in the document as an
aspiration. It is very important because, in the previous year, in 1994-95,
the tax-to-GDP ratio was only 22,5%.

Now the 25%, granted, was a kind of rule of thumb, taking account of what
government might want to take out of the economy on the one hand and, on
the other hand, the developmental needs and how we would have to exercise
that position. None of these would be fixed for all time. The 25% is still
there, but we are now looking at it from the other side of the 25% compared
to where we were when we tabled Gear. So there is one set of issues. I
think it is a kind of discussion that we must have in this House and
elsewhere from time to time.

The other issue that is important about what we had then and what we have
now is the composition of tax. In the 1994-95 year personal income tax made
up about 40% of taxes collected. In the current fiscal year we anticipate
it will be about 29,2%. That has been kind of constant, depending on how
much spending there is in the economy, but in 1994-95 it was 26,1% and now
it is kind of 28%.

So there isn’t that much movement, but the big change has been in respect
of corporate tax, which in the 1994-95 year was as low as 12,1% and now is
double that. So the big change has, in fact, been on the corporate side.

Now this is important, because it clearly has been an area where the bulk
of base broadening has happened. It is also important, because the
administrative efficiency of the SA Revenue Service would be tested right
here as there is a battle of wits about these issues. It is indicative of
the high levels of profitability, because company income tax is, of course,
a tax on profits. But I think that it is also important to understand that
that change brings with it a variability that would not be there in the
same way if you were more dependent on secondary taxes. It is a tax on
profits and so, when profits are in decline or you come to the end of the
business cycle, there is then likely to be less company income tax to be
collected.

So the cyclical nature of corporate taxes is something we need to
understand. Your colleague the hon Stephens is not in the House, but this
issue that we were talking about yesterday - about the surplus - is largely
a consequence of this issue. So 25% is there; it’s not as aspirational as
it was when we tabled the strategy in 1996, but it is still some kind of a
reference point. I think more important than just that ratio is also the
composition of the tax yield. Thank you.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and thank you for that
reply, Minister. I take the point that the Minister has made, but
notwithstanding the fact that 25% was an aspirational figure, I think there
was a clear indication, particularly to overseas investors, of the type of
the level of taxation that would possibly be applicable to them in terms of
investing in this country. In other words, there was a figure designated
which, give or take, they could relate to in terms of their commitment to
South Africa and their tax commitment.

That has now gone out of line and, quite rightly, as you said, corporate
tax has now increased quite considerably as a proportion, which just
underlines the importance of the question of giving some sort of indication
to corporates out there, and more particularly to overseas investors out
there, of what your policy in respect of taxation is, because that speaks
to their forward planning exercise in terms of where they are going to
invest. I know the Minister is somehow sceptical as to exactly what ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time has expired and I still don’t get the
question.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Well, I think the Minister gets the gist of the question.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I should get up and say I don’t get the gist.
[Laughter.]

Regarding the 12,1% in 1994-95, the corporate tax rate in the budget then
was reduced to 40% from 48% and a secondary tax on companies was introduced
at the rate of 25%. We have had this argument and there are those who
appear before the committee and so on, who are quite ideological about the
tax and dividends. Now we are comparing like with like, and we are
comparing the 29% corporate tax rate.

I have looked at a number of surveys undertaken by the World Economic Forum
and by various universities, at a competitiveness survey undertaken by the
World Bank, at a “Doing Business in 2007” survey undertaken by the
International Finance Corporation and the World Bank together. None of them
raised tax rates as an issue in quite the same way. I think that what they
would do – and, of course, business does not like paying tax - is rather
deal with an environment that is a lot more certain.

Some of the things that you have seen in some new countries, like some of
those formerly of the Russian Federation, are that they have had these flat
taxes. They have privatised all kinds of things, and then realised that it
is actually not workable, and they have had to retreat. That creates far
more uncertainty than what any investors had to deal with in their tax
relations in South Africa.

So our communication to all investors is: Steady as she goes. I believe
that we have a reasonable relationship. Sometimes businesses complain that
they do not like this ease with which somebody from Sars writes, and says,
“This is my card, and I am your dedicated representative. If you have any
problem, call me 24 hours a day. We are here to render a service.” They do
not like that; they feel it is too close.

I do not know if tax rates or the tax composition in this country is as
much of a problem as some rabid free-marketeers sometimes hold it out to
be. [Time expired.]

    Reporting of suspicious transactions to Financial Intelligence Centre
                      (FIC), and investigation thereof

89.   Ms J L Fubbs (ANC) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   (a) How many suspicious transactions were (i) reported to the
           Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) since its inception and (ii)
           investigated and (b) how is the money involved in established
           money-laundering operations treated;

      (2)   whether any criminal investigations were instituted against any
           person(s) as a result of suspicious transactions; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether the FIC detected any funds that may have been used for
           financing terrorist activities; if so, what are the relevant
           details?
           N436E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker, and my thanks
go to the hon Fubbs for the question. In the past financial year, 19 793
reports of suspicious or unusual transactions were received by the centre.
Not all of the transactions are criminal in nature. Joan Fubbs may go to
the local branch of a bank and suddenly want to draw R100 000 from her
account on a particular day. The bank would say, “Hon Fubbs, come back this
afternoon,” and in the meantime it would say, “This is an unusual
transaction.”

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Yes, can we ask you to do the same, hon Gibson?
[Interjections.] What the Financial Intelligence Centre doesn’t do is that
it doesn’t investigate. It receives these suspicious transactions. In the
legislation we thought it more important to have a body that has a set of
good relations with a range of financial intermediaries. That is a
reference point.

The focus is largely on the eye – it is intelligence rather than evidence.
So, in the drafting of the legislation this information, in the form that
we receive it in the FIC, can’t be used in a court of law either, but it
first has to be processed by law-enforcement agencies. So there is a very
close relationship with the SA Police Service, with the Directorate of
Special Operations - the Scorpions - and also with the Asset Forfeiture
Unit. That is where these issues are dealt with, so that the FIC exists as
a collection point rather than as an enforcement agency in own name and
right.

With regard to the third part of the question, if there is a transaction
that is deemed to be in violation of the “Pocdatara”, or the Protection of
Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, the
other agencies will have to deal with it – we would be aware of it.
Sometimes, by the way in which they look at information and understand
transactions as they flow out of particular points or between particular
sets of individuals, they then have to make the inferences and take that
issue further.

We also have a responsibility in terms of standing resolutions of the
United Nations Security Council to act in a particular way on those
matters. Thank you.

Ms J L FUBBS: Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker, and thank you also,
Minister Manuel, for what can only be a very enlightening clarification
that I know a number of South Africans, if not most, would welcome.

Minister, there is just one area which you may wish to give an opinion on,
which would perhaps further reassure people. As you are aware, most of the
large banks have been complaining that the current FIC obligations are just
so onerous and that that is part of the reason why administration costs are
rising. They want to do so much, they will say, for the bulk – the majority
- of South Africans to bring them in. But it is this FIC that is making it
difficult for them. What is your opinion regarding the continuation of what
has just become a kind of mantra of a complaint by the banking community?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, even if the banks complain I think
we need to say thank you to the banks in South Africa, because they are
actually very highly compliant. I think what we are seeing in respect of
the banks is that they respect their licences. I know for ordinary
individuals that when you arrive at the airport you need $100 to get a taxi
on the other side, and they want your electricity bill. There is a sense of
red tape about this.

If you look at the issue of administrative costs in the banks, for a long
time the banks had indicated that they did not want individuals with small
accounts. But since the very same banks initiated Mzansi, you have seen
those numbers take off. So the issue of costs is not so much a problem for
them. The way in which the law is structured is that the front desk people
- the tellers - would be responsible. So it is for that reason that the
tellers actually insist that all of them should be covered. They are the
last port of call. They would end up in court if they violated this, and so
they are actually enforcers of the law.

On balance, I don’t think it works too badly. I also don’t think that the
banks have excluded people on this basis. It is, in fact, a lot more
difficult to enforce with the same intent in respect of some other
intermediaries. Estate agents and, just recently, the FIC held workshops
with the Estate Agency Affairs Board because, if an estate agent has a
sense that somebody has a big suitcase of money and they are transacting in
that way, they have a responsibility to report this. Similarly, people
dealing in motor vehicle sales and the casinos have that kind of
responsibility, and our battle is in fact to hold up the banks as an
example and to get the other intermediaries to act in the same spirit.

It is this acting together that will prevent the money-laundering. We must
provide no place to hide for crooks and launderers, because laundering
always comes after the commission of some other crime. This would either be
drugs transacted, taxes evaded or some other way in which people have
accumulated money that then results in the laundering. We must ensure that
we can deal with laundering within that context, but understand that ahead
of it are some other crimes as well. Thank you.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Deputy Speaker, I just want to follow up by asking if
there were any investigations and prosecutions as a result of these
transactions, and, if so, what was the monetary value attached to those?
Secondly, does the success or lack thereof justify the operation costs of
the FIC and also the cost to individuals and business in complying with
this? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, is he still a maiden, the hon
Marais? He lost it.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: He lost it yesterday, I am told.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Of just the suspicious transactions reported, the
amount covered in the reports is about R427 million. But those are just
reports; they don’t mean anything. My difficulty, hon Marais, is that our
enforcement agencies will take these things forward. You will see
increasingly that laundering is one of the charges along with other charges
brought against individuals. We have to do a lot more work in this area.

Part of what we must ensure is that the law-enforcement agencies actually
have a better capability to prosecute in this area. That is work in
progress; it is about building the capacity to ensure that the suspicious
transactions can be sorted, and those that hint at something else pursued
with more vigour. But it is not our responsibly in the FIC.

Your question about the monetary value of business complying and so on: you
can’t look at life like that. You won’t know the value of the FIC until you
have discovered some day that there are people who have been amassing money
to launch dirty nuclear bombs or something like that. You won’t know that.

So, you can’t quite argue like that, because the role of intelligence and
financial intelligence is one of those areas. It can’t actually just be
measured narrowly in terms of rands and cents. There is a series of other
issues that come into play, and it is very important that we appreciate
that in the wider context of law enforcement and the spirit of democracy in
this country. Thank you.

   Intensification of trade liberalisation and export diversification, and
                          impact thereof on Asgisa

74.   Prince N E Zulu (IFP) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (1)   Whether trade liberalisation and export diversification have
           been intensified to counter the volatility in commodity pricing
           within the economy; if not, why not; if so, what will be the
           impact on the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
           Africa (Asgisa);

      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?
           N5E

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Madam Deputy Speaker, the answer to the question is as
follows. Yes, indeed, our efforts to diversify our basket of exports are
intensifying, although we must recognise that this is also a gradual
process. We haven’t only now started to look at this, but we can say that
it is now being intensified.

Some of the prerequisites that are required for export diversification are,
firstly, the international competitiveness of exports, which depends mostly
on the underlying competitiveness of the South African economy itself and
also on the exchange rate levels; secondly, it is market access that
requires participation in the multilateral trade organisations, the ability
to negotiate favourable trading terms within those organisations and
mutually beneficial trade with bilateral and regional partners; thirdly,
resource support in which we could include financial incentives, trade
finance and insurance products, all within a basket of government
interventions designed to improve the competitiveness of exports.

Regarding trade liberalisation, this will not be intensified as an end in
itself, but will be seen rather in support of a multilateral development
trade agenda defined by the Doha Round of World Trade Organisation talks,
and also where the department itself deems it necessary for strategic
purposes. The examples of the latter include where we have signed
agreements like our trade and development co-operation agreement with the
EU, the SADC Trade Protocol and the recently concluded free trade agreement
with the European Free Trade Association.

Obviously, any intensification of the diversification of our exports and
trade liberalisation that seeks to improve competitiveness of the domestic
economy, and thereby move the economy onto a sustainable growth path, is
fully aligned with the objectives of the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa. Thank you.

Prof E S CHANG: I will speak on behalf of Prince Zulu. My question is very
simple. It relates to labour liberalisation and free trade. What impact
will they have on South Africa’s economic growth rate, on job creation and
on job losses? Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not get ...

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Neither did I, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Prof E S CHANG: Oh, okay. I was asking how trade liberalisation and free
trade would impact on the South African economic growth rate. Also, what
will the impact be on job creation and job losses?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Well, if you talk about diversification of exports,
obviously as we diversify exports we add value. If you look at what we have
done in the past few years, we have actually diversified our exports from
the primary commodities, which are really your mineral resources, to
manufactured goods to the extent that the export of manufactured goods has
actually overtaken that of the primary commodities. As we add value to our
products, more jobs are created at home, and obviously that is a good
thing.

When it comes to trade liberalisation, I think, as South Africa, we have
gone a long way towards liberalising our trade, reducing the tariffs that
are there in the economy and the subsidies. What we would look at doing is
to keep protection in those areas, industries or those sectors which are
sensitive for our economy, particularly in a labour-intensive sector that
can create a lot of jobs and where there is clear evidence that there is
dumping or it is being threatened by imports from other countries. A
government would then, in protecting jobs, try to use trade liberalisation
to balance that. So, both of them do have an impact on job creation in the
country.

Dr P J RABIE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Acting Minister, you referred to
Asgisa and so forth. My question to you is: Will you be able to tell the
Assembly when the National Industrial Policy Framework will be released? We
believe that it has been before Cabinet, and we would appreciate it if you
could give us an indication as to when it will be released to the general
public. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Thank you, Chairperson. I think that is a new
question, because indeed you are looking for a date as to when this policy
will be released. All I can say is that the Department of Trade and
Industry has worked extensively on the National Industrial Policy Framework
for our country, the aim of which it is to create a platform for what I
have just spoken about – the competitiveness of our economy and ensuring
that we diversify the basket of our exports, as well as that we also look
at our niche markets where we can have even more tradable exports. As
regards the date, hon member, a thousand apologies. I wouldn’t know that.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: One cannot help but appreciate, according to the
responses from the Minister, the government’s policy and strategy on the
question I have asked regarding the macroeconomic reform strategy. The
prerequisites that are listed here make reference to that. I would like to
emphasise the fact that there is a paradigm shift in terms of export
diversification, particularly the beneficiation strategy, and in export
incentives.

Obviously, one can also further ask the following question: Minister, are
we confident, as South Africa, that export diversification can rebuff the
volatility of commodity prices? I say this with special reference to the
expected impact on sector investments as found within the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. Thanks, Chair.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY (on behalf of the Minister of
Trade and Industry): Hon member, I can say, yes, we are confident because
the proposed National Industrial Policy Framework is creating a platform to
address two key issues on which export diversification rests, which are
competitiveness and capacity. This framework will indeed pave the way for
South Africa to mitigate the impact of volatile commodity prices.

In terms of the third pillar of export diversification, which is that of
market access, hon members know that as we speak our President, accompanied
by several Ministers, including our Minister of Trade and Industry, is in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to spearhead South Africa’s trade and
investment drive into this new high-growth market. As South Africa, we need
to target new, dynamic and nontraditional growth markets. And, I think,
that is what the DTI’s National Industrial Policy Framework seeks to do.
Thank you.

              Support mechanisms for land claims beneficiaries

84.   Ms C Nkuna (ANC) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:

      What mechanisms will be put in place to support the land claims
      beneficiaries in order to ensure that they remain productive?

                       N431E

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chair. The Land
Claims Commission and the Department of Land Affairs are working jointly on
a settlement support implementation strategy. In each regional office of
the commission, settlement support staff are involved in the early
settlement processes of a land claim to ensure that claimants are involved
in the land use planning so as to make informed settlement choices; that
project planning is done within the socioeconomic and sustainable
requirements; that the drafting of feasible business and land use plans is
done; that there are memoranda of agreement with the relevant role-players,
such as the Department of Housing, municipalities and the provincial
departments of agriculture in the settlement support processes; that a
joint proposal is made by the commission with AgriSeta and the Department
of Labour for skills development and long-term mentoring of projects; that
there is an area-based approach to ensure that all projects are part of the
provincial, local and district planning processes to ensure sustainability;
to promote sustainable and productive use of agricultural land, ensuring
that no arable land lies fallow; and, to facilitate access for communities
to the government’s agricultural assistance programmes, such as the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, the Micro-Agricultural
Financial Institutional Scheme of SA and Land Bank packages and other
schemes. Thank you, Chair.

Ms C NKUNA: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Thank you, hon Minister, for the
detailed response you gave to my question. Hon Minister, you mentioned
government’s agricultural assistance programmes like the Comprehensive
Agricultural Support Programme – Casp - the Micro-Agricultural Financial
Institutional Scheme of SA – Mafisa - the Land Bank and others. Hon
Minister, what mechanisms do you put in place to ensure that funds provided
for these schemes are utilised to the full and not rolled over?

Inkomu Mutshami wa Xitulu. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chair. That is a
very difficult question, because first of all Casp programmes are not
managed at national level; they are managed and implemented at provincial
level. The major challenge there has been for a long time the lack of
skills and capacity. However, the provinces have improved in the past two
years or so. They have ensured that they have the required capacity, and we
are hoping that there will be a great improvement in terms of roll-overs
this year. In terms of Mafisa, we have had three provincial pilot projects
in the Eastern Cape, Limpopo and KwaZulu-Natal.

We have been assessing and evaluating, learning from the lessons that we
have learned in these provinces. It is hoped that we will be able to roll
out Mafisa to all provinces in the coming year. We have already started to
do assessments in those provinces and we believe that we are ready with the
roll-out of Mafisa. We have personnel at national level and also in the
provinces who are working closely on these projects and who are monitoring
them to ensure not only that we have projects that are not going to fail,
but also that through those business plans, the monitoring and the
evaluation officials we can ensure that these programmes become
sustainable. Thank you.

Mr A H NEL: Thank you, Chair. Minister, in terms of the question I asked
and the answer I am getting – it hasn’t reached me yet - let me just say
upfront that we support measures that bring sustainability. Yesterday we
asked the Director-General of Land Affairs this specific question. He
assured us that they have enough plans and that they are planning and
strategising every day. But – and then he passed the buck – he said that
the problem lies with the Department of Agriculture and the provincial
departments which cannot put these plans in place to support beneficiaries.
My question, Madam Minister, is whether it is because of this that you
asked the Public Service Commission to investigate the capacity of the
Department of Land Affairs and its director-general. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: My investigation was based
on a lack of capacity, on high vacancy rates that we have in the department
and also on problems around the management of state leases and state land.
Because the problem was huge we sought the assistance of the Public Service
Commission so that they could advise the department, so that they could
also look at the gaps and fast-track corrective measures that would assist
us to ensure not only capacity for the department but also to be able to
assess skills - do a skills audit – in terms of the human resources that we
have in the department, where the gaps are and what needs to be done. Thank
you.

    Use of rail infrastructure to transport soccer supporters during 2010
                         Soccer World Cup Tournament

99.   Mr M M Swathe (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      Whether he and his department have considered the construction of new
      railway lines or the use of old rail infrastructure for the 2010
      Soccer World Cup Tournament to transport the large numbers of soccer
      supporters to the stadiums, thereby using trains as a form of mass
      transport; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        N449E

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (on behalf of the Minister of
Transport): Hon Chair, just this morning my attention was drawn to an entry
in a publication called the Who‘s Who of Southern Africa. Someone in there
describes me as “a nice terrorist”. I don’t know what that means, but that
person goes on to say that if I were to leave Azapo and join the DA, I
would be voted President of South Africa. [Laughter.]

Of course, this raises interesting things, because it would mean that I
would be the DA leader. It would mean that their problem was solved; they
would have a leader now. [Laughter.] But this would also mean that they
should behave in a manner that would make me remember them with fondness
when I am their leader. [Laughter.]

The answer to the question asked by hon Swathe, who is an hon member of the
DA, is as follows. The Public Transport Infrastructure and Systems fund
will not be funding any construction of new passenger railway lines.
However, the Department of Transport has identified a number of key rail
infrastructure projects that will support the 2010 Fifa World Cup and, more
importantly, leave a legacy. For this purpose, a significant portion of the
PTIS fund has been allocated to the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd and is
focused on upgrading existing infrastructure such as signalling, stations,
telecommunications and so on, and on specific security-related
infrastructure such as the construction of railway police stations.

This investment totals R1,361 billion, which is additional to the Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework capital allocation of the SARCC. This is spread
over the financial years 2006-07 up to 2009-10.

Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you, Chairperson, and hon Minister. My follow-up
question is with regard to the trains as you indicated, correctly so, that
there would be no upgrading of infrastructure. But what we as South
Africans are facing is that in 2010 we will need a lot of transport. That
is why I am asking how many trains we can have so that we can alleviate
this question of transportation in 2010. If that is the case, how are you
going to use this infrastructure after the 2010 soccer event? Thank you
very much.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHONOLOGY (on behalf of the Minister of
Transport): I did say, hon member, that there will be upgrading. I think
the answer indicates very clearly that quite a lot of resources will be
invested in upgrading transport infrastructure for 2010, and we described
those investments as the type of investments that would leave a lasting
legacy for our people. That means the population will inherit an
infrastructure that is much better - we will be able to move them from
place to place much better – that is, after the World Cup - than we do now.

Mr C M MORKEL: Minister, thank you for answering that question. I think you
covered part of the follow-up question I was intending to ask when you
mentioned that there would be an upgrading of the security systems on our
railways. I mention this with reference to the legal action that in your
acting capacity you may or may not be aware of with the rail commuter
action group and that there have been victims that now need to be
compensated. This highlights the point that our commuters do not feel safe
on our railway lines.

The SAPS railway units that are being rolled out are one step in the right
direction. I ask you, though, Minister: if South Africans have no
confidence or lack confidence in using our railway lines, can’t we
therefore expect international visitors also to have a similar lack of
confidence. What can we as South Africans therefore do in trying to make
2010 work in order to ensure that our railways are safer? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (on behalf of the Minister of
Transport): Hon Chair, I imagine that it was very clear in the initial
response I gave that, in addition to comprehensive plans that are being
made to ensure that the transport system is better than it is at present,
there is an element of security that is being built into these processes
that are under way at the moment.

So, yes, attempts and plans are being made with various elements – not only
with the Department of Transport but also with municipalities in the
metros, provincial administrations in our provinces and various other
elements in our society that are involved in the security of transport and
so forth - to make this system work as successfully as possible. So, yes,
there are advanced plans that will take care of the concerns that the hon
member currently has.

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Chair. Minister, acting on behalf of the Minister
of Transport, I’m sure that your versatility will put you in good stead
when you decide to become a member of the DA. [Laughter.]

May I just ask you something? You indicated to my colleague over there that
there is a certain amount of co-ordination taking place between the various
spheres of government, so presumably the department is playing a leading
role in the allocation of this funding towards those various municipalities
and metros?

In terms of the old infrastructure, what exactly will the funding be used
for? Will it be used to upgrade the infrastructure or to replace it with
new infrastructure? This is because it appears that if you come up with a
very bold project, such as the Gautrain, you get all the money in the world
thrown at you, but yet there are thousands upon thousands - I don’t know
how many – of old railway coaches sitting at Rosmead.

Will it be a consideration that we actually use what we’ve got, fix it up
so that it does in fact become a lasting legacy and not one of the white
elephants like the Gautrain will be?

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (on behalf of the Minister of
Transport): Hon Chair, not being the Minister of Transport, I don’t have
all the details at the tips of my fingers relating to the question that the
hon member has asked. But I am aware that, yes, there is a comprehensive
plan that involves the metros, the municipalities and various levels of
government. I’m not aware of the specific numbers to give you, hon member,
but I will let the Minister of Transport know about your questions, and you
might get more joy from him than you do from me. Thank you very much.

Ms N P KHUNOU: Chairperson, I know that in the past there was a problem
with signalling. Upgrading will be highly appreciated as this will help in
the reduction of accidents. However, when you do upgrade the stations, will
you consider accessibility for people with disabilities as this is a
problem with all the stations - there is no accessibility for people with
disabilities? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (on behalf of the Minister of
Transport): Hon Chair, I am not quite sure when the work will be concluded.
What I do know is that one of the priorities of the plans that the
Department of Transport has for upgrading transport systems in the country
is making these facilities accessible to people with disabilities.

Once again, I’ll not be able to tell the hon member where the process is,
but I do know that this is part of the plans. This is one of those things
that I’ll sensitise the Minister about.

  Successes and challenges in relation to the Microeconomic Reform Strategy
                                   (MERS)

82.   Mr S J Njikelana (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:
      (a) Which aspects of the Microeconomic Reform Strategy (MERS) have (i)
      been undoubted successes and (ii) encountered challenges and (b) how
      is he addressing the challenge posed by the factors that are limiting
      accelerated and shared growth and development in the economy?
                                        N427E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister of Trade and
Industry): Chairperson, the answer to part “a” of the question is as
follows. Since the inception of our Microeconomic Reform Strategy, or Mers,
there have been significant successes in areas of sector support,
developmental finance, equity and technological advancement.

In the area of sector support the most notable success has been with our
Motor Industry Development Programme, MIDP. This programme has effectively
secured the survival of the South African automotive industry, helping us
to preserve employment in the core automotive sector and generating
significant linkages to other sectors such as leather and plastics.

Government support has also significantly contributed to the restructuring
of upstream resource-based processing sectors like the steel and chemical
industries that were experiencing difficulties in the 1990s. These
industries have been successfully restructured and are now globally
competitive.

Coming to the leveraging of development finance institutions, or DFI, as
agents for socioeconomic change, that is a core objective of Mers. Under
the Microeconomic Reform Strategy we have witnessed the increasing capacity
of our DFI, Khula, to deliver on its mandate. We have witnessed the roll-
out of the SA Microfinance Apex Fund, Samaf, and the improved strategic
alignment of the Industrial Development Corporation with government’s
poverty and employment targets for 2014.

Over recent years, the Industrial Development Corporation has enjoyed
success in supporting labour-absorptive sectors and broad-based black
economic empowerment initiatives. A promising development is that the
Industrial Development Corporation’s most successful investment projects in
terms of employment creation have been in the expansion projects. The DTI
has driven the mainstreaming of BEE as a fundamental feature of the
business environment in South Africa, firstly, through the promulgation of
the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Act and, recently, the gazetting
of the triple BEE codes of good practice.

On the technological front, various technological programmes have also
functioned well, such as our Support Programme for Industrial Innovation –
Spii, for short - and our Technology and Human Resource for Industry
Programme, Thrip. Moreover, the national spend on R&D has improved from
0,76% of GDP in 2001-02, to 0,87% of GDP in 2004-05. There is also
supplementary evidence to suggest that South Africa is emerging as a
regional technology hub, given the country’s participation in various
cutting-edge projects such as the Square Kilometre Array.

Coming to the next part of the question, the challenges experienced,
notwithstanding the above-mentioned successes experienced by the South
African economy, Mers has confronted various challenges and constraints as
it is implemented. These include a lack of intragovernmental co-ordination.

With regard to those crosscutting initiatives, which I think are being
addressed currently through the cluster system and government ... Thank
you. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon members, I want to remind you
of an NA Rule - and I would like you to look it up; it is Rule 46 - that
requires of us not to converse aloud during the business of the House.

During the course of the debates this week I’ve often had to appeal to you
not to raise your voices. You are drowning out those that have the floor to
speak and address the House. I would like you to remain in the House. I’m
not sending you out to have a cup of tea, but, at the same time, could you
please observe the requirements of NA Rule 46, which you adopted. Thank
you.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Ndiyabulela, Mphathisihlalo noMphathiswa obambeleyo
ngempendulo yakhe. [Thank you Chairperson, and the acting Minister for his
response.]

I once again appreciate the response that was given, suffice to say that
what’s helpful here is for us to understand that not only should our focus
be on the macro strategy, but also on the micro aspects and particularly on
seeing it as a composite package in terms of economic transformation. I
thought though, hon Minister, that you would also refer to the National
Empowerment Fund, particularly since you have made mention of broad-based
black economic empowerment.

My follow-up question is around the challenges, particularly the lack of
intragovernmental co-ordination with regard to crosscutting initiatives.
Could the acting Minister help us as to what exactly is being done to
address that challenge? Also, what attempts are being made to respond to
the challenges that are limiting the accelerated and shared growth and
development in the economy? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister of Trade and
Industry): Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, hon member. Indeed, I
forgot to mention the National Empowerment Fund, which was established to
support our initiatives of financing broad-based black economic
empowerment.

The hon member is correct in that having focused and attained stability at
the macroeconomic level, we asked ourselves as government what we could do
to deal with the micro aspect. That is where all these issues are that I
have raised, such as SMME support, BEE, etc, which come into play with
their supporting mechanisms and initiatives.

I mentioned that, despite the successes, we have experienced some
challenges in this area, one of which is the sheer co-ordination of
crosscutting issues amongst government departments that is currently being
addressed through the cluster system. In this regard, there is also a lack
of monitoring and evaluation, which is required to measure the impact of
these programmes for the strategy to respond to an evolving economic
landscape and, obviously, insufficient financial and human resource
development for there to be implementation.

What are we doing to try to deal with the challenges? In 2006, the
government adopted a more robust approach towards identifying and
addressing what today are called the “binding constraints” on accelerated
and shared growth in South Africa – the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, or Asgisa - which builds, in fact, on the
successes of Mers and which seeks to address all the weaknesses identified.

As we know, Asgisa focuses on improving co-ordination through the cluster
system of government. [Time expired.]

Dr P J RABIE: Thank you, Madam Chair. Acting hon Minister, I think what
you’ve said here about Asgisa and the small, medium and micro business
sector is extremely important. My question to you is that at the moment we
have an excessive amount of red tape, which impedes the small to medium
business sector. We, from the DA, think that we are propagating a one-stop
approach in which entrepreneurs will be able to register small businesses
and so forth.

It was mentioned this morning in the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
Industry that you are going to review the excessive red tape regarding the
small to medium business sectors. Would you be able to give us, again, a
timeline when we’ll be able to streamline this particular legislation,
because I think it is extremely important? The only way of solving
unemployment here is to create jobs and creating jobs is the only means of
expanding this sector. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister of Trade and
Industry): Ngiyabonga lunga lelihloniphekile ngalowo mbuzo. [Thank you hon
member for that question.]

Indeed, over the years the Department of Trade and Industry has been
looking at mechanisms of reducing the burden for small and medium
enterprises. Various studies have been conducted to look into this matter
and several suggestions have been made to government. Just recently, the
Presidency and Treasury were looking at how to deal with the regulatory
impact on the functioning and success of small businesses. So, indeed,
government is engaged in this.

As to when all these processes will come together, I think that’s a
question we could answer some other time. I’m aware that within the
Department of Trade and Industry, within what they call Cipro - the
Companies and Intellectual Property Registration Office - there is an
attempt to ensure that there’s decentralisation in terms of which people or
companies can go to provinces to register their companies rather than
depending on lawyers and consultants in Pretoria.

As far as one-stop shops are concerned, I think a move towards that has
been taken through creating Seda - Small Enterprise Development Agency -
offices in all nine provinces of our country. As you know, Seda is an
institution that we brought about, bringing together Ntsika and bringing
together what we call our community participation programmes - looking at
co-operatives and the small business support division that was housed in
the DTI.

We were trying thereby to bring these one-stop shops closer to the SMMEs so
that those that need advice could go there. If they need export advice,
they can go there. The writing of business plans, and several other things,
they can get there. So, I think, the department has moved towards bringing
one-stop shops closer to small businesses. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, import costs drive competitiveness. Crucial
import sectors are transport, energy and telecommunications. Those sectors
are under domination by parastatals. How will the Minister of the
Department of Trade and Industry effect ... [Inaudible.] ... in the
microeconomic reform strategy there? The mandates of parastatals will be
reviewed to ensure that emphasis is placed on delivery of efficient
service, ensuring cost-competitiveness rather than profit-seeking for its
own sake, when you consider that parastatals fall under the purview of the
Minister for Public Enterprises?

Why will this entrepreneurship only occur in future and not immediately?
Also, Minister, you know that we as South Africa claim to be the cheapest
electricity producer in the world, but does the Minister know that our
industry pays more for electricity in comparison with emerging countries
like India and China, or even our friend ... [Inaudible.] ... Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (on behalf of the Minister of Trade and
Industry): Hon Chairperson, I think the question was just too long for me.
Regarding the first part of it, I think the hon Minister for Public
Enterprises, who is the shareholder within the parastatals, would be able
to answer. I would really request the hon member, if she has other
questions, to direct them in writing to the hon Minister of Trade and
Industry, as I do not have answers at the moment. Thank you.

                 Current value of total pension fund surplus

90.   Ms C B Johnson (ANC) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   What is the current value of the total pension fund surplus;

      (2)   whether all participating pension funds have completed their
           actuarial evaluations to determine the value of the surplus; if
           not, why not; if so, how many participating pension funds have
           distributed the surplus;

      (3)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?
      N437E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Deputy Chair ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): No, hon Minister. You are not a
Deputy, and neither am I. I am a Chair.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: My apologies, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you.
The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Who is this Ms C B Johnson?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): She is your colleague, the hon Carol
Johnson. But the supplementary question will be asked by the hon Mr
Johnson.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Oh! I wondered about this sex-change stuff.
[Laughter.] Let me give a perspective. There are 13 500 pension funds,
which together have about R1 trillion under management. But there is a very
significant disproportion in the operations because about 80 pension funds
account for about 73% of all members.

Arising from the Pension Funds Second Amendment Act, a procedure was laid
out for the apportionment of surpluses that accrued when funds converted
from defined benefit to defined contribution.

As at 28 February 2007, the surplus apportionment schemes approved for
distribution amounted to about R7,6 billion. But it’s hard to tell what
that is a fraction of, so we don’t know what the total apportionment would
be once the process is concluded.

The FSB estimates that the majority of registered funds have submitted
surplus apportionment schemes but, again, the number is not known. One of
the reasons for this is that they have to deal with stand-alone funds -
frequently employer or bargaining-council funds. But then there are also
the so-called umbrella funds that are made up of a myriad of individual
funds. One of the difficulties with the umbrella funds is that the issue of
trusteeship is a lot harder, because funds are just combined. There has
been a great deal of concern expressed about this. Yet, on the other hand,
individual funds require their own administration, and the costs thereof
are prohibitively expensive.

As at 28 February this year – and that was all of 14 days ago - 581 schemes
for surplus apportionment had been received by the registrar. Of these, 244
- 42% - had been approved, while the remaining 335 are pending or not yet
completed.

There are also, arising from these funds, just over 15 000 that submitted
no returns - either they were established afterwards or established as
defined-contribution funds, or established for some other reason.

Now, it is not possible for the registrar to act just on the information
received, partly because a lot of information was received very close to
the due date. This requires a level of scrutiny which, as you can well
imagine given the numbers involved, would require an enormous or mammoth
administrative exercise. That is the situation. As of now, there is R7,6
billion in approved schemes for the apportionment of surpluses. Thank you.

Mr M JOHNSON: Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Comrade Minister. The answer has
been quite profound and very comprehensive. Thanks for that. However, what
measures has the Financial Services Board – the FSB - put in place to
ensure that fund administrators give beneficiaries a fair value of what is
due to them when they approve such applications? Linked to that also is a
matter you raised about the minorities, that is those pension funds which
were not actually approved. Given the fact that the minority of these
pension funds did not submit the surplus apportionment schemes to the FSB
for approval, what risks does this situation pose to the beneficiaries?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Chairperson, I think it’s very hard in this
case to generalise, partly because if one tracks through the history of
pension fund legislation in South Africa - the oldest being 51 years old;
it’s a 1956 piece of legislation – there have been a series of amendments.
Some of these have been introduced to effect certain very important
principles.

A late addition, for instance, is that the funds in the fund belong to the
fund. I don’t want to say too much about this, because this legal basis may
be tested because there is an instance now where individuals are alleged to
have removed large sums of money from funds. This needs to be tested, and I
am saying it is being tested in a court of law. The easier instances to
deal with is where you’ve had strong trusteeship, because some of the
changes introduced in the Pension Funds Act require 50-50 employer and
employee representatives, and if they are all acting correctly with the
dignity and fiduciary responsibilities required, you clearly don’t have a
problem. You invite in the actuaries, you determine how much money was in
the fund at the point of conversion, and then that must be allocated. Once
you have done that, a series of other issues arise. You must then trace
members who were members of the fund prior and contributors who may not be
alive or may not be contributors any longer.

So, it’s a rather complex issue. It’s almost impossible to do this merely
by looking at the papers. I am saying that the scale of the task is
exceedingly difficult for the FSB. They will report to Parliament through
the agency of the portfolio committee from time to time, but the key is
just the determination of how much is available and to ensure that it is
correctly apportioned when it is done. Thank you.

       Departmental strategy in relation to failed farming operations

108.  Mr A H Nel (DA) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:

        Whether her department has a strategy to solve problems relating to
        failed farming operations where land restitution or reform took
        place; if not, why not; if so, what strategy?

                 N458E
The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chair, yes, the Department
of Land Affairs has a strategy in place in relation to failed land reform
projects. These models include a settlement model for beneficiaries who
have housing as their primary immediate need, a farming model and a
strategic partnership model. Each model carries various options and has
financial and human resource implications.

The land reform offices in the different provinces will have to carefully
weigh up these options and decide with the affected beneficiaries on the
best way forward, including a course of action for beneficiaries who have
abandoned projects. The strategy also provides sound guidelines on what
should be done when financial institutions want to repossess properties.

The Commission on Restitution of Land Rights also monitors projects where
restitution has taken place to ensure sustainability. Should any problem
areas be identified, intervention is initiated and facilitated in liaison
with other relevant role-players, such as the provincial departments of
agriculture and financial institutions, in order to devise appropriate
strategies for their projects.

In addition, the commission and the Department of Land Affairs are working
jointly on a settlement support implementation strategy to ensure the
sustainable projects to which I referred in an earlier question.
Mr A H NEL: Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Minister, for the answer. I
listened very carefully to your answer because the problem of failed
farming operations is a serious one. Apart from the fact that it is a waste
of public money, one feels sorry for the people involved.

We have also formulated a plan to deal with the prerequisites for, and the
failures of, land reform with help of experts. I will supply you with a
copy. Maybe there is something that you can use. My question is whether
your department’s strategy has been implemented as yet, and whether you can
supply us with examples in which some of these failures were reversed.
Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chair. For
instance, the strategic partnership model has worked very well. In
Mamahlola in Limpopo we have had a problem in which communities were unable
to sustain their projects because of conflicts within that community. We
then formed a partnership between this community and SA Farm Management,
which is a company that includes white commercial farmers but also black
experts who had formed this joint venture with the community of Mamahlolo.

Today they have already had great success. They are producing papaws,
guavas, avocado, citrus and are already in the export industry; and both
the company and the community of Mamahlola still have ownership of the land
rights in the area and also a shareholding of over 50% of the business
conducted on the land. Both parties are very happy and the project is a
great success.

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Chair, I would like to thank the Minister for her
reply, as I was listening carefully. I would like to ask her, in view of
the nature of this question, whether the problems that have been
highlighted are as a result of policy failure or teething problems in the
implementation of the policy of land restitution. Are they indicating that
the policy itself is problematic or are they indicating that there are
problems in the implementation?

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chair, it is not about
policy. It is about the fact that our people for centuries were denied the
opportunity to participate in agriculture. You will remember that when we
were schoolgirls, you and me, we were told that the stupid ones must do
agriculture and the clever ones must do science – and, of course, everybody
did not want to be stupid. There was this view that agriculture is where
you work in the mud and work hard in the sun the whole day. Even today most
of our youth are not interested in agriculture.

So, it is a huge challenge that we have. It is a legacy of apartheid Bantu
education. It is also a legacy of separate development in which blacks were
forcefully removed from fertile agricultural land, which is still our pain
and the challenge that we have to face today.
It is very important, therefore, that we devise these strategic plans in
terms of which those that had the opportunity and privilege to have this
fertile agricultural land and to be exposed to agriculture through land
banks and various schemes – in which they were given loans of 65 years
wherein even your grandson could come over and continue on your bond – that
those opportunities now be opened up to those who were disadvantaged. Those
that were privileged must also be ready to share their skills and their
experience and share the land with all the people of South Africa.
[Applause.]

Chief B P BIYELA: Chair, I am worried about the cases of blacks that failed
to manage their farms. I think the business of failure is not within the
blacks who took over. It is the manner in which funding was given to the
people. Is it not a fact, hon Minister, that a white farmer was given a
large tract of land and was given funds by the government to employ blacks
in order to give labour, and that thereafter all the failures,
responsibilities and accountability rested on the shoulders of the white
farmer? May I ask ... [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired, I
regret, and so has time for questions in general, hon Minister, which
excuses you from replying. The time allocated, as I said, has expired and
outstanding replies received will be printed in Hansard.
See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr M WATERS: Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the next
sitting day of the House:


   That this House debates the senseless and brutal murders of innocent
   children.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, I move without notice that the House ...

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I beg your pardon, we
again have to object. We’ve received one motion without notice concerning
which, I think, we communicated to the party concerned that we had a
problem with certain aspects. I don’t know if this is a different one, but
we’re not aware of any other motions without notice.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon Acting Chief Whip. I
know this issue of a notice not having been circulated was raised this
morning in the Chief Whips’ Forum as a problem. Hon Cupido?

Mr H B CUPIDO: Okay, I shall not move it then.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-SBotha): Thank you.

The House adjourned at 17:06.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Regulations issued under section 13 of the Small Business Tax
      Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Act, 2006 (Act No 9 of 2006),
      prescribing the circumstances under which the Commissioner may waive
      any amount of additional tax, penalty or interest payable by specific
      persons.

2. The Acting Minister of Health

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2007/08 to
      2009/10.

3. The Minister in The Presidency

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Government Communication and Information
      System (GCIS) for 2007 to 2010.

4. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

   (a)      Report on the provisional suspension from office of Mr I X
      Masimini, an additional magistrate at Queenstown, in terms of section
      13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

   (b)      Report on vacancies in the offices of magistrates, in terms of
      section 9(5)(b) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act, 1944 (Act No 32 of
      1944).

5. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

   (a)      General Notice No 8 published in Government Gazette No 29528
      dated 9 January 2007: Extension of the deadline for public comments on
      the Draft Subsistence and Small-scale Commercial Fisheries Policies,
      in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

   (b)      General Notice No 1832 published in Government Gazette No 29487
      dated 12 January 2007: Publication of National Environmental
      Management: Waste Management Bill – for general comment: National
      Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

   (c)      Government Notice No 147 published in Government Gazette No
      29647 dated 23 February 2007: Waste tyre Regulations, in terms of the
      Environment Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).

   (d)      Government Notice No R.150 published in Government Gazette No
      29657 dated 23 February 2007: Commencement of threatened or protected
      species Regulations, in terms of the National Environmental
      Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

   (e)      Government Notice No R.151 published in Government Gazette No
      29657 dated 23 February 2007: Publication of lists of critically
      endangered, endangered, vulnerable and protected species, in terms of
      the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No
      10 of 2004).

   f) Government Notice No R.152 published in Government Gazette No 29657
      dated 23 February 2007: Threatened or protected species Regulations,
      in terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,
      2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


National Assembly


1. The Speaker

   (a)      The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
      dated 2 March 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
      members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
      National Defence Force in the Republic of Mozambique:

      EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR SERVICE IN
      FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH
      AFRICA TOWARDS THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE FOR
      HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE


      This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have authorised the
      employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
      personnel to the Republic of Mozambique, in fulfilment of the
      international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the
      Republic of Mozambique, for humanitarian assistance in the
      preservation of life, health and property resulting from the
      widespread rains that have caused extensive and serious flooding.
      This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
      section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
      1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of
      2002).


      A total of one hundred and fifteen (115) SANDF members are employed as
      from 04 March to 19 April 2007 to provide humanitarian assistance in
      the preservation of life, health and property resulting from the
      widespread rains that have caused serious flooding. The Department of
      Provincial and Local Government (DPLG) will bear the cost of the
      deployment. The total estimated cost to be borne by the DPLG is R 25,
      019, 752. 76.


      I will communicate this report to the members of the National Council
      of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
      the attention of the National Assembly.


      Regards


      Signed


      T M MBEKI


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Finance Bill [B5–
    2007] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 14 March 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined
        the Finance Bill [B5– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77), referred
        to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 77
        Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on Tobacco Products
    Control Amendment Bill [B24 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated
    13 March 2007:


        The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the subject of
        the Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B24 – 2006] (National
        Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint
        Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B24A-2006].


