---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 11 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-09-11
---

TUESDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                       QUESTIONS TO RECEIVE PRECEDENCE

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I have been informed that the
Whippery has agreed that there will be no notices of motion or motions
without notice today. We will therefore go straight to the Questions to the
Deputy President. [Interjections.]

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT

 Progress in addressing constraints on economic growth, and supplementing of
               infrastructure allocations of certain provinces

11.   Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   What progress is the government making in addressing the
           constraints on economic growth, such as the massive backlogs in
           infrastructure, deficiencies in logistics at ports and a
           considerable concentration of production inland, that were
           identified before the launch of the Accelerated and Shared
           Growth Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa) in 2004;

      (2)   whether the government is considering supplementing the
           infrastructure allocations to provinces with a large
           concentration of economic activities that benefit other
           provinces, as in the case of Mpumalanga with its coal-related
           economic activities; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                            CO1994E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, as members would know, one of the six
interventions of Asgisa is in the area of infrastructure. The intervention
in this area is aimed at addressing backlogs and deficiencies. Both the
annual report and my comments on Asgisa to the National Assembly on 22
August stated that we were making progress in this area. Already, an amount
of R415 billion for the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period 2007 to
2010 has been committed for both social and economic infrastructure over
the MTEF period.

Progress is being made in transport, energy, information and communication
technology, as well as in water and sanitation. As part of the massive
infrastructure investment programme, Eskom has built two new open-cycle gas
turbines in Mossel Bay and Atlantis. These two power stations represent the
first built in the new era.

Eskom is recommissioning Camden, Komati and Grootvlei. Construction of the
Ingula Pump Station in the Drakensberg has started, as well as the building
of the new R80 billion power station in Lephalale.

In addition, Transnet’s five-year capex plans have been revised up from
R3,2 billion to R78 billion since October 2006, with major investments in
iron ore and coal lines and huge orders for locomotives and port
operations.

Government is not considering supplementing infrastructure allocations for
provinces. However, as members would know, combined provincial budgets
account for 42% of total government noninterest expenditure, with 96% of
provincial revenue funded from national transfers, and 82% of this
consisting of the equitable share. This equitable share has grown at an
average rate of 11,9% from 2003-04 to 2006-07.
This growth is in line with government’s prioritisation of social services,
namely education, health and welfare. It also allows provinces greater
choices to rehabilitate and maintain road networks and to support business
development and rural areas as well as agricultural support.

In addition, the conditional grant has grown rapidly. In the current MTEF,
the housing and human settlement grant increases from R6,7 billion to R11,5
billion.

The health grant saw an increase of R3 billion from R10,2 billion to R13,2
billion. In infrastructure, the grant also increased from R3 billion to R5
billion.

We cannot deprioritise infrastructure as we clearly need to upscale local
economic development and work in growth and development strategies.

The biggest challenge that we face is the quality of expenditure and the
need for skills to eliminate these problems in some of the provinces. That
is why we are exploring skills support for provinces as well, similar to
the initiative that was taken by the municipalities through Siyenza Manje.

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WAVELONKHE WETIFUNDZA: Mgcinisihlalo, ngitsandza
kubonga imphendvulo lesiyinikwa Lisekela Lamengameli. Umbuto wami
lolandzelako kakhulukati umayelana nekukhicitwa kwemandla agezi njengoba
sati kutsi sifundza saseMpumalanga sikhicita emaphesenti langetulu kwalangu
70%. Siyati kutsi kuye kwaba nesincumo sahulumende wavelonkhe sekutsi kuhle
kwengetwe kukhicitwa kwemandla agezi kuze sive saseNingizimu Afrika sikhone
kumelana nalentfutfuko ledzinga lamandla agezi.

Hulumende ngeke yini akubone kukuhle kutsi njengobe sekunemaloli lamanyenti
kangaka lalayisha kakhulu emalahle bese kufa imigwaco; kantsi hulumende
wesifundza abengakakucapheli loko ngesikhatsi ahlela tinhlelo takhe kutsi
kungenteka ngekuhamba kwesikhatsi lemigwaco iguculwe ibe ngimigwaco
lemikhulu yavelonkhe. Kumbe kungenteka yini, ngandlela tsite, kutsi
umtfwalo wekulungiswa kwaleyo migwaco kubuye kube ngalapha ngasesikhwameni
savelonkhe?
(Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I would like to thank our hon
Deputy President for the response she has given. My next question is mainly
about the production of electrical power, since we know that the Mpumalanga
province produces more than 70%. We know that there has been a resolution
made by the national government that it would be good if we increased the
production of electricity power so that South African citizens can keep up
with the demands of electrical power usage.

Is the government not going to notice that there are now many trucks that
carry coal and destroy roads; was the provincial government not aware of
that when planning its programmes, so that as time went by they would
transform the roads into national roads? Is there any other way: perhaps
the transformation of roads can be funded by the National Treasury?]

IPHINI LIKAMONGAMELI: Ngiyabonga Lungu elohloniphekile, into eyenzekayo
ngendaba yale migwaqo, ukuthi sizowakha ujantshi. Yiwo ozothwala amalahle
ukuze sikwazi ukuphumuza imigwaqo ingathwali kakhulu. UMnyango Wezokuthutha
waseMpumalanga usebenzisana noMnyango Wezokuthutha kazwelonke kanye no-
Eskom. Sebevumelene ngendlela abazokwazi ngayo ukuyibheka le nto.

Kule nyanga edlule ngiye ngahlangana nabo ngalolu daba, bangitshela ukuthi
uma sebevumelene ukuthi bazowuphumuza kanjani umgwaqo ngesikhathi besalinde
ukuthi kwakhiwe ujantshi. Uma sebeqede ukuvumelana bazosibhalela incwadi
basichazele. Ikhona indlela yokuyibheka le nto. U-Eskom ushilo yena wathi
uzobanika imali ukuze umthwalo womgwaqo ungabi wumthwalo wesifundazwe.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon member. What is happening about this
situation with the roads is that we are going to change this by building a
railway line. It is going to be used for transporting coal so that we can
reduce traffic on the road. The department of roads and transport in
Mpumalanga is working hand in hand with the national Department of
Transport and also with Eskom. They have agreed on the manner in which they
are going to look at this.

Last month I met with them regarding this matter, and they told me that
once they have agreed on how they are going to reduce traffic congestion
whilst waiting for the construction of the railway line they would write us
a letter and explain the situation to us. There is a way of handling this.
Eskom did promise that they would give them the money to build the road so
that the road problem does not become a provincial problem.]

 Measures to ensure easier access to start-up finance and reduce regulatory
 constraints, with particular reference to previously by marginalised groups

12.   Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether, since the launch of the Accelerated and Shared Growth
           Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, the government has had any
           formal engagement with the private sector, particularly banks,
           to ensure easier access to start-up finance for business
           ventures and initiatives and to reduce the regulatory
           constraints on small businesses; if not, why not; if so, what
           are the relevant details;
      (2)   whether there are indications of improvement in the awarding of
           business loans and related support to entrepreneurs from
           previously marginalised groups like women, rural communities and
           the youth; if not, what are the constraints; if so, what are the
           relevant details?
                       CO1995E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chair, government has been in consultation with all
stakeholders in the business sector, including banks, even before the
inception of Asgisa. Such consultations have taken place through business
associations such as the National Business Initiative, the Big Business
Working Group, Business Unity SA, Nafcoc, and others. In all these fora,
banks are represented directly and through the Banking Council of South
Africa.

The financing of SMMEs has been identified as one of the key interventions
in the second economy in the Asgisa programme. Asgisa does not do
everything, as you know. We do not replace departments and we are not
responsible for the overall programme of action of government. So, in the
ongoing consultations with banks, the DTI and the National Treasury have
been the leading departments.

Discussions have continued with major banks as well as with development
finance institutions such as Khula Enterprise, the Industrial Development
Corporation – the IDC - and the National Empowerment Fund and other
nongovernmental organisations that are involved in financing SMMEs. The
Department of Housing, the DTI and the National Treasury also represent
government in the Financial Services Charter Committee.

Access to finance is a key deliverable in the Financial Services Charter,
especially for SMMEs and financial services to the unbanked. As you know,
progress has been made in relation to Mzansi. Progress is also being made
through other BEE charters, where the financing of transactions is also
important. Many companies that have entered into large BEE deals have
assisted their partners to raise funds.

But, I will agree that more still needs to be done. Banks need to offer
more business credit rather than consumption loans to their customers.
While it is important to ease regulations in relation to access to finance,
we also need to manage our overindebtedness as a country and as individuals
- hence, the need for the National Credit Act.

It is important, hon members, to recognise that SMME support should be
multifaceted. It must involve banking services. But it must also involve
nonfinancial support including issues such as market access – some of which
can be done through favourable procurement opportunities. It must also
include capacity-building such as mentorship and enterprise development
that is directed at SMMEs.

I also want to highlight the fact that in relation to support for women and
their access to finance, the Women’s Entrepreneurial Fund by the DTI is
also going to be launched. Deputy Minister Thabethe has been working on
this initiative. Co-operative finance, in partnership with Old Mutual, is
also unfolding to fund micro enterprises as well as family business co-
operatives.

Regulatory constraints on small businesses are being addressed through a
Regulatory Impact Assessment process which has been completed by the
Presidency. The Co-operative Banks Bill, which the NA is passing this
afternoon and which will then be submitted to the NCOP, also seeks to
enhance access to finance by poorer communities, individuals, small
businesses and co-operatives. By promoting such regulated and orderly
assistance to SMMEs we are ensuring that we develop sustainable and
responsible business practices. Thank you.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Deputy President, do you think that labour laws would also
possibly be changed as a result of the reduction in the regulatory
constraints? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think that the two things are different, hon
member.

                Trade agreement signed with Indian government

13.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Deputy President:
      (1)   Whether any trade agreements have been signed with the Indian
           government; if so, (a) what areas of trade form part of the
           agreements and (b) what informed the government to look into
           these specific areas;

      (2)   whether skills development was considered when these agreements
           were signed; if not, (a) why not and (b) how will ordinary South
           Africans benefit from this exercise; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                 CO2022E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson and hon members, yes, a trade agreement
was signed on 22 August 1994 with the Indian government. This agreement is
a general trade agreement using a standard format which is used
internationally in agreements of this nature. The details of the specific
areas covered by the agreement can be obtained from the Minister of Trade
and Industry.

South Africa and India, however, have a co-operation agreement through the
Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa, on the
international placement of students. So far, co-operation in this area has
been with Indian companies, even though the Indian government does support
this initiative. This is in relation to the placement of unemployed
graduates and mid-careered professional women in the main.

The areas of placement are in scarce skills such as information and
communications technology, finance, project management and engineering. The
placement opportunities are advertised in the media, and information is
also shared with interested counterparts at provincial as well as at local
government level.

A total of 19 000 students have been placed, in the last 18 months, in
South Africa and overseas. Seven hundred of these 19 000 students have been
placed overseas and, of the 700 placed overseas, 185 are in India. There
are a further 217 candidates that will also be placed in India soon.

The opportunities for training in India have been renowned in South Africa
and have strengthened our bilateral relations. We have also learnt a lot
from India about cost-effectiveness in training, quality training and
emphasis on entrepreneurial development as a component of providing skills
to young people.

I must just add that I know that the Minister of Education and the Minister
for the Public Service and Administration have also been holding
discussions with the Indians about collaborating with them to support the
enhancement of teaching maths and science. It is work in progress. Even
though we do not have a stand-alone agreement, definitely the co-operation
is robust. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Modulasetulo, a ke leboge karabo yeo ke e filwego ke
mohlomphegi Motlatšapresidente, mong’aka. Ke mo leboga go menagane go bona
gore mmušo wa gešo o kgona go hlokomela ditšhuana tšeo e lego mangwaya-mpa.
Potšišo ya ka ya go latela mohlomphegi ke gore a e ka ba thušo yeo e tla
fihlišwa le kua magaeng, moo basadi ba ithwešago ka letolo gammogo le bana
bao ba hlaotšwego ke mmušo gore ba hwetše thušo? A e ka ba re lebeletše
gore re sekamele kudu ka kua go bao ba tšwago diprofenseng tšeo go thwego
di ikgonere? (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[Kgoši M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me thank the hon Deputy President for
her response. I thank her very much on account of our government’s
assistance to the poor of the poorest. My next question is whether this
kind of assistance would reach the rural areas, where women are mostly
engaged in self-help schemes and where children have been identified to
receive government grants. Are we only focused on the so-called poor
provinces?]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Ke solofela gore o ne o sa botse o ne o bua fela. [I
guess you were not asking, but just talking.] [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The question I heard was: Does help reach the
rural women who are also suffering? Am I representing you well, Kgoši
Mokoena?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Nyaa! [No!] [Laughter.]
The training that we have been doing, specifically in this programme, is
for graduates. Ordinary people would not automatically qualify. There is a
vigorous process of selection. However, there is a bias in the programme in
the sense that we take many of these graduates from the rural areas,
because it is those people in the rural areas who are likely to find jobs
that feed the kind of qualifications they have. Therefore, an ordinary
person’s child benefits.

uNks N D NTWANAMBI: Enkosi Mhlalingaphambili, Sekela Mongameli ndibabonile
aba abaphathiswa babini benqwala ngengokuba ubusitsho. Ndiyababona naxa
bekuncumela kwaye ndifuna ukuqonda ke ngoku ukuba ngokwalo mba ingaba
uqoqosho lwasemaphondweni lona lukhula kangakanani na. Enkosi.

SEKELA MONGAMELI: Enkosi Mhlalingaphambili, nakuwe Qabane ngombuzo wakho,
besikhe sandwendwela amaphondo xa ewonke kwaye asikagqibi ukwenza oko
sisasalelwe yiGauteng kunye neleFreyisitata kuwo wonke la sele siwahambele
sijonga ikqubela nophuhlo kuwo alikho esilifumnise lingakhuli. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs N D NTWANAMBI: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy President, I saw these
two Ministers nodding as you were talking. I can see them when they are
smiling at you, and I want to know then in relation to this matter how much
the economic rate of the provinces grows. Thank you.
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Chairperson, and you, Comrade, for your
question. We visited all provinces and we are not yet finished doing that
as we are still left with Gauteng and the Free State. In all the provinces
that we visit we check on the progress and the development and there were
none that we found not progressing.]

In fact, there hasn’t been a province in the last two years which had
negative growth. That is very encouraging. Even the poorest provinces are
growing. The challenge still remains the sharing of the benefits of growth.
That is the biggest part in the same way as at the national level ...

... sabayon ukuba uqoqosho luyakhula, kodwa ukwabelana ngezoqoqosho
ngokohlobo lobukomanisi, loo nto isasixakile. Enkosi. [... we can see the
economy is growing, but to share in the economy according to the principles
of communism, is still a problem to us. Thank you. ]

     Effectiveness of programmes aimed at empowering women economically

14.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether programmes aimed at empowering women economically have proved
      to be effective; if not, why not; if so, how are women (a) benefiting
      from such programmes and (b) empowered to be self-sustaining as a
      result of these programmes?       CO2024E
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, programmes aimed at empowering women
economically in the private and public sectors, as well as in politics, are
continually evolving. We have not yet seen the ultimate impact of all these
developments. As the President stated, we need to move with the necessary
speed to ensure greater empowerment in the economy.

As you would know, a recent study sponsored by Nedbank and the
Businesswomen’s Association about SA Women in  Corporate Leadership Census
shows that women constitute only 19,8% of executive managers and 10,7% of
directors of the 372 companies that were surveyed. These figures are an
improvement on last year’s comparable figures of 14,7% and 7,1%
respectively.

However, considering that 41,3% of the working population is female, these
figures indicate that there is more work that still needs to be done. The
census ranks South Africa above Australia when it comes to the percentage
of women who are on boards of directors, and above the United States,
Canada and Australia when it comes to executive women managers.

Bangamaqaba laba bantu bakula mazwe. [The people in those countries are
barbarians.]

The Department of Trade and Industry has developed an economic empowerment
programme for women, which is responding to the fact that the black
economic empowerment charters and even our own initiatives put together as
government are still not giving us the higher levels of involvement of
women in the economy that we aspire to.

Despite all the challenges, however, we have to say that women are making
progress. We have seen more and more women taking advantage of the support
that we give them. Year after year, we have women in agriculture, for
instance, taking great strides, all from humble beginnings. This year’s
winner, for instance, of the female farmer of the year award is Mrs Makgoro
Mannya, who runs Ditubatse, which is situated in Tzaneen in Limpopo. She
produces mangoes, avocadoes, guavas, litchies and atchar. She employs 86
permanent workers and 40 seasonal workers. Their business is beginning to
export to the European Union and elsewhere in the world.

We have also seen women in mining, women in science and technology and
women in the financial services sector over the years. The SA Women
Entrepreneurs Network alone has helped establish 1 800 women-owned
businesses, and because of the growing numbers of women entrepreneurs and
the slow response by some financiers, the DTI is therefore establishing the
Women Entrepreneurs Fund, which will be housed at the Industrial
Development Corporation. It would initially be capitalised at R100 million.


Women who have won awards for the Technology for Women in Business
programme have also had exposure to international markets and have had
technology inputs into their businesses, thus improving their performance.

In addition, there is work to develop co-operatives which will be supported
by the co-operative fund which I spoke about earlier on in the context of
jobs for growth.

The first baseline survey on the progress of BEE was recently released. The
study was commissioned by the Presidency and the DTI and was based on
interviews with 1 700 companies. The study found that 12% of companies have
exceeded the 10% ownership targeted for black women as set in the BEE Code
of Practice for black women to have some economic interest in companies.

On the other hand, 81% of companies have not started the process of
involving black women in ownership companies. All in all, 6,1% of the
targeted 10% base has been met. We are going to take correctional action,
however, where there is underperformance as identified.

Judging by the number of women who are entering and staying in business,
the support given to women, limited as it may be, is having an impact. The
Presidential Women’s Working Group has also made strides in its efforts to
support women empowerment. This women’s working group has come up with a
concrete proposal on how to restructure the retirement industry so that it
can set up women better. This proposal was presented to the President who
supports it enthusiastically.

The proposal is to set up a retirement fund for women which seeks, amongst
other things, to increase the participation and benefits of vulnerable
groups in the retirement industry. For instance, women represent 33% of
retirement fund assets but only 7% of women are represented in the
retirement fund as trustees.

The fund is also meant to widen the savings network and improve the savings
culture by bringing into the net individuals that are currently outside
this net; create a vehicle that mobilises financial resources; act as a
force that would ensure that there is greater shareholder activism; and
redirect some of the mobilised resources towards programmes and projects
that improve the lives of women.

As you know, the trustees who sit in these retirement funds are men and
tend to take money from poor black investors and go and invest this in
exclusively white areas. There are no benefits therefore for the people who
are pension fund members, especially women.

The proposal highlights the need for the inclusion of domestic workers as a
sector that is always overlooked, but plays a critical role in our economy.
This initiative will also force retirement funds to look at the
representation of women in the sector and therefore will ensure that there
is greater gender balance in that industry. It would also enable women to
increase their savings.

The support for women’s economic empowerment has to be intensified, but a
start has been made, especially by the ruling party which clearly puts
women on the agenda wherever possible. Thank you.

Kgoši M L MOKOENA: Mutshami wa Xitulu, ndzi lava ku khensa nhlamulo leyi
ndzi nga nyikiwa hi Xandla xa Presidente eka leswi a nga swi vula swo
saseka ngopfu. Hi khensa hi ndhundhuzela no hoyozela leswi a nga swi vula.
Hi ri khoma tano manana wa tiko, u swi khome kahle.

Xivutiso hileswaku: Eka migingiriko ya wena ya ku pfuna vamanana hi swa
timali, ha swi kota ku va pfuna leswaku mundzhuku va tiyimela havoxe eka
ntirho lowu? [Ku Kavanyeta.] (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Deputy
President for the answer that she has just given to me. We are grateful for
the answer. Keep it up, mother of the nation: you are on the right track.

The question is: In your intervention on assisting women financially, will
it be possible for them to be on their own in future? [Interjections.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am getting interpreting services, but other
people say they are not. Could we get it please, on channel 11? Continue,
Kgoši Mokoena. You may want to interpret after that, if there is no
interpreting service.

Kgoši M L MOKOENA: Mutshami wa Xitulu, Xandla xa Presidente u ndzi twile, u
ta hi hlamula. U swi twile hinkwaswo leswi ndzi nga swi vula. Loko a nga
swi twangi, ndzi ta engeta, a ndzi na tingana. A swi karhati, ndzi nga
thlela ndzi vula leswi ndzi swi vuleke. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraph
follows.)

[Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, the Deputy President understand me and
she will respond. She heard everything I said. If not, I will repeat it. I
am not shy to do so. It is not a problem - I can repeat what I said.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Now mine has also gotten lost. [Laughter.]
Channel two, thank you very much. Deputy President, must he repeat himself?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, please.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Kgoši, could you repeat that in the same
language?

Kgoši M L MOKOENA: Mutshami wa Xitulu, leswi ndzi nga swi vula hileswaku hi
khensa leswi Xandla xa President a nga swi endla eka vamanana laha tikweni
ra hina. Hi ri ha khensa migingiriko ya yena ku pfuna vamanana hi swa
timali. Hi ri a khome tano, ha n’wi rhandza, u endla kahle swinene. Hi te
ha ndhundhuzela na ku hoyozela, nkulukumba.

Kambe xivutiso hi lexi: Eka leswi va swi endlaka swo saseka swonghasi, va
ta swi kota ke leswaku vamanana va tiyimela havoxe mundzhuku eka leswi va
swi endlaka – va tiyimela havoxe va nga dyeriwi swilo swa vona?

I xivutiso xa mina xolexo, ndzi ri Xandla xa Presidente a hi hlamule. Ndzi
khensile. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, what I have said is that we are grateful
for the assistance given to the women of our country by the Deputy
President. We commend her intervention in assisting them financially. We
say that she must keep it up. We love her. She is doing a sterling job. We
praise and commend you, hon Deputy President.

But the question is: Despite the sterling job that she is doing, will she
be able to allow these women to stand on their own in the future, rather
than having to depend on people who will rob them of their money? That is
my question. Thank you.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There was interpretation on channel two. Hon
Deputy President?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, most of the women are being financed –
these are loans anyway – so, there are expectations that they are going to
make profits because they have to repay those loans. I am proud to say that
the repayment rate by women is much higher than by men. They are becoming
self-sufficient. Give them the money.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I thank the Deputy President for her responses.
Given the good work that is in progress in relation to the empowerment of
women, is it possible that the Deputy President could compile the projects
that are available and ensure that they are distributed to us as members of
this House, given the fact that we are in touch with the communities on the
ground in urban and rural areas? This will help us mobilise people to
access these opportunities that are available, so that they are not only
discussed here. Is that possible, Deputy President? Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I will ask the Department of Trade and
Industry, which is the custodian of this information. Most of this
information is actually available on their website, but because we know
that not all women have access to technology, we could facilitate, through
Members of Parliament, increased access. I will definitely tell DTI.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It is a big challenge for Members of
Parliament to access their computers and get this information. It is a
reminder to us all.

        Plans with regard to government’s moral regeneration movement

15.   Mr M A Mzizi (IFP) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the lack of high morals and values at all
           levels of society, any plans are in place to intensify the
           government’s Moral Regeneration Movement; if not, why not; if
           so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether the Moral Regeneration Movement has thus far been
           successful and achieved its objectives; if not, (a) why not and
           (b) how will the government rectify the situation; if so, what
           criteria were used to measure the success;

      (3)   whether any review of the Moral Regeneration Movement will be
           considered in order to (a) strengthen it and (b) make it more
           effective; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                                     CO2025E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Chair. Hon member, you refer in your
question to government’s Moral Regeneration Movement. Let me clarify that
there is no government Moral Regeneration Movement. The movement belongs to
the people of South Africa in their different formations, such as in faith-
based organisations, in business, in youth, in sport, etc.

I would like to repeat what I said last month in the National Assembly,
namely that families, parents and communities are the most critical people
in this campaign. They need to collaborate with government and other
stakeholders.

This responsibility can never and must never be shifted to schools,
government and other agencies, because the role of nurturing a child from
the time he or she is able to communicate has to be the responsibility of a
parent. The issue of instilling moral values should always remain a concern
of the parties that have a direct responsibility for each child, whether
they are parents, guardians, relatives or siblings.

It is clear that this is a challenge that is preoccupying many of us. I
would also like to add my voice that even as government, notwithstanding
that we think that we need parents to be more visible, we can do more. I
would also like to say that in my office we are working together with the
responsible department in this area, the Department of Arts and Culture. We
are looking at strengthening this campaign; in particular we want to
mobilise families and parents because they are the biggest missing link in
this work.

I have also clearly stated that the question of government doing it alone
in this context risks having something that is supposed to be a way of life
being overregulated and bureaucratised. You cannot legislate on morals, but
from government’s side it is the social cluster that is responsible for
that work and they have, in the last lekgotla, put some ideas in front of
us as part of the initiatives under social cohesion.

This year, an amount of R4,1 million has been allocated for the moral
regeneration movement by government. There is a big role for Members of
Parliament to play in this regard. As the hon member there was talking
about information on business opportunities, I think that, in the same
vein, I see Members of Parliament, through their constituencies, playing a
significant role in reaching out to the communities and mobilising them in
support of positive values.

Changing people’s mind-set is an enormous task that needs continual
interventions. It needs a multipronged approach. The success of the renewal
of our nation will occur when we all decide to stand up and be counted for
the positive contribution that we can engender in our community.

I do just want to say that I am alarmed at the growth of sexism amongst
young men. I am just amazed at what one hears being uttered in the media by
teenage boys around the issue of gender equity. So, in some ways, I think
we are going backwards in some things, but, having said that, I think we
also need to be doing more work in making sure that boy children feel
loved, welcome and led.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Ngiyabonga Mgcinisihlalo nasePhini likaMongameli. Phini
likaMongameli, lo mbuzo asiwubuzi ngoba mhlawumbe sithanda ukuzwa ukuthi
kuthiwani ngawo. Ngiyavumelana nawe uma ukhuluma ngabazali ukuthi yibona
okufanele engabe bahamba phambili. IsiSuthu sithi: Bontata-bana ba jele
morara o bodila, mme jwale meno a bana a ya thella”.

Leso simo sisho ukuthi-ke yebo lezi zibi sizishayela sizibeke phambi
kukahulumeni. Sizishayela ngendlela yokuthi uhulumeni phela wathi asilususe
uswazi ezinganeni nasezikoleni ngakho-ke izingane sezingamahlongandlebe.
Uma ukhuluma nengane isikutshela ngamalungelo. Isizwe siya ngokuya
sishabalala ngakho-ke sifuna ukwazi-ke mama ukuthi uhulumeni yena uthini.
Embusweni wobandlululo kwakukhona lezi zakhiwo okwakuthiwa izikole
zezingane ezigangile – izikole ezazakhelwe amahlongandlebe. Kwakhungekho-ke
lokhu okwenzeka manje ngaleso sikhathi sombuso wobandlululo. Ngabe kukhale
nyonini kithi ukuze izingane zethu zibe ngondingasithebeni?  Kukhona
abazali nabanye abantu abapha izingane ezigcwele imigwaqo izimali ukuze
zifeze lezi zidingo zazo ngakho-ke lesi sidleke sasemgwaqeni ngeke siphele.


Ngabe uthini uhulumeni kulokho? Phela thina sesephucwe amandla futhi
asisakwazi ukushaya ingane. Sakhula sishwaya thina yingakho sikhule saze
saba ngaka. Wena ongenhla. Ngehlela ngezansi.

IPHINI LIKAMONGAMELI: Naledi, eyakho le ndaba. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson, and the Deputy President. Deputy
President, we do not ask this question because we simply want to hear what
is being said about it. I concur with you when you say parents are the ones
who should take the lead. There is a Sesotho expression which says:
“Bontata-bana ba jele morara o bodila, mme jwale meno a bana a ya thella”.
[The sins of the fathers are visited upon the children.]

This situation means that indeed we put all the blame on the government. We
blame the government because it is the government that said we must stop
using corporal punishment on our children at schools. Now children do not
want to listen. When you talk to children about something, they simply tell
you about their rights. The nation is being destroyed and we need to know
what the government is saying about that.

During the apartheid regime we had reformatory schools and these were the
schools for children who did not want to listen. And all these things which
we see happening now did not occur during the apartheid regime. What went
wrong with us that has led us into having children that have become
homeless? There are parents and other people who give money to the street
kids to meet their needs, and therefore living on the street will not come
to an end.

What does the government say about this? We have been disempowered and we
can no longer punish children. We grew up being punished and that is why we
reached this age. Chairperson, I am finished and I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Naledi, this question is for you.]

When the Minister of Education answers, she will also touch on this issue –
delegation - but having said that, one of the realities that we have to
deal with, as parents in the 21st Century, is that ...

... asifani nalaba bantwana. [... we are not like these children.]

We are not the same. Just think of the amount of knowledge that our
children have as compared to the amount of knowledge that we had in our
time. The mass media and many other influences that are there are impacting
on them. So, we cannot go against the grain and wishes of the communities
that we grew up in. Things are just not the same.

Another thing that we have seen is also a certain degree of emotional
instability amongst young people, for instance, suicide.

Uyafuna ukumbetha lo mntwana emva koko ayokuzixhoma, uyabazi banjani? Ngoko
ke masibacengeni aba bantwana ... [You want to give this child a hiding and
after that he or she goes and hangs himself or herself; do you know how
they are? Therefore let us plead with these children ...]

... but we have to be firm and we have to give them quality time. I think
that, as parents, we are overdelegating the responsibility of spending
quality time ...

... sibangcambazisa aba bantwana. [... communicating with our children.]

There is no substitute for quality time with your children. I am not saying
that those of us who grew up under a system where corporal punishment and
beating was allowed by parents and even at school are damaged in perpetuity
but we lived in a particular era. So, the adjustment is not going to be
about government, it is about all of us as society and, again, I say that
parents must take responsibility. They must engage with their children at
home.

It is also important to say that the overwhelming majority of South African
children are good children. So, we must also make sure that when we talk
about our children, we do not give the impression that all South African
children are problem children.

uNks N D NTWANAMBI: Ndiyabulela Mhlalingaphambili, ndiyangqinelana noSekela
Mongameli ukuba induku ayinamzi. Into endifuna ukuyibuza kukuba ingaba
abantu bezeenkolo bayakhuthazwa na ukuba benze uchatha bona njengokuba
ingabo abona bantu bathetha nabantu ixesha elininzi, ingakumbi xa sithetha
ngokushumayeza hayi umsindo ozayo kweli thuba, kodwa ukuguqulwa kwezimo
nezimilo kunye neendlela zokuphathana nezokuhlalisana. Andithethi nge “vat
en sit” xa ndisithi ukuhlalisana. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Ms N D NTWANAMBI: I thank you, Chairperson, and I agree with the Deputy
President that ill-treating someone is a recipe for disaster. What I want
to ask is whether people of faith are encouraged to put in an extra effort
as they are the ones who talk mostly to the people. They usually preach
about the evils that might crop up for not obeying the word of God, but
this time they should talk about the change of conduct and behaviour, the
way of treating one another and staying together. I am not talking about
the so-called “vat en sit” when I talk about staying together. [Laughter.]]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: There is work that is going on to galvanise us so
that we have shared values. There is something called The Charter of
Responsibility and there is also in the MRM, The Charter of Positive
Values. I also know that there are different initiatives that are meant to
target categories of people in society amongst young people. For instance,
in the education system there is the Girl Empowerment Movement, GEM, which
is something that fulfils the same role as the Girl Guides, the Young
Women’s Christian Association and all those organisations that are
dedicated to supporting, educating and strengthening the girl-child.

I think we need to support those initiatives. Hon member, I know that you
were a primary school teacher of note in your community. You need to go
back to your school and continue to find out what is happening there and
how we can support the teachers, in order for them to be in a better
position to perform these many tasks that we are delegating to them.

I also know that the Department of Education is promoting a campaign called
“Adopt a School” through which they are giving us the privilege, as parents
and society, to go back to some of the schools we used to go to, or schools
that we have access to, in order to support them so that the governing
bodies, children and teachers do not feel that they are alone. They would
like to see every school have a minimum level of service – not just be a
row of classrooms – and that there is proper decorum at school, in the
laboratory, on the playing grounds, etc.

So, if you adopt a school, wherever you are at work, when you see freebies,
you direct them to the school that you are linked to. If any one of you has
not adopted a school, I am very worried, hon members, because all of us
have to adopt a school that we can support without taking over.

Singafuni ukuyophatha. Ngiyabonga. [Let us not want to have complete
control. Thank you.]

Ms D ROBINSON: Thank you, Chair. I would just like to support what was said
previously by the Deputy President about parents needing to take
responsibility. I just want to ask whether there has ever been any
consideration of using clinics for helping young parents to give them some
guidance on how to bring children up. Young people are having children
early and very often without the support of sound family structures.
Parents are at a loss as to what to do. I think this could be a programme
that could help if we actually have parenting skills taught. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I’m not sure whether your follow-up question
is linked to the question on the Order Paper, but I wouldn’t mind if the
Deputy President wishes to express an opinion on it.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I suppose that is advice. Right now, we do not know
what is going to work. We are prepared to try a lot of things without being
too intrusive. I know that there was a time, not even for young parents,
that whenever people went to hospital, they would also be given advice by
the medical staff on bringing up children, not just health and medical
advice. It is also encouraged that social workers and other people who are
part of those social services play a role. Of course, churches are
important also for that.

The challenge also of those children who are having children is that
sometimes they become disconnected from youth activities and they are not
quite a part of the women’s congregation in church. So, there is a need for
us to look at the intervention that is targeting those young parents.

This morning, we had a meeting with the Minister of Planning and
Development in Chile who is a guest of Mrs Mbeki. As you know, Chile is one
of the countries that we are looking at quite intensely because of its
success in alleviating poverty and because it has a similar history to
South Africa.

They had a horrible dictator and all kinds of things happened there. They
are also reconstructing and developing their country. But what was very
interesting in their presentation was the extent to which they look at
poverty as a spiritual deprivation, hunger, absence of services, etc. For
each of these deficiencies they actually look at an intervention so that
for this particular category of people in society who are young parents and
therefore present a specific need, there is a particular intervention aimed
at looking at them.

I’m sure this is something we will be talking about with many of the
Ministers from the social cluster who were there, not just in relation to
this group but generally to make sure that people living on the margins of
society are seen as human beings and not just as numbers of people who must
just receive a social grant. They are total beings and they have needs
other than just income. Thank you.

         HEALTH QUESTIONS TO BE RESPONDED TO LATER WATER IN THE DAY

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I’d just like to make an announcement that the
Health questions will be responded to later in the day. The Health Minister
has a meeting with the Deputy President right now, so we will move them
towards the end. I was informed by the Minister of Education that she may
not be with us throughout because of other commitments but other Ministers
will respond on her behalf. I now call upon the Minister of Housing to
respond to the question by the hon B L Matlhoahela. I don’t see B L
Matlhoahela in the House but for the information of the House, you may
respond to the question. [Interjections.] Is she here?

                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE

                                  Cluster 2
MINISTERS:

  Availability of waiting lists for housing in certain areas in Kimberley,
                                Northern Cape

86.   Ms B L Matlhoahela (ID) asked the Minister of Housing:

      (1)   Whether there are housing waiting lists available for (a) Santa
           Sentrum, (b) Witdam, (c) Greenside and (d) Diamond Park, Green
           Point, in Kimberley in the Northern Cape; if not, why not; if
           so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether any plans are in place to develop and uplift these
           areas; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   CO1128E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Chairperson. When you said,
“Matlhoahela”, I thought you were referring to houses only. [Laughter.] The
question before me is about the waiting list in the area of Kimberley and
my response is as follows: The Sol Plaatje Municipality has confirmed that
they only have a very general waiting list for the Kimberley region. This
list, broken down vaguely, reads as follows: Santa Centre, which is one of
the areas that the hon member wanted to know about, is 33 – that is the
need for that area; Witdam is 107; Greenside is 50; Diamond Park is 500;
and Green Point is 300. The total is 990.

We, in the Department of Housing, are trying to move away from the concept
of a waiting list to the concept of dealing with the need, because inherent
in the concept of a waiting list is a great deal of dependency on the
state, which we are trying to deal with and the creation of a culture of
entitlement. This has become a serious problem. It is the kind of problem
we seem to have experienced in the past two days in the Western Cape.

We are trying to say to our communities that we have a responsibility and
the communities themselves have a responsibility. The product, which is a
house, is a joint responsibility between government and the owners
themselves – the beneficiaries, finally. So we want to sell the idea that
we are now going to be dealing very comprehensively with the need.

We will define what the need is but the waiting list is a different
concept. We want to change to co-operation between ourselves and the
beneficiaries. The second part of the question deals with whether or not
there are any plans to develop these areas. Our answer is, yes, certainly.
The Northern Cape Department of Housing and Local Government is currently
compiling a multiyear provincial housing development plan. As most members
know, most of these plans have at their core the concept of Integrated
Development Plans, IDPs. We are just one element in that IDP planning.

I also want to say that we have plans to ensure that most of these areas,
which are informal settlements, are areas that we are giving attention to.
So, the question whether or not we have any intention to uplift these areas
should be a foregone conclusion. Yes, we have the intention to uplift these
areas because these are areas that we have prioritised in our housing
scheme. Thank you.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Thank you, Chair. Thank you for your answer, Minister. I
would like you to elaborate, if you could, on part of the answer you gave
about moving away from a concept of a waiting list to one of identifying
the need. May I ask you whether that could result in someone who is fairly
low down on the existing list being elevated to the top and the people who
were at the top therefore moving down? Is that a possibility that could
result from this new priority that the department is considering? Thanks.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: The other question you would have gone on to ask
was whether it was possible for the Minister to remove the people from the
waiting list. Is that where you were going to, hon member? My answer is yes
– I have just done that at Joe Slovo. What we are doing is working on a
priority list of criteria and we are working together with the
beneficiaries and communities.

When I was in the National Assembly a few months ago, I had the same
question. My response was that we have been urged by the National Assembly
to create a national database. A transparent process would be an added
bonus in assisting us to get to that national database, which would
eliminate, firstly, the possibility of any corruption in the allocation of
houses, as most members know that we have a serious problem with that;
secondly, the removal of any idea that there might be corruption in the
allocation of those houses.

If we have a database in the same way as Home Affairs has a population
register and in the same way as the Independent Electoral Commission, the
IEC, has a voters’ roll, then this is open to all for people to understand
whereabouts they are on the waiting list, and the criteria would have been
worked on together with the beneficiaries on what our most immediate needs
are.

What we, as the Department of Housing, have identified as immediate
criteria are age, vulnerability – those people that might be afflicted by
some illness - and children. Beyond that, we are working with the
communities to work out what criteria we might have. Of course, we have
also identified that female-headed households are part of the criteria that
we will rank very highly.

So, we are working on a group of criteria, which we are using to put people
on the waiting list. By the time the waiting list is consolidated and
accepted, nobody may move anybody from anywhere to anywhere else without
the permission of the Minister.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are there any further follow-up questions? No,
no, no, no! There are other people, Chief. Miss Nyanda, your hand was up.
Not? Oh! Was your hand up? Then hon Thetjeng. Hon Nyanda.

Khuluma-ke sisi. Angithi ngikupha ithuba manje.
Nksz F NYANDA: Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. Bengicela ukubuza kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi
lezi zinhla, njengoba ethi bazibekile, zizoba khona kuzo zonke yini
izifundazwe ngendlela abeka ngayo ngoba lezi zinhla kwezinye izindawo ziba
khona kodwa uma sekukhishwa izindlu kuthathwa abantu abasezansi banikezwe
izindlu. Ngiyabonga.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEZINDLU: Inkinga yethu yiyo yona leyo yokuthi sizama ukuthi
sibe ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[You may speak, hon member. I am now giving you a chance.

Ms F NYANDA: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to know from the Minister
whether these lists, as she says they have already been compiled, will be
available to all the provinces as she puts it, because these lists are
there in other places, but when the houses are being allocated, only the
people who are at the bottom of the lists are considered. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: That is our problem and we are trying to have ...]

... a comprehensive list that is held nationally so that anybody ...

... nasezifundazweni bakwazi ukubona ukuthi zihamba kanjani lezi zinhla
kodwa abanalo ilungelo lokuthi bashintshe abantu. Inkinga yethu ilapha
emphakathini lapho uthola ukuthi umuntu ufika abhalise bese ethola ukuthi
obhalise emva kwakhe useyitholile indlu. Izinkinga zethu ziqala lapho bese
kubonakala sengathi amakhansela abantu abangethembekile nabanokukhohlakala.


Kuye kwenzeke ukuthi ngesinye isikhathi singabatholi abantu abasohlwini
lokulinda ngoba abantu bakithi abahlali kulezi zindawo lezi abasuke befake
kuzo izicelo. Bayasuka lapho baye kwenye indawo sithi uma sesibafuna ngoba
basohlwini singabatholi. Sinenkinga-ke yalokho kodwa-ke uma sinohla
lukazwelonke siyokwazi ukuthi umuntu usesukile KwaZulu-Natali waya
eFreyistata bese simsusa lapho simfake kolunye uhla lokulinda.
Sisasebenza khona lokho-ke kodwa okumqoka ukuthi sifuna ukwethembeka kohlu
lokulinda kubonakale kuthi nezifundazwe zingene kulolo hla lokulinda.
Sizama ukuthi izifundazwe namakhansela bangabi nelungelo lokushintsha uhla
lokulinda. Kufanele ihlale injalo nje ... (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[... even in the provinces, is able to see how these lists are compiled,
but they have no right to change the lists of people. Our problem with the
communities is that you find that a person registers for a house and you
find that the one who registered later has already been allocated a house.
Our problems start there and in the end councillors are seen as
untrustworthy and corrupt people.

It sometimes happens that we do not find the people who are on the waiting
lists because our people do not reside in the places where they have
applied for the houses. They move away from where they had registered and
live elsewhere and when we look for them, as they are on the lists, we are
unable to find them. We have a problem with that, but if we have a national
list we will be able to know that a person has moved from KwaZulu-Natal to
the Free State and then we would put him on another waiting list.

We are still dealing with that but what is important is that we want to
ensure that even the provinces do appear on such a waiting list. We are
trying to make sure that the provinces and the councillors do not have a
right to change the waiting list. It must remain as it is ...]

... very much along the same lines as we have with the population register
at Home Affairs. Thank you.

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you, Minister, for the
responses. I just want to ask a follow-up question that deals with the
prioritisation that sometimes will be based on vulnerability. There are
people that are physically challenged – some have lost their sight. You
will find that they are not really prioritised at local level in terms of
the provision of houses.

I just want to check what can be done in the immediate future to address
those challenges of those people who to us are definitely in need of those
facilities that are there. That is one part of the question. The other
question, Minister, also on the list again: Does it mean that if a person
is quite healthy or does not have children, there will be a possibility of
that person being moved from the top of the list to the bottom end, vis-à-
vis looking at the needs that might be there? I just want to check that.
Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you, Chairperson. May I deal with the last
part that deals with the question of whether healthy people and those who
have no children would be moved from the top to the bottom. I think that we
are trying not to be very mechanical in the way that we operate the system.
The plea that I had made to the National Assembly was for Members of
Parliament and, in this case, members of the House, to get involved in the
process of our waiting list because we have a challenge here.

At the moment, the waiting lists are put together by council. You have a
right to go and ask for the waiting list and the criteria that have been
used in developing that waiting list. Most of the time it is based purely
on when people applied, but we have new criteria now that we have just
outlined and you might want to sit with them to understand how they should
deal with that.

At all times we are dealing with the community, so we get them involved in
this. So, we might find that a particular community might not prioritise
quite the things that we want to prioritise because they might not have the
challenges that we want to put across.

We want to make sure that the elderly, children and people who are
vulnerable are given first preference for natural reasons that you and I
can understand. These are the people that the state would want to ensure
are protected and are given the advantage that the state services are
providing.

I think I answered both parts of the question. It refers to both the able-
bodied person and those without children. Also, beyond that, we are trying
to create a culture where the able-bodied person would come and help us
build their own houses because that is something so inherent in human
dignity that we do not want to take that away.

We want people to feel that they are part of building their own houses. It
never was the intention of this government to give free houses to all. It
was the intention of this government to give free houses to those people
most deserving of state assistance. We are urging the able-bodied who are
still able to work to please take advantage of the fact that we have made
inroads into talking to banks and we are putting in place structures to
assist them.

If all of that fails and you are not employed, please come and join us to
build your house. We call this sweat equity. In that way we will be able to
provide you with the house. You will be able to take ownership of something
that you would be proud to call your own, not someone that is merely given
to you when, in fact, you can assist in making this a different world.

Ms H LAMOELA: Thank you, hon Chair. Thank you, Minister, for the
information shared with us today. I would just like to know whether
farmworkers will also be included on the waiting list, while working on
farms?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: We have a big challenge in dealing with the rural
landscape. We have just had a workshop together with our rural stakeholders
to try to craft a policy that is suitable for all. To begin with, people
who live on farms do not own the land on which they live. The land is very
often owned by the farmer. So, we have to find a way in which we can have a
relationship with the farmer in terms of which he can cede a part of the
land to ensure that we are able to put houses there for the workers, but
this is work in progress.

We hope that very soon we will be able to complete a policy on farm housing
because we hope, even as we are building in the urban areas, that if we can
provide the same for the rural areas, we will be able perhaps to stem some
of the tide into the urban areas where people feel drawn to the urban areas
because we are able to provide them with houses in the urban areas. So, it
is something that we are working on and something that is really a big
problem for us because of the land ownership that we have in the rural
areas.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo noNgqongqoshe. Ngqongqoshe, sebewubuze
kakhulu umbuzo wohla lokulinda ngakho bengithi uzofinyelela kulokhu engiya
kukho – bengingeke ngisaphakama. Ngqongqoshe, uma sikhuluma ngalezi zinhla
nalaba bantu abasemikhukhwini, ngabe siyabacabangela laba bantu abalalela
umthetho nabangahambi bayokwakha njengalaphaya ko-Jukskei noma kuphi kodwa
abakhe lapha emuva kwezindlu zabantu?

Labo bantu sengathi abekho ndawo. Abantu abathola ukusizakala kuqala
ngezindlu yilabaya abasemikhukhwini. Ngabe sithumela muphi umyalezo kulaba
bantu abakha emva kwezindlu zabantu futhi abalalela umthetho nabangabekanga
impilo yabo engozini? Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson and the Minister. Minister, the
question of the waiting list has been asked many times and I thought you
would have addressed what I want to ask otherwise I would not have risen.
Minister, if we talk about these lists and people living in informal
settlements, are we being considerate to people who abide by the law and
who do not occupy land illegally in areas like Juskei or any other place
where they live in the backyards?

It seems like these people are nowhere. People who get first priority are
those who live in informal settlements. What message is carried across to
those people who build shacks in the backyards and who also abide by the
law and who do not put their lives in danger? I thank you.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: I didn’t know I would have such a tough time
today. Hon Mzizi, I wish you were with me yesterday when the people in Joe
Slovo – I’m just making an example – decided to take to the streets,
endangering the lives of the motorists there and burning property and all
that. You see, when we started the project in Joe Slovo, the biggest
problem we were confronted with in Langa were people saying exactly what
you are saying. They said they have been here since 1960 but government has
not done anything for them. They say they are the law-abiding citizens and
their children have spilled over into the backyards. They say that we come
here and the first thing we want to do is to build houses for those people
who broke the law and settled where they knew they were not supposed to
settle.

We had to speak to them and indicate to them that the part of our
development and our policy is actually to ensure that we can uplift people
who are in informal settlements. It took a long time to convince the
residents of Langa. Now, imagine what they are thinking now when, in fact,
they were bypassed in development and the development given to those people
whom they conceived of as breaking the law.

Today, the very people who have been prioritised are out on the street
because they do not want to move so that houses are built for them. It is a
very intricate problem when you are dealing with human beings and a need
that government has identified as something that we should meet. Beyond
that, I think that this is something that we are dealing with on a case-by-
case basis.

We now have worked out a ratio where wherever we are dealing with informal
settlements, 30%-50% of that would be people from the backyards – to ensure
that we are able to cater for all equitably. When we deal with informal
settlements, an indication should not be given that we are not building
houses for those people who have been waiting. They have been on the
waiting list and when we give houses, those are the kinds of people that we
are giving houses to.

At the same time, precisely because of the situation that people in the
informal settlements find themselves in, we have to attend to them as well.
What we are doing now is to give 30%-50% and 50%-70% to ensure that we are
even-handed in our approach.

Chairperson, if you will allow me, the last time I had interaction with him
he was talking about the hostel dwellers. Exactly two weeks after that,
they were out in the streets. They were the same hostel dwellers that he
was asking me about. So I hope that I can appeal to him to talk to these
people to say that we are really committed to dealing with them and that we
will be getting there. They must please give us time to get there. We will
provide them with decent housing, not on the street but where they live.
Thank you.

       MINISTER OF HEALTH’S QUESTION AND RULES FOR FOLLOW-UP QUESTIONS

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Minister. Hon
members, there are just two things I want to mention. I’m informed that the
Minister of Health’s question will be dealt with towards the end of our
session of questions, due to her unavailability at this point in time.
Secondly, I want to draw members’ attention to the provisions of the Rules
of the NCOP with respect to follow-up questions. Follow-up questions are
not speeches; there are time limits and only four follow-up questions are
permitted. I just wanted to draw members’ attention to that so that we
don’t have unnecessary chaos. I’ll therefore proceed to Question 88.

      Particulars of provincial and municipal disaster management plans

88.   Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      (a) How many (i) provinces and (ii) municipalities have disaster
      management plans, (b) what percentage of their budgets is allocated
      for disaster-related capital expenditure per province and (c) what was
      the total economic impact of the recent fires that engulfed a number
      of provinces?          CO1993E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, hon
members of the House, the answer to the hon Windvoël is as follows: The co-
ordination and overall management of the disaster management function has
presented all spheres of government with tremendous challenges. We should
remember that all in all we have 283 municipalities in different provinces
and a number of national departments and non-governmental organisations are
involved in the implementation of this function.
One of the major weaknesses relates to the sourcing of information. This
has led to government resolving that, from now on, an annual report
focusing solely on disaster management should be prepared. The first report
will be released before the end of this year, and will cover issues
relating to leadership, the establishment of structures, the formulation of
disaster management plans and prevention strategies, budget allocations,
the availability of basic disaster-related infrastructure and the response
to specific disaster-related incidents, amongst other things.

Regarding the specific issues raised by the hon member, I wish to report as
follows: Only one province has finalised its disaster management plan,
seven provinces are in the process of completing theirs, and one province
has not commenced with the drafting of the plan due to capacity
constraints. The majority of our metropolitan and district municipalities
in secondary cities have either finalised or are in the process of
finalising their disaster management plans.

The updated figures will be included in the annual report and the amounts
allocated for disaster-related capital expenditure are not available at
present. They are being collected and will be included in the 2006-07
disaster management annual report.

The question also focuses on the economic impact arising from the fires
which recently engulfed a number of our provinces. This matter was dealt
with extensively by the Minister for Provincial and Local Government when
he addressed the NCOP last Thursday. He advised the Council that a detailed
assessment of damage is currently under way. This is being co-ordinated by
the National Disaster Management Centre and involves all affected
provinces, municipalities and national sector departments.

I can do no better than to simply advise the hon Windvoël to read the
Minister’s speech because, unfortunately, this question came before the
Minister came to address the NCOP. I thank you.

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WAVELONKHE WETIFUNDZA: Mgcinisihlalo, ngibonga
imphendvulo lesiyinikwe ngumhlonishwa Lisekela leNdvuna yeLitiko
Lahulumende Betifundza Nebasekhaya. Kuliciniso kutsi lombuto ufakwe
kungakafiki lengcoco lebesinayo kuleliviki lelengcile, sitawulindza lombiko
wemnyaka lotawuchamuka etikweni.

Sitsandza kwati kutsi ngutiphi tinyatselo letitawutsatfwa litiko
ngaletifundza nabomasipala labangenato letinhlelo tekumelana naletehlakalo
ngobe saphasisa umtsetfo lobitwa nge-Disaster Management Act, lophocelela
kutsi tonkhe tinhlelo nome ematiko abe nalo loluhlelo lekumelana
naletehlakalo. Kungabikhona kwaloluhlelo kwenta kutsi silahlekelwe
yimiphefumulo leminyenti, kungaba ngenca yemililo, tikhukhula njll.

Njengobe sikhuluma ngekugucuka kwesimo selitulu lesitsi yi- “çlimate
change” kutawujabulisa kutsi sati kwekutsi kutawuba netinyatselo
letitawutsatfwa Litiko kulandzelela letotinhlangotsi letehlukene
tabohulumende, basemakhaya nebetifundza. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
Siswati paragraphs follow.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I thank the hon Deputy
Minister for Provincial and Local Government for the response that we have
been given. It is true that this question was submitted prior to a debate
we had last week, and we will wait for an annual report from the
department.

We would like to know what steps will be taken by the department against
those provinces and municipalities that do not have programmes to deal with
these disasters because we passed the legislation named the Disaster
Management Act, which compels all departments to have these programmes to
deal with these disasters. The absence of these programmes causes the loss
of so many lives - it can be through fires, floods, etc.

As we are talking about climate change, it will interest us to know that
steps will be taken by the department to monitor various spheres of
government, local and provincial. I thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
fully agree with the hon member about what would happen to those
municipalities who are unable to deal with these disasters. As I said
earlier, the department is in the process of accumulating all these reports
from the various municipalities and districts to actually determine what
the damage has been.

We’ve not actually been able to collect the information on all the damage
that has been done by the latest disasters. As we are proceeding with the
process, we are hoping that the districts will assist those municipalities
that are struggling to put together that kind of report. They will also see
if the capacity is there so that whenever such disasters happen, those
municipalities will be able to deal with those disasters. Thank you.

   Provision of sanitation and flushing toilets for people in rural areas

90.   Nkosk N D Ntwanambi (ANC) ubuza uMphathiswa weZamanzi naMahlathi:


      Ingaba uluntu oluhlala ezilalini luyabandakanyakeka na kugutyulo
      lwelindle nezindlu zangasese ezigungxulwayo; ukuba akunjalo, kutheni;
      ukuba kunjalo, zithini iinkcukacha?     CO1998X
(Translation of isiXhosa question follows.)

90    [Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Water Affairs and
      Forestry:
      Whether sanitation and flushing toilets are also provided for people
      living in the rural areas; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                                  CO1998E]

UMPHATHISWA WEMICIMBI YAMANZI NAMAHLATHI: Enkosi Mhlalingaphambili kunye
namalungu ahloniphekileyo. Ndingaqala ndithi eyona nto iphambili kuluhlu
lwezinto urhulumente afuna ukuzenza kukuhambisa iinkonzo ezilalini.
Iinkonzo zamanzi kunye nogutyulo lwelindle ingakumbi, zezona zinto
sijongene nazo sileli Sebe leMicimbi yaManzi namaHlathi. Amalungu ayazi
ukuba sizibekele amaxesha okuhambisa iinkonzo zamanzi ebantwini
ungaphelanga lo nyaka uzayo ka-2008 kunye nezindlu zangasese ungaphelanga
oka-2010. Sinawo amaxesha esiwabekileyo okuba siphelise uhambiso lwelindle
ngamabhakethe ngoDisemba ka-2007.

Xa sikhangela, ukusulela kunyaka ka-1994 sifumanisa ukuba lihle kakhulu
inani labantu abangasenazo izindlu zangasese. Singatsho ukuba njengokuba
sithetha ngoku phantse zizigidi ezithathu nangaphezulu zamakhaya
angenazindlu zangasese. Asihlelanga nje sibila sisoma ukuqinisekisa ukuba
naba bantu bazezi zigidi zithathu bayazifumana iinkonzo zamanzi kunye
nogutyulo lwelindle. Into ebalulekileyo kukuba xa sijonge ugutyulo
lwelindle okanye izindlu zangasese kufuneka iqwalaselwe izinto ezithile
phambi kokuba kuthathwe isigqibo ngeyona ndlela ilungileyo yokuqhuba le
nkonzo kwiindawo ngeendawo. Izinto eziye zijongwe kukuba iza kuba ziindleko
ezingakanani na ukufaka indlela ethile, eyeyamanzi okanye le ingadingi
manzi neyaziwa njenge-dry sanitation. Kujongwa ukuba imali yokuqhuba loo
nkonzo ikho na, amathuba emisebenzi aza kuvulwa kukwenza lo msebenzi; loo
ndawo inawo na amanzi aza kusetyenziswa xa kugutyulwa elo lindle; iimeko
yamanzi angaphantsi komhlaba kuloo ndawo kunye nomgama akuwo emhlabeni,
ukukhuseleka kwawo; kunye nokuba zintoni ezikhoyo apho ezizizisetyenziswa
zabantu ezinokusetyenziswe xa kukhethwa eyona ndlela yohambiso-lindle kuloo
ndawo.

Xa ndisiza ngoku kulo mbuzo wezindlu zangasese ezigungxulwayo, okwangoku
inyani mayithethwe ukuba asizo zinto kujongwe ukuba zingakhona ezilalini
njengokuba sithetha nje ngenxa yokuba xa kule meko zikuyo ngoku iilali
zethu akukho zisetyenziswa zoluntu zikhoyo zinokusetyenziswa ngalo mzuzu
ukwenza ukuba ezi zindlu zigungxulwe. Xa ujonga kwakhona inqanaba lenkonzo
engumthetho nesivumelene ngayo thina kukuba abantu basezilalini bahlulelane
ngamanzi noluntu lonke kuba akukho ziimpompo kwindlu nganye. Loo nto
ithetha ukuba akukho ndlela yokuzisa amanzi kumzi ngamnye ukuze sikwazi
ukuwakhela indlu yangasese egungxulwayo. Xa uphinda ujonga, ufumanisa ukuba
kwalapho ezilalini akukho mibhobho nandlela yakuhambisa eli lindle. Xa sele
sifake ezi zindlu zigungxulwayo liza kuhanjiswa njani? Azikho tu ezo
zisetyenziswa.

Akukho zindawo zakucoca xa sele lihanjisiwe elo lindle. Ukukhawulelana nezi
ngxaki singurhulumente siye sakhangela ukuba zeziphi na iindlela
esingazisebenzisayo ukuncedisana noomasipala abanengxaki yabantu
abangenazindlu zangasese; abangenwa zizifo. Sathi ke masibonisane ngokuba
yeyiphi indlela yohanjiso lwelindle nobuchwepheshe obunokusetyenziswa
kwiindawo ngeendawo.

Sibachazele ngale dry sanitation njenge-VIP kwiindawo apho baziyo ukuba
abanamanzi kwaphela kulo ngingqi bakuyo. Kwiindawo ezinamanzi kodwa
kungekabikho zinkozo ngalo mzumzu bayazibeka ezi VIP’s kodwa bazakhe
ngendlela ezakwenza ukuba zikwazi ukulungiswa zingungxuleke nazo xa sekukho
amanzi. Kwezinye iindawo sibacebisa ukuba ilindle lingasetyenziswe emva
kwexesha elithile ukwakha umanyolo olunokuthi lusetyenziswe kwezolimo
nangona siyibawela into yokuba wonke umntu oseMzantsi Afrika afumane
iinkonzo ezikwiqondo eliphezulu kule ndawo yesanitation. Ngelishwa ayikwazi
kwenzeka yonke lonto kule nkqubo sinayo ngoku nanjengokuba nditshilo ukuba
ilindle eligungxulwayo lifuna ukuba kubekho into eninzi phambi kokuba umise
ilindle ngokwalo. Kufuneka unxebelelwano nothungelwano lwamanzi ukuhanjiswa
kwemibhobho bulk water systems nezinto zokulungisa nayo yonke loonto. Loo
nto ithetha ukuba abantu bethu basezilalini bazakuhlala ngolu hlobo
behlelelekile; Hayi! Esikwenzayo ngoku kukuzama ukuba wonke umntu ongenazo
iinkonzo makafumane iinkonzo ezingundoqo ukuze wonke umntu xa enayo siye
kwinto ebizwa ngokuba yileli apho siza kunyuka sijonge ukuba siziphucula
njani iinkonzo esele sizikhuphile, sijonge ukuba xa sisenza loo nto zikho
na iilali ezinokuthi xa zidityaniswa kukho namashishini kubekho nezinye
izinto ekwabelwana ngazo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, Chairperson, and
hon members. I will start by saying that the most important thing is
service delivery in the rural areas amongst the things that the government
wants to do. Water services and especially sanitation are the things that
we deal with as the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. The members
know that we have set a target to deliver water services to the people
before the end of 2008, and toilets before the end of 2010. We also have
set a target for ourselves to eradicate the bucket system before the end of
this current year in December 2007.

When we look back from 1994 we find that the number of people who do not
have toilets has decreased. We can say currently almost three million and
more households do not have toilets. We are not relaxed; we are trying to
make sure that these three million people and more do get water services
and sanitation. It is crucial that when we look at sanitation and/or
toilets, certain things are considered before a decision is taken about
which way is suitable to proceed with this service in various places.
Things that are considered are costs involved in building a certain road
even if it is for water infrastructure, dry sanitation. We consider whether
the money for doing that service is available, and the employment
opportunities that will be created. We look at whether the place has water
that will be used when the waste is removed, the condition of underground
water in that area and the distance of underground water, and safety of the
place. We also look at what things people use or the infrastructure that
can be used in an area.

Coming to the question of flushing toilets, let the truth be known that for
now these are not things that can be constructed in the rural areas. When
you look at the situation of our rural areas there is no infrastructure
that can be used to support flushing toilets. When you look again at the
standard of services that is law and which we agreed to in that people in
the rural areas share public water, there are not water pumps in every
house. That means there is no way of bringing water into every house so
that we can build flushing toilets. When you look again you discover that
in the rural areas there are no pipes, and there is no sanitation system.
How is it going to be removed when we have built these flushing toilets?
There is none that is being used.

There are no places for waste excretion. When it has been removed, where is
it going to be excreted? To deal with these problems, as government we
usually look at ways that we can use to assist municipalities with problems
of people without toilets, as well as the fact that these people get
diseases and the like. We decided to assist each other because when we look
at different places, we look at the ways of removing sanitation and the
technology that can be used in that respect.

We have told them about dry sanitation like the ventilated improved pit
toilets at places where they know that there is no water at all in the
area. At a place where there is water, but without water currently, they
build these VIPs in a way that they can be corrected when there is water
available and they can also be flushed. In other places we advise them
about the urine diversion toilets that can be used after a certain period
and there is manure that can be used in agriculture, although we would like
everybody in South Africa to get services with high standards with regards
to sanitation. Unfortunately, it is impossible for that to happen with the
programme that we have currently. As I mentioned earlier, flushing toilets
require many things before you can have sanitation infrastructure: there
has to be a water-supply network, the delivery of pipes, bulk water systems
and things to correct all of that. Does that mean our people in the rural
areas will remain disadvantaged? No! What we are trying to do now is to try
to provide for everybody who does not have a basic service so that when
everybody has it, we go to something called a ladder, whereby we can see
how to upgrade the services that we have delivered; and when doing that,
there are rural areas that can be grouped together and we see if there are
businesses and other things that can be shared.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister, may I advise you to
summarise. I have already given you more than two minutes. Please summarise
and if there is a follow-up question you can give a written reply to the
member concerned.
UMPHATHISWA WEMICIMBI NAMAHLATHI: Enkosi mhlalingaphambili. Hayi
besendigqibile ke ndisithi siza kugqithela kule nto endithi yiladder
ukunyusa izinga lenkonzo nanjengoko sifikelele kumgangatho wezinto
esijolise kuzo. Enkosi.

Nksz N D NTWANAMBI: Enkosi mhlalingaphambili. Ndiyabulela Mphathiswa,
ndibuvumelana nawe kwaye ndiyiva kakuhle le nto uyithethayo. Ndifuna nje
ukuqonda ukuba ingaba niyasebenza na noomasipala ngakumbi phaya ezilalini.
Kwakhona ukubonakalisa ukuba apho kunzima khona iza kubakho na imichiza eza
kuncedisana noko ukubulala amavumba kuba kaloku kusehlotyeni kwakhona
ngoku. Enkosi.

UMPHATHISWA WEMICIMBI YAMANZI NAMAHLATHI: Ngokuqinisekileyo siya
kusebenzisana nooMasipala ngakumbi eli sebe lamanzi nezamaHlathi.
Sifikelele phaya ezantsi sincedisana nomasipala ukusukela ngela xesha
besenza i-IDP’s zabo kwisicwangciso sincedisana nabo sisebenzisana neSebe
lePhondo lemimandla ukuba zamela ukuba bafumane Le mali abayicwangciseleyo.
Ukuze sizise iinjineli zize apha ukuza kucebisa, ngoba apha akhona amanzi
awekho amanzi uhlobo lwenkonzo enokulunga yile nale, ewe nakwezo bugcisa
ezinceda ngemichiza bacetyiswe sithi.

Okubalulekileyo ukuba amalungu mawakwazi kukuba asinyanzelisi ubugcisa
okanye ndlela ithile yokufakwa kweenkonzo. Siyacebisa sithi kolu hlahlo-
lwabiwo-mali ninalo, kwimeko enikuyo nantsi inkonzo eza kuba ngcono, ibe ke
ngoku nguceba ethatha isigqibo sokuba baza kwenza ntoni kodwa sibe
sisebenzisene nabo kakhulu. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, Chairperson. I was
concluding and I was saying we are going to move forward to what I call a
ladder to upgrade the standard of service, whereas we have reached our
target. Thank you.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Thank you, Chairperson. I thank you, Minister. Somehow I
tend to agree with you and I understand very well what you are talking
about. I would like to know if you work with the municipalities especially
in the rural areas. It is very difficult to work there, but would there be
chemicals to assist them to get rid of the odours because it is summertime
again? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Most definitely we will work
with the municipalities, especially this Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry. We went to grass-roots level to assist the municipalities since
they were making their IDPs. In the strategy we were assisting them,
together with the Department of Provincial and Local Government, to help
them get the money they have planned for, so that we can bring the
engineers to them to advise them as to where the water is, the type of
service that is suitable, and, yes, with science as well to help with
chemicals. They are advised by us.

What is important for members to know is that we do not force technology or
the type of services to be used onto people. We advise and tell them, and
we look at the budget that they have, look at the circumstances that they
face, what type of service is going to be suitable, and the councillor will
make a decision as to what they are going to do. But we will have worked
with them a great deal. Thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): We now proceed to Question 91. I
have just been informed that a Minister whose name had not been brought to
my attention was supposed to answer that question, which was directed at
the Minister in the Presidency, the hon E G Pahad. I am not sure which
Minister it is. There seems to be no reaction and that makes my work much
easier. I will now proceed to Question 92, printed in the name of the hon
Ntwanambi to the Minister of Home Affairs.

   Progress in assisting women who have been registered as married without
             their permission, and in eliminating identity fraud

92.   Nkosk N D Ntwanambi (ANC) ubuza uMphathiswa weMicimbi Yezekhaya:


      Kumaxa lindawoni isebe lakhe (a) ekuncedeni amakhosikazi azibona sele
      etshatile ngaphandle kwemvume yawo kunye (b) ekulweni ubuqhophololo
      obenzeka ngokuvulwa kwamatyala ngezazisi ezibiweyo ingakumbi
      ngabasebenzi besebe lakhe?        CO2000X
(Translation of isXhosa question follows.)

92.   [Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      What progress has been made by her department to (a) help women who
      have been registered as married without their permission and (b)
      eliminate fraud emanating from accounts opened by using stolen
      identity documents, especially by employees of her department?
                                              CO2000E]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, the answer to the question is that we
launched a Marriage Status Verification Campaign in August 2004, and we
have put the following mechanisms in place to assist women to verify their
marital status as it reflects on the computerised National Population
Register. A special link has been introduced on the website of the
department which women can utilise to verify their marital status online
against the National Population Register.

Secondly, we also encouraged women to visit any office of the Department of
Home Affairs to verify their marital status. We have established the number
32551 which is a track-and-trace number. We are hoping that we will be able
to upgrade the system such that it can also assist women to verify their
status through an SMS.
However, in cases where women have been registered as married without their
permission or their marriage is suspected to be fraudulent, such marriages
are investigated by the department through the Chief Directorate: Counter
Corruption and Security. The investigations are done to identify officials
of the department as well as any syndicates who operate with officials.

The response to the second part of the question is: Yes, the department has
entered into a memorandum of understanding with the SA Banking Risk
Information Centres, or Sabric, on 12 March 2007. The purpose of this
partnership is to combat identity fraud committed on banks by unscrupulous
individuals as well as officials from the department. The Chief
Directorate: Counter Corruption and Security in the department has
established a nodal point for this purpose and officials stationed in this
component assist with the verification of identity numbers and marital
status as and when banks make such requests.

They also assist with the co-ordination of information from the banks to
Sabric and in the event that any identity document is found to be
suspicious or a marriage is suspected to be fraudulent, the matter will be
referred to the relevant investigators in the department to undergo
thorough investigation and action. Our current turnaround project
workstream on ID processes is already investigating the possibility of
introducing biometric verification to which banks and other retailers will
have access. Thank you.
Ms H LAMOELA: Mr Chair, the Minister has given us an SMS number to verify
marital status. Could you please repeat the number? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): The Minister will repeat that. I
think it’s more technical; and it is for the benefit of the whole House.
Hon Thetjeng, let me take a substantive question.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon member, this is a track-and-trace number
and what we want to do is upgrade it. For instance, you can send your ID
number now from the House. Just send your ID number to that number, it will
come back responding to you by saying, “Yes” if you currently have an
application for an ID. If it is not there, it will say “No”. But if it says
yes, it will also give you details about where or how far that process is.
Of course, that applies to people who applied after 7 February 2007.

Now what we want to do is to use the same facility and upgrade the facility
which we have just established to ensure that you are able to verify your
marital status from the same number. Now you want the number, I am sorry.
Oh! I am sorry. The number is 32551. That is a track-and-trace number SMS.
Thank you.

Vho O M THETJENG: Mudzulatshidulo, ndi khou livhuwa phindulo ye ya fhiwa
nga Muhulisei hafha Minisita wa zwa Mahayani. Ndo vha ndi tshi khou humbela
u vhudzisa uri naa arali muthu o maliwa nga ndila I songo teaho a tshi khou
toda u divha zwauri naa a tshi toda u phumulisa u maliwa honoho, ndi mini
zwine zwa ita uri zwi dzhie tshifhinga tshilapfu-lapfu khumbelo iyo ine
muthu a khou I toda i sa fheli nga u tavhanya? Ndi ralo ngauri vhanwe
vhathu vho maliwa vha sa zwi divhi, fhedzi zwi dzhia tshifhinga tshilapfu
nga maanda uri hoyo mulandu u kone u fhedziswa uri muthu a kone u divha
zwauri ha ngo maliwa. Nndaa. (Translation of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I appreciate the answer given here by the
hon Minister of Home Affairs. If a person has been fraudulently married, I
would like to ask why it takes so long to nullify the marriage. I say so
because there are people who are fraudulently married and it is taking too
long to nullify the marriage. I thank you.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Have you tried to go to any office to verify
your marital status? That’s because you don’t have to apply to verify your
marital status. You simply walk into an office, go to a desk, ask, and they
will check and they will be able to provide you with the information. Have
you tried? Have you applied and how long did it take? You haven’t tested it
or tried it. Please go to any office. Go and verify your marital status,
and see if you won’t get a response timeously. [Interjections.]

No, you are not listening. You are talking. I don’t think you will be able
to ask a follow-up question on what I have just been responding to. You are
not listening. You are talking to somebody else and I am responding to you.

Vho O M THETJENG: Muhulisei, ndo vha ndi tshi khou ri a vha khou fhindula
mbudziso ye nda i vhudzisa. Mbudziso ine nda khou i vhudzisa ndi ya uri ndi
mini tshine tsha khou ita uri vhathu vhane vha wana uri vho malisiwa vha
songo tea u malisiwa uri hezwo zwithu zwi phumulwe, zwi tshi dzhia
tshifhinga tshilapfu-lapfu? Zwino ndi khou vhudzisa uri ndi nga mini zwi
tshi khou dzhia tshifhinga tshilapfu-lapfu uri muthu a kone u phumulisa zwe
zwa itiwa a sa zwi divhi, zwa u malisiwa? (Translation of Tshivenda
paragraph follows.)

[Mr O M THETJENG: Hon Minister, you are not responding to my question. My
question is why it takes so long to nullify a fraudulent marriage. I say so
because there are people who have been fraudulently married and it is
taking too long to nullify the marriage.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: To nullify the marriage: how long does it
take? That’s the first question I would like to respond to. But, secondly,
it is obvious that you don’t expect to be able to walk to a desk and simply
say, “Well, verify my status” and people check and they establish that you
are married. You would say, “No, I have not been married!” You dispute that
and they then nullify immediately.
For your information, and I am sure you know about this, there are women
who have deliberately gone into these kinds of marriages. Some of them have
actually been paid to go into these marriages and will come back and say,
“We know that the department has a campaign, which was launched by the
Minister, in which I can simply nullify the marriage.”

So, it’s important that when a person comes forward to verify status and
actually report that that marriage is fraudulent, you then conduct an
investigation before you nullify such a marriage, because also, it would be
easy to abuse the system in the same way that people are abusing the
facility currently. So, we should not make it easy for people to abuse
facilities and services which we are providing to the public. Thanks.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Are there any further follow-up
questions? In the absence of any, I will go back to the earlier ruling by
the Chairperson to release the hon Minister of Education. Given that she is
here, I am not sure whether I can go directly to her to answer Question 96.
She will guide us further as to who is going to take the remaining
questions. With your permission, hon members, I hand over to the hon
Minister to deal with Question 96.

  Steps to increase the number of maths and science teachers and to retain
                        these scarce skills resources

96.   Mr M A Sulliman (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      (1)   Whether her department has taken any steps to increase the
           number of maths and science teachers in high schools by
           recruiting (a) teachers who have taken voluntary severance
           packages, (b) young South African teachers living and teaching
           abroad and (c) foreign English-speaking teachers; if not, why
           not; if so, how many foreign teachers were recruited in the past
           two years;

      (2)   whether any mechanisms are in place to make sure that South
           Africa is (a) producing maths and science teachers and (b)
           retaining these scarce skills resources; if not, why not; if so,
           what mechanisms in each case?     CO2005E

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, my colleague the Minister for the
Public Service and Administration will answer any further questions on my
behalf.

With respect to Question 96, the reply is as follows. We have put in place
procedures to employ teachers who have had a break in service, including
those who took a voluntary severance package. They are, of course, now
eligible for permanent employment. Colleagues will be aware that,
initially, they could only be appointed on a temporary basis. We’ve now
ensured that they can, in fact, secure a permanent position.

We do advise provincial departments of education to recruit these
educators, but then we also say to them that they must recruit young people
who are joining the profession so that those who took packages shouldn’t
stand as a barrier to new entrants to the profession.

So, in looking at those who want to come back, we would tend to look at the
scarce skills subject domains as a first preference – those with
mathematics, science and similar qualifications.

In terms of young South Africans living abroad, we are recruiting via the
normal recruitment policy. We are not making special endeavours to seek
them out. They can apply for any post that is advertised. We don’t keep
records, hon members, of how many persons who are South Africans, are
teaching abroad. It would be very difficult to maintain such a database.

In terms of our own records through Persal, we had 1 432 foreign teachers
employed by provincial education departments in the period 2005 to this
year. The recruitment of an additional 2 000 foreign educators is planned
by my department, and we are currently working on an implementation plan.

Colleagues would have heard the hon Deputy President refer to our
recruitment of scarce skills. A number of our schools do not have qualified
mathematics and science teachers. So, in order to fill that gap, we are
looking beyond our shores. Of course, we are attempting to identify
qualified persons in South Africa who would be ready to fill those
positions. Should we not be able to fill them, we then, of course, are
going to go on this foreign recruitment campaign.

We are making various endeavours to increase the number of qualified
graduates in South Africa. We are investing in student service contract
bursaries. Colleagues should be aware of the Fundza Lushaka programme,
which is for young persons wishing to enter the teaching profession.

Over the MTEF period an amount of R700 million has been allocated to the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme for loans in the form of bursaries
for student teachers, with a specific focus on mathematics and science.

We are developing plans to retain these scarce skills because one of the
problems has been that, due to poor remuneration and poor service benefits,
we’ve tended to lose these very critical skills and therefore are looking
at special provisions within the remuneration framework to address persons
with scarce skills and those who are willing to teach, especially in our
poorest and most rural communities.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Thank you, hon Minister for the reply. It was very
helpful. Hon Minister, what I would like to know is: I know the question of
science and mathematics is very close to your heart and all of us are
looking at this particular issue. Hon Minister, is there some sort of
indication that could tell us when, within the next three, four or five
years, we will overcome this burden? I think it’s vitally important for us
to have a sense of what the situation is. Thank you very much.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Chairperson. I’m not sure which
burden the hon member is referring to, because there are several associated
with this.

Firstly, there is the issue of many high schools not having teachers that
are qualified and competent in this area. To overcome that, you have to
have teacher development programmes; you must offer persons bursaries to
upgrade their skills fully. For that, we have a plan that we are
implementing so that we have a teacher development framework which we will
be implementing from 2008.

Secondly, as I’ve mentioned, there is the issue of remuneration. Persons
with these particular qualifications are attractive to a range of sectors
and therefore you’ve got to remunerate them in a way that will keep them in
the profession.

The third problem area is the performance of young people in mathematics
and science in South Africa. We are working on that through the Dinaledi
strategy and through, of course, an improved curriculum in mathematics in
the country. We are trying to get more and more young people to take up
mathematics and to succeed in it.

A fourth problem area would be the matter of how we ensure that, as a
nation, we become numerate and scientific. That means that every high
school in the country must have a competent, qualified teacher in
mathematics. It is our intention that every secondary school – the 6 000
public secondary schools we have – should have such persons within them and
should be able to offer children mathematics up to Grade 12 as part of
their subject choice offered by teachers able to successfully train our
children in these subjects. That, for me, is the first prize: that every
school must offer this. The second aspect is that they do this in a
competent manner which allows our children to succeed.

I may say that while these five are challenges for the country, they are
challenges that are international. Every country in the world is struggling
in these subject domains, because these are the most important for
knowledge creation and social development.

Mr J B TOLO: Chairperson, if there’s a shortage of mathematics and science
teachers in the country, then that shortage is more pronounced, I think, in
the rural areas. I want to find out from the hon Minister if there is any
retention strategy so that teachers of mathematics and science can actually
remain in the rural areas and not go to the bright lights of Johannesburg
and these other areas. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much. As colleagues would know,
my hon colleague the Minister for the Public Service and Administration was
involved in a very complex and long process of negotiating a new Public
Service wage agreement. Incorporated within it was a provision for an
occupation-specific dispensation. That was the creation of remuneration
frameworks for professionals working within the Public Service.

Part of what we have inserted, as Education, into the occupation-specific
dispensation framework is attention to the recognition of scarce skills. By
scarce skills, we have referred both to discipline as well as location –
the spatial dimension of rural communities. It is our intention that
allowances and so on will be provided to persons who take up posts in areas
such as the hon member referred to.

What would be good though, hon member, is if we could develop better ways
of collecting data in the country. What one finds is that the very
provinces that the member is referring to are unable to give us information
as to exactly which schools do not have a mathematics or science teacher
and which of their schools do not have a laboratory. We wish members would
pay more attention to the constituency areas they’re from, to identify
whether the provincial departments are actually assisting in ensuring that
these skills exist. It’s vital for South Africa to perform better in these
areas.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, as quite a number of the colleges of
education no longer exist, and seeing that training of teachers is a
competency of the Education department at national level, I want to check
with the Minister whether there is any plan from her department to have
these kinds of colleges deliberately opened to train teachers specifically
in mathematics and science in order to try to close the gap. At the moment,
it seems as if that competency has been given to the universities, and it
seems to me that there is not enough output of graduates in those
particular areas.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I think the decline in the number
of graduates was not necessarily associated with the closure of the
colleges. I also think, when talking of the colleges of education, that we
shouldn’t always romanticise them, because they were not delivering the
kind of product the country wanted. In most countries, what you want are
teachers who are graduates of a university. Therefore, I think the way we
talk about the colleges is as though there was no problem with them at the
time when the step to close them was taken.

Now, to come to your specific question: One of the things that we have done
is through the provision of this bursary, through the Fundza Lushaka
programme, we have identified specific subject areas, two of them being
mathematics and science. It’s very interesting that, after the first year
of this bursary programme, we’ve seen almost a doubling of the numbers
taking up teaching. It’s fascinating that, in just one year, you have that
kind of massive shift.

This begins to indicate that, in fact, the absence of support, of a
bursary, which had been a policy in the past, had actually caused people to
go into domains where they would probably get scholarships. You didn’t have
scholarships from the private sector for teaching. So, government coming
back there has made a very important difference. On the matter of whether
we would utilise any space of the colleges that currently remain empty for
enrichment or other forms of development programmes, clearly one would have
to do so.

Regarding whether we would open a special mathematics and science college,
there’s been some discussion in Limpopo about reviving an institution, but
it would not be in the form of the college that was there in the past. It
certainly would be available for the development of teachers and for the
improvement of their ability in mathematics and science.

I really want to discourage the notion that we will revert to the model of
teacher colleges of education that we had in the past. We’ve moved away
from that. What we need to do is strengthen our faculties of education at
the universities and the universities of technology; ensure that we support
bursary students appropriately; ensure that we remunerate teachers so that
they choose to be in the profession and choose to remain in the profession.
That’s the kind of direction that we are working in.

           Performance of municipalities under Project Consolidate

93.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      (1)   How many municipalities under Project Consolidate are now able
           to stand on their own;

     (2)    whether there are any plans in place for those municipalities
           that still need monitoring to follow suit; if not, why not; if
           so, what plans?              CO2002E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, the
answer to the question coming from the hon Kgoshi Mokoena is as follows:
Project Consolidate was aimed at deepening the thrust and impact of
existing national, provincial and local government policies and programmes
through the provision of hands-on support to a targeted set of
municipalities. Support was, through this programme, provided to 139
municipalities over a two-year timespan.

The provision of hands-on support is now being extended to all
municipalities. The key achievements of this programme may be summarised as
follows: the augmenting of technical, financial planning, project
management and other specialised skills has been beneficial in the short
term.

Service delivery has been accelerated through the unblocking of slow-moving
projects. Support has been provided for the development of local economic
development strategies. Financial systems have been established, audit
queries addressed and, in a number of municipalities, revenue income has
been substantially improved and key stakeholders are now involved in
supporting local government in a better organised manner, eg the
Development Bank of Southern Africa, the Institute of Municipal Finance
Officers, the Old Mutual group and many others.

The provision of support to municipalities has very little to do with
municipalities which, as the hon member states, are not able to stand on
their own. It has everything to do with the constitutional injunction in
section 154(1) which provides that, and I quote:

   The national government and the provincial governments, by legislative
   and other measures, must support and strengthen the capacity of
   municipalities to manage their own affairs, to exercise their powers and
   to perform their functions.

The overall objective of Project Consolidate was to mobilise the whole of
government and key stakeholders from outside government to provide tangible
support to these municipalities covering a range of specific key
performance areas with the aims of resolving very specific programmes and
assisting in the building of internal municipality capacity.

The performance of all Project Consolidate municipalities has improved. The
Minister addressed the impact of Project Consolidate in the National
Assembly and in the NCOP during the budget debate on 6 June 2007 and 20
June 2007 respectively.

Project Consolidate was a pilot programme whose primary objective was to
test certain approaches towards the vision of hands-on support to
municipalities. In January 2006, based on emerging lessons from Project
Consolidate, the extended coverage Lekgotla adopted a five-year local
government strategic agenda whose primary purposes were to mainstream hands-
on support to local government, and to address the strategic governance of
the state in order to better refine, strengthen and give greater attention
to matters related to policy regulations and the physical environment for
local government.

Lastly, one of the direct consequences of the local government strategic
agenda is that the provision of hands-on support by government has now been
extended to all 283 municipalities. This strategic agenda sets clear
activities, roles and responsibilities, and timeframes in respect of key
municipal performance areas.

The performance of all municipalities will be closely monitored at the
provincial, local and national levels. Reports on progress will be provided
to Parliament on an ongoing basis. I thank you.

      Measures to monitor retraining of staff by government departments

94.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for the Public Service
      and Administration:

      Whether her department has put any measures in place to monitor
      whether government departments are retraining their staff; if not, why
      not; if so, (a) how is that process assisting in fast-tracking service
      delivery, (b) how many staff members were found not to be trainable
      and (c) what will happen to them?
                             CO2003E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson and
members of the House, in reply to this particular question we need to
indicate whether there are any measures in place to monitor whether
government departments are retraining their staff.

Now I do want to say that at this point in time we are finalising the human
resource development strategic vision for 2015, and it’s largely based on
the outcomes of an extensive consultative and review process which looks at
the efficacy, achievement, resources and capacity constraints on human
resource development, based on our previous strategy of 2000 to 2006.

In this current strategy we are working on we very clearly state that
departments will be required to develop annual human resource development
implementation plans that have agreed performance indicators and that will
report on the performance targets on a quarterly basis. So there will be an
annual performance report which will be an aggregation of all the quarterly
performance reports.

So, in summary, the departments will, through their annual human resource
development implementation plans, of course need to ensure that there is
retraining of staff in line with each department’s strategic objective. So
that’s where we’re going to place it, and we are placing it there.

Nothing, however, stops the Public Service Commission from investigating
this particular area at any given point in time, because, as you are aware,
as part of their oversight function, they can investigate, monitor and
evaluate any aspect that relates to either human resource development or
even service delivery or any other practice or system in government.

Does this process assist in fast-tracking service delivery? Of course, we
will expect that training and development will have a positive impact on
the development of human capital in the Public Service and, in turn,
improve service delivery capacity, but as you would have heard, listening
to the various inputs from different Ministers this afternoon, including
the most recent response by the Deputy Minister for Provincial and Local
Government, there are particular interventions in departments and sectors
to improve service delivery - as I stated earlier - of which human capital
development is but one component.

We see this as part of a range of interventions to look at how we can
improve and fast-track service delivery, but generally there are targeted
programmes to take it forward.

Finally, you’ve put me in a little bit of a difficult situation, through
you, Chairperson, by asking how many staff members are found to be
untrainable. You know, generally, you don’t want to say that any person or
public servant is untrainable. We’d rather say there are challenges around
particular areas of specialisation, so I’m unable to answer that question
honestly. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me thank the ever-ready Minister for
the manner in which she responded to my question. Regarding the very last
part of the question, let me change it by asking what we’re going to do
with those who have reached their ceiling. Thanks, Chair.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, that
is a new question, of course. Let me state upfront, regarding those who
have reached their ceiling, whether we want to call them deadwood or as
Kgoshi originally said, untrainable, we generally find a way of easing them
out of the Public Service.

At this particular point in time, what we have is an employee-initiated
severance package, which is a package in terms of which a public servant
can apply to leave the Public Service. We generally try to facilitate a
soft landing and will look at training in areas other than those in which
they are competent.

One such example I can use is the SA National Defence Force, where there
are people who are more senior in age and are serving at a lower level and
in a more civilian capacity in the National Defence Force. We do not see
them playing an active role in the armed forces and we’ve looked at placing
them elsewhere with requisite skills where they can play more menial and
other roles, but generally we’ll move them out through an employee-
initiated severance package. Thank you.

              Measures to deal with allegedly corrupt officials

95.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for the Public Service
      and Administration:

      (1)   How is her department dealing with alleged corrupt officials at
           border gates like Beit Bridge;

      (2)   whether security vetting of officials in critical posts will
           ensure that unwanted elements, are done away with; if not, why
           not; if so, how is her department dealing with alleged
           syndicates among some of these officials?    CO2004E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, the
hon Kgoshi Mokoena asks how we are dealing with corrupt officials at border
gates such as Beit Bridge. The easy way out would have been to ask my
colleague the Minister of Home Affairs, together with the Ministers of
Finance and other portfolios to answer the question, but let me deal with
it more broadly.

As the portfolio of Public Service and Administration, we are responsible
for establishing and implementing policies and strategies to fight
corruption and improve ethical conduct in the Public Service. The
application thereof, of course, takes place within sectors, departments,
etc.

Now there is a functioning anticorruption co-ordinating committee that co-
ordinates anticorruption work in the Public Service, and the Department of
Home Affairs, the SA Police Service and the SA Revenue Service are
represented on this committee in this functioning structure. These organs
of state are involved in border control activities.

What I think we’re all aware of is that the Department of Home Affairs and
the Minister of Home Affairs have actually run an awareness campaign with
immigration officers at port control offices. In addition to this campaign,
the Chief Directorate: Counter Corruption and Security in the Department of
Home Affairs is currently rolling out two corruption-prevention projects.

Now these projects entail the evaluation of corruption risks, the
development of an action plan that compels all office managers in the
department, including those in port control offices, to take responsibility
for curbing corruption.

The directorate is also investigating allegations of corruption which
involve officials of that department. And from the reports that the
Minister has made public for the period of 1 April 2006 to 31 March 2007, a
total of 13 immigration officers that were stationed at 11 port control
offices were found guilty of misconduct and were dismissed. These charges
apparently included aiding and abetting illegal immigrants,
misappropriation of state funds and unlawful issuing of documentation.

There’s also the role of the SA Revenue Service, which is dealing with
corruption at border posts, and they have an ethics office that conducts
education and awareness programmes and campaigns at the border posts. The
SA Revenue Service has also set up a business intelligence unit, and that
particular unit is responsible for intelligence-gathering at the ports of
entry. They’re also tasked to conduct risk assessments and a range of other
things. Then, of course, there is the police, and I won’t go into that.

If there are any follow-up questions, I am so fortunate as to have my
colleague the Minister of Home Affairs in the House to pursue them, and I
would suggest that the other questions also be put to the other Ministers
whom I’ve mentioned in the response as being involved in this. So I was
unable to deal with the specifics of that, but could reflect more broadly
on the work that’s being done. Thanks very much, Kgoshi Mokoena.

      Particulars regarding identification documents currently awaiting
                                 collection

97.   Mr M A Sulliman (ANC) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   (a) What was the total number of identification documents (IDs)
           as at the latest specified date for which information is
           available still awaiting collection in each province, (b) why
           have they not yet been collected and (c) what happens to IDs
           that are not collected;

      (2)   whether her department has put any plans in place to (a)
           expedite and (b) improve the delivery of IDs; if not, why not;
           if so, what plans?                                 CO2006E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, the answer is that most of the
identity documents – IDs - which are issued by the department, are
distributed to SAPO – the South African Post Office.

Therefore, an attempt to provide a figure for those IDs that are in our
offices could mislead the House, so I’ve decided that I will not give the
exact figure, because I don’t want to be accused later on of misleading the
House.

To answer part (b) of the first question: There are a number of reasons for
identity documents not being collected by applicants, of which the
following are the main reasons: one, applicants move or change their
residential and postal addresses without informing the department
accordingly and applicants then end up being untraceable; two, applicants
provide incorrect or incomplete residential and postal addresses, which
then affects the delivery of their IDs; three, we do inform applicants via
SMS messages that their identity documents are ready for collection, but
some simply fail to collect the documents.

Identity documents which are not collected within a period of 12 months are
returned to the Department of Home Affairs head office in Pretoria for
filing.

With regard to question 2(a): the department has instituted the following
to expedite the delivery of identity documents to their rightful owners:
Firstly, by utilising the services of the SAPO, which collects identity
documents from the offices of application, to deliver the documents to the
rightful owners at the residential and postal addresses as indicated on
their application forms; secondly, through door-to-door deliveries by
officials from the office of application; thirdly, by utilising our mobile
units to deliver identity documents in rural areas, mainly areas which are
not serviced by the SAPO; fourthly, assistance from traditional leaders and
social service workers – community development workers – does help to
inform applicants when their IDs are ready for collection.

The answer to part (b) of the question is that the department has since
introduced a track-and-trace system which allows members of the public to
enquire about the status of their applications and to inform them about
their IDs, when they are ready for collection, or even at what stage in the
process each application is, up until the end of the process. Thank you
very much, Chairperson.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Thank you, hon Minister, for the reply. I appreciate that.
Arising out of the hon Minister’s reply, the thing that worries me a bit is
the process after the untraceable IDs are returned to your department after
12 months. The question is: Are they kept there for years and years and
years, or do you have a cutoff point at which you have to destroy the IDs?
I think that is quite crucial. Thank you, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, hon Sulliman. Yes, they
are returned to head office and the tradition has been really - the
practice has been - to keep them but at some point to destroy them.
Obviously, with the current turnaround process, which looks at this
specific area of ID fraud, one of the weaknesses would be keeping them for
too long, because then anybody could lay their hands on those IDs. I’m
hoping that the work team dealing with ID processing will then make
recommendations about the best ways of dealing with this particular
challenge, which would obviously include destroying those IDs without
keeping them for long periods of time.

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, could the hon Minister tell us whether the systems in
the department are actually talking to each other or one another. I am
asking this question, because more often than not when a person applies for
an ID for instance in place A and that person leaves A and goes to place B,
the person is still able to apply for an ID there and the system is still
able to take the application there. They are not able to pick up that that
person has applied for an ID in place A some two months ago or one month
ago and therefore he cannot process a new ID altogether, because he has not
collected the other one yet. What is the situation in relation to that?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Yes, this is a challenge in relation to our
Information Technology - IT - systems generally in the department, but not
as they affect the systems that don’t talk to each other. I do want to
indicate to hon members that one of the reasons why we have launched a
track-and-trace system is precisely to curb corruption. If the application
now, for instance, is captured on track-and-trace, right, and later on the
ID is collected and again a person applies, the information will be
captured right at the frontline offices. It will be reflected that the
person already has an ID.

What is currently happening is that you would apply and the frontline
offices would not be able to pick up that in fact this person has already
applied. People who will be able to pick up that information are people who
are working with IDs at headquarters. With track-and-trace it will be
possible for officials at the frontline desks to actually pose certain
questions when you come forward to reapply for an ID when you had already
secured one.

Systems, yes, but obviously in order for us to achieve some of what we are
setting ourselves to achieve, we have to improve our IT systems; ensure
that they talk to each other - sort of – back-to-back and ensure that
obviously we are able to pick up any loopholes which are making our
officials vulnerable to acts of corruption. Thanks.

    Particulars regarding the detention of illegal immigrants at Lindela
                              Detention Centre

98.   Mr M A Sulliman (ANC) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (a) How many illegal immigrants were at the Lindela Detention Centre
      as at 31 July 2007, (b) how much is the total cost of detaining
      illegal immigrants at (i) the Lindela Detention Centre and (ii)
      overall and (c) what is the current turnaround time for repatriation
      of illegal immigrants?            CO2007E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, as at 31 July 2007, we had 1 557
illegal immigrants at the Lindela Detention Centre. The cost to maintain
each person is R77,96 per day, per illegal foreigner who is detained at
this facility.
Secondly, the cost of both accommodation and repatriation per month is R7
894 120. That is the cost of accommodation, maintenance and deportation of
illegal immigrants per month. This is not per year, but per month.

Regarding the current turnaround time, which is part (c) of the question,
the time periods for repatriation are between 14 and 30 days. Beyond 30
days, we have to secure special permission from the courts for continued
detention of an illegal immigrant. Thanks.

Ms J M MASILO: Thank you very much, hon Minister, for the response. I want
to ask a follow-up question on the Marabastad office, which I pass twice a
week. There are lots of people staying there. Is there any arrangement to
cater for them, maybe a special centre, and what are the recent
developments in terms of their processes? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Ms Masilo. The Marabastad office
is a refugee reception office. It is not a repatriation centre for illegal
migrants, but, obviously, we do have a number of illegal immigrants
lingering around Marabastad, hoping to push their luck and secure a section
22 permit, which is given to asylum seekers.

If members would like to raise questions about refugee reception offices, I
will be able to come back and provide that answer, but I do always stress
the difference between the Lindela Repatriation Centre as a centre for
illegal immigrants and Marabastad, Rosettenville or any other offices like
the office in Cape Town as offices for the reception of refugees and asylum
seekers. Thanks.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, thanks to the Minister for the
comprehensive response. Arising from the Minister’s response, based on the
amount we are spending as government in taking these people back to their
respective countries or to the border gates they came from, can’t we
minimise some of this expenditure? We can arrange that we don’t take
people, let’s say, for example, those who are arrested at the border next
to Beit Bridge; that we transfer them to the North West, far away from Beit
Bridge.

We are spending a lot of money by taking them from there to Lindela only
for them to be taken back again to Beit Bridge to go to their respective
countries. As the Minister has already said, we are spending a lot of money
for taking these people up and down, and some of them are doing this
deliberately because they want to. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Kgoshi Mokoena. You are very
correct. Obviously, there is a need for government to find ways of
minimising the expenditure. However, I do want to caution that not all the
illegal immigrants who are arrested do pass through Lindela. I mean, if you
are caught in the Free State, Mpumalanga or even in the Eastern Cape, you
do not necessarily go through the Lindela Repatriation Centre. In the main,
the people you’ll find at the Lindela Repatriation Centre are those who
have been arrested in the areas of Gauteng. Most of the people who are
caught in other provinces are deported directly from those provinces to the
areas they came from.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I would just like to ask the Minister about the monthly
amount it costs to keep these illegal immigrants. Does this include the
medical treatment and services that they might need as well?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Yes, hon member, this is inclusive of medical
attention and everything else they need, which is provided to them whilst
they are at the centre.

  Progress regarding departmental strategic plan to improve the Batho Pele
                                  campaign

99.   Mr M A Sulliman (ANC) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      What progress has been made regarding her department’s strategic plan
      (2005-06 to 2009-10) to improve the Batho Pele campaign by introducing
      measures to ensure compliance through unannounced site visits, name
      badges and enhanced internal communication?
                       CO2008E
The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, the answer to the hon Sulliman’s
question is that the strategic plan of the department is being implemented
as part of the overall turnaround of the department. A new business model
and a vision process are being designed and will be ready by November. The
strategic plan will, out of necessity, need to be reviewed in line with the
new model and the new design of the department.

The second part of the question deals with site visits and unannounced
visits. Yes, these visits are regularly conducted across all nine provinces
at various offices of the department. Regular spot checks are also being
done. These visits and spot checks will continue on a regular basis to
ensure compliance with service delivery standards as well as to monitor
customer satisfaction.

In addition to unannounced site visits, the Ministry and senior managers
from the department’s head office visited all nine provinces during the
public outreach programmes with a view to observing and addressing service
delivery challenges.

In general, each visit consisted of frontline work being done at different
service delivery points to experience service delivery demands and
challenges first-hand, to discuss challenges facing the specific province,
to interact with the media and, in some cases, with other stakeholders such
as councillors, relevant government departments and communities. I must
also mention that the Department of the Public Service and Administration
itself does have particular days a week dedicated to unannounced site
visits conducted by all members of Cabinet to different service points of
government.

On name tags, the launch of name tags for all staff members of the
Department of Home Affairs already took place in 2005. It’s not that there
were no name tags, but these name tags are now a different type of name tag
in that they bear the photograph of the staff member. The wearing of these
name tags is compulsory and staff members can be disciplined if they do not
comply with the wearing of their name tags.

Prior to this there were name tags, but they simply had the name of the
staff member and the department. One would find that in some instances a
member of the public would come forward and lay a complaint only to find
that, in fact, the name tag which was worn by the official concerned was
not his or her name tag. The best way of averting that kind of challenge
was then to introduce name tags which bear the photograph of the person.

We always want to make sure -and appeal to members of the public to ensure
- that the staff member who is serving the client is a staff member who is
wearing a name tag and whose photograph resembles the face of the person
who is serving him or her. This is one way of minimising the risks of
corruption and fraud which are currently taking place. Thank you.
Mr M A SULLIMAN: Minister, I do not have a follow-up question but I’d just
to say thank you very much for the answer. We will know now as a
legislature what to do when we visit some of these offices, because we have
discovered that many officials do not wear the name tags but we know now
what to do with them.

                    WRITTEN REPLY TO QUESTION ON HOUSING

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): In the absence of a further follow-
up question, I will move to Question 101. Before that, I want to bring to
the attention of this august House and to the hon N J Mack in particular,
that as per request of the Minister of Housing - whose request has
convinced my own sense of judgment – that the question you have asked does
not belong to the Department of Housing. It belongs to the Department of
Agriculture and/or the Department of Land Affairs. The enforcement aspect
of that question - because Land Affairs came with this legislative regime -
is the work of the police. Land Affairs cannot go and check whether farmers
are violating the law. So, it is multifaceted.

However, the Minister has requested that she be excused and she has
provided a written reply on aspects of the question that may assist you in
terms of locating the specific role of her department in relation to the
matters contained in the question. I hope that will be okay with you, hon
Mack. Okay, do you want to raise something?

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, there is a certain aspect: Definitely there
should be mechanisms in place to assist municipalities with the necessary
funding or any other means. Because our people are going to municipalities
for housing and this is an unfunded mandate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, could you sit down. You
are out of order! I said there is a comprehensive response written by the
hon Minister dealing with aspects that relate to the constitutional
functions of the Department of Housing with regard to the question you have
asked. It is written down. The Minister is not here, and it will be handed
to you by the staff here. Thank you.

        Impact of, and participation in Healthy Lifestyles Programme

101.  Ms N F Mazibuko (ANC) asked the Minister of Health:


      (1)   (a) What impact has the Healthy Lifestyles Programme had since
           its inception and (b) how many provinces have launched this
           programme officially;

      (2)   whether communities are participating in this programme; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   CO2015E
The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you very much, Chairperson. First of all, let
me apologise for coming late. I had a meeting with the Deputy President and
I regret the fact that I missed answering Question 87.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): We will come back to it.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: I don’t know how the House dealt with it, but I do
have an answer, which I can deposit with the staff to forward to the hon Mr
Mzizi. With regard to the question that was asked by the hon Mazibuko ...

... ngicela ukubonga kakhulu lo mbuzo obalulekile owubuzileyo bese ngisho
ukuthi ... [... I would like to thank you for the important question you
have asked and I would also like to say that ...]

... since its inception in 2004, the national Healthy Lifestyles Programme
has received tremendous political support and strategic leadership from all
Members of Cabinet, myself included. At the departmental level, a national
task team was established in the same year, that is August 2004, and it
currently involves a number of activities to strengthen the Healthy
Lifestyles Programme, including the development of a healthy lifestyles
strategy to support the healthy lifestyle’s campaign and activities.

The recent development includes the integration of the Healthy Lifestyles
Programme into other government programmes. These include the social
cluster comprehensive task team activities, the National Youth Service, the
Department of Transport – I am referring to road safety campaigns here -
the Department of Social Development, the prevention of drug abuse, Golden
Games for the elderly, youth development programmes, the Department of
Education, health-promoting school initiatives, school health services,
life-skills education, the safety in schools programme, the Department of
Safety and Security, tobacco control legislation, Sport and Recreation SA,
and physical activity programmes.

The Healthy Lifestyles Programme comprises five components, which are the
promotion of nutrition, the promotion of physical activities “ukunyakazisa
umzimba” the promotion of tobacco control, the promotion of safe sexual
behaviour, and the promotion of prevention of abuse of alcohol and other
substances.

Specific interventions in this regard include the integration of the
Healthy Lifestyles Programme in community-based monthly mass education
campaigns, the implementation of tobacco control laws to protect people
from passive smoking or second-hand smoking, discouraging the youth from
taking up smoking and encouraging smokers to quit smoking.

We have also had relationships with fast-food outlets to promote healthy
eating practices, notably Nando’s. We also have mass mobilisation of other
stakeholders to participate in the promotion of healthy lifestyles. We also
conducted health-screening services for body mass index, blood pressure,
blood glucose, cholesterol, pap smears, prostate and breast cancer.

The launch of the Move for Health campaign by myself in 2005 was to improve
the level of physical activity, and I am sure colleagues have seen me
trying to walk it through. I am hoping that all of us can do that.

The promotion of healthy lifestyles takes place through the media,
television, computers, the Internet, media advertising and the print media,
the establishment of health education programmes, the SABC, radio and 60
community radio stations, the establishment of community and school
projects enhancing healthy lifestyles, and the design, development and
distribution of promotional material like posters, leaflets, booklets,
video cassettes.

All provinces have launched this programme, and let me just announce that
we have also, as the Department of Health, now agreed that next year we
will mark a dedication to healthy lifestyles with the same magnitude with
which we marked World Aids Day. I am hoping that members of the House will
also participate in this activity, because we would like to see the whole
of South Africa engaged in this healthy lifestyles movement.

Since the launch of the Healthy Lifestyles Programme in all provinces,
implementation is taking place now in districts and local service areas
with a multisectoral approach. The following information gives details of
some of the activities taking place at district and local district level:
social mobilisation of community structures like the NGOs and the CBOs to
promote healthy lifestyles; partnerships with traditional health
practitioners; partnerships with LoveLife and other NGOs that I have
mentioned; partnerships with schools and churches; partnerships with local
communities; and partnerships with women’s organisations, notably Sawid.

There is also the establishment of community-based physical activities. In
this regard, we refer to the formation of exercise groups for the elderly
at clinic level and in collaboration with the Department of Social
Development. Let me just boast a little bit in that Limpopo has a women’s
soccer team contributing to physical activity.

There is also the training of community champions in establishing physical
activity programmes: Sports for Children with sports clothes and
sportsgear; soul Champions for exercise with Soul City; Little Champs with
the Heart and Stroke Foundation SA; soccer for the elderly with Discovery
Health; and various monthly 3-kilometre to 8-kilometre health walks, as we
have seen and may try to do. I am inviting members in the House to organise
these walks in your localities and in your neighbourhood because they are
very helpful.

There has also been the establishment of community and school-based food
gardens, and I am proud to say that everywhere I travel I can see the
mushrooming of food-garden training facilitated by the Food Gardens
Foundation, the donation of garden implements by the Department of Health
in collaboration with the Department of Agriculture, nutrition education
provided by the national Integrated Nutrition Programme ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister, may I bring to your
attention an earlier precedent in which I made a ruling that where hon
Ministers have questions that go beyond their allocated time for reply,
they may ask to give that written reply to the member in question. This is
in light of trying to manage time.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you very much, Chairperson. It’s just that
this is a subject very close to my heart. I thought that, you wouldn’t
notice that by accident. Thank you very much. I will submit the answer.

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Ngiyabonga, Ngqongqoshe, ngempendulo yakho futhi ngiyazi
ukuthi uhlelo oluthanda kakhulu lolu. Bengithanda ukwazi, Ngqongqoshe,
ukuthi kuzo lezi zinhlelo ozibalile kanye nokudla okunomsoco okufanele
abantu bakudle, ingabe abondlekile njengami, sekube nomehluko na kubo?
Ngiyabonga. [Uhleko.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Umehluko ungawubona nakimi. Akufanele size size
nakuwena, uyazibonela nje nawe ukuthi kunoshintsho uma ngabe unyakazisa
umzimba, kodwa akusikhona ukunyakazisa umzimba kuphela. Ziningi ezinye
izinto esizenzayo esicabanga ukuthi zibalulekile ezisiza izimpilo zabantu,
njengokubahlolela umdlavuza, njengokuzama ukuthi sibone izinga le-BP
nokuthi ushukela egazini labo ungakanani ukuze sikwazi ukubasiza. Kodwa
okokunyakazisa umzimba uma ufuna ukubona umphumela bheka kimi dadewethu.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Minister for your answer. I know that this is
a programme which is very close to your heart. I would like to know whether
the programmes you have mentioned, as well as the nutritious food which
must be eaten by people, have also benefited overweight people like myself.
Thank you. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: You can even see the difference in me. We don’t
even have to come to you, because you can just tell us that there is a
change when you exercise your body. It is not only exercising, because
there are many things that we are doing that we think are important and
improve people’s lives, like screening them for cancer and checking their
BP and cholesterol levels, so that we are able to help them. However, as
far as exercising is concerned, just look at me, my sister, if you want to
see the results.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I must bring to your
attention that a ruling by the House, unless it is revoked, remains a
ruling. I did not want to confuse the hon Minister. The ruling by the
Chairperson was that the Minister requested that we deal with her questions
towards the end. But because she is here I cannot keep her, even if she is
here, until the end. This does not take away her obligation to answer the
question that we skipped when she was not here. We will deal with that
question as we proceed. I want to check whether there is any other follow-
up question.

   Particulars regarding mothers and children who have benefited from the
         prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV programme

102.  Ms N F Mazibuko(ANC) asked the Minister of Health:

      (1)   (a) How many mothers and children have benefited from the
           prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/PMTCT
           programme and (b) how many children to date are alive through
           this intervention;

      (2)   whether there is any monitoring system in place to track those
           children who were born under this programme?
                                             CO2016E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Once again, thank you very much. I will try and
move very quickly through this question, in the interests of time. The
answer to part 1(a) is that a cumulative figure, hon member, is not
available. The answer to 1(b) is that it is not known as there are no
systems in place to capture such information.

The answer to part 2 of the question is that the introduction of PCR
testing at six weeks, when coming for first immunisation, and the use of
national coding systems are in place to track only those that come at six
weeks for testing in our facilities.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Sorry, Minister, I take it you were
answering Question 102.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Yes.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chair, it’s a pity that the answer given by the Minister
says that there are no records available, because I would similarly like to
know if indeed records are available regarding mothers who were actually
disadvantaged by the irresponsible advocating of controversial remedies
like beetroot and garlic; and indeed how many children died as a result of
that. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister, I am not sure whether
you want to respond to that, because I took it as more of a statement or
comment. But I don’t know. Hon Minister?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I am rising on a point of
order: The Minister clearly said that there were no records. So, any
sensible and sane person cannot still continue and want to ask about
records, regarding which it has been clearly said in this House that there
aren’t any.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S SETONA): Could you take your seat, hon Chief
Whip. Hon members, I just want to check and I think I have made a clear
comment, that I read that as a comment or statement. I want to check first
whether the Minister wants to reply - I don’t want to be presumptuous. Some
Ministers are eager to respond even to those comments; if not, then I will
make the necessary ruling. Hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I think, during
the tabling of the budget in this House, we also referred to the fact that
we are developing systems. But, if the hon member is really interested in
understanding the value of garlic, beetroot, lemon, olive oil, amadumbe and
so on, he is invited to my office. I will go through a whole lecture. But
if he so wishes, he can also go to the website. This information is
available. I am not dreaming it up. It is true and I have said it over and
over again. If the hon member thinks he is going to discourage me from
saying these things: hard luck.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: The point of order that you
took from the hon Chief Whip, in which he implied that I am not intelligent
...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Who took the point of order?

Mr A WATSON: You allowed him to speak and it’s on record that he said
“intelligent people”, inferring that I am not intelligent. [Interjections.]
Well, that’s a second disgraceful remark. It’s typical of the ANC.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Watson, could you take your seat
because I want to make a statement. Hon member, the Chief Whip may have
made that statement and, as far as I am concerned, he never made any
reference to any speaker. He made a general statement that an intelligent
person would not have asked this question. Therefore I don’t take your
point of order. Could I take your further follow-up question?

Mr A WATSON: A follow-up on the point of order, please, Chair ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): There is no follow-up on the point
of order ...

Mr A WATSON: The point is that the Chief Whip referred specifically to my
question and said that I shouldn’t have asked it because any intelligent
person should have known ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): No, you are out of order ...

Mr A WATSON: I am not out of order, I am within my rights ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Take your seat, hon member. Hon
member, take your seat ...

Mr A WATSON: I want you to rule on what the Chief Whip said.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): You are not going to impose a ruling
on me. [Interjections.] No, I am not going to do that. Hon member, maybe
you need attention. I am not sure whether that is the proper way of seeking
attention. [Interjections.] I will handle it; I will give you attention
appropriately, but not on your own terms. Maybe you have invited television
cameras here. I won’t do it on your terms, hon member. I am warning you.
Could I take further follow-up questions?

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, on a point of order: I would like to
request that we get a Hansard copy of what actually transpired. I would
also request you to look at it and see what happened, and I would appeal to
you then to make a ruling. If you heard something different to what the hon
Watson heard, then there is a discrepancy and it should be checked against
Hansard, please.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): That is procedural, hon member. We
don’t have to be taught about that. It is procedural just to test whether
what I have said ... I am saying the Chief Whip said any intelligent person
can ... [Interjections.] Yes, we will refer to Hansard, hon member. But
that does not take away my ruling, unless I am convinced otherwise by the
records. Can we take further follow-up questions?

     Particulars regarding facilities providing termination of pregnancy
                                  services

103.  Ms N F Mazibuko (ANC) asked the Minister of Health:

      (a) How many public and private facilities providing termination of
      pregnancy services in terms of the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy
      Act, Act 92 of 1996, have been established and registered to date and
      (b) what monitoring systems have been put in place to curb the
      mushrooming of fly-by-night clinics?
            CO2017E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: The reply to the question is as follows: There are
245 registered public facilities and 160 private facilities. The total
number of registered facilities therefore is 405. There are no monitoring
systems in place. However, community members - and I dare say members of
this House - are encouraged to report any suspicion of an unauthorised
provider at local, district or provincial level. In other words, this is a
self-regulatory approach. Thank you.

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Siyabonga Ngqongqoshe, manje uma ngabe ngibathola labo
abangenalo igunya lomthetho ukwenza umsebenzi ngenze njani njengeLungu
lePhalamende? Ingabe kukhona lapho ngingashayela khona ukuze ngazise
uMnyango ukuthi naba behushula izisu ngaphandle kwemvume na? Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Minister. If I were to find someone not
authorised to do the job, what should I as a Member of Parliament do? Is
there a number which I can dial to inform the department that there is an
illegal termination of pregnancy service? Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Sinalo uhlelo okudala silumemezela ukuthi labo abangagculisekanga  ngendlela
abaphathwa ngayo nabenza okuphambene nomthetho ukuthi  bangaxhumana  kanjani
nathi.  Sinalo  uhlelo  esibheka  ngalo  izikhalazo.   Ungaya   emtholampilo
oseduzane noma ubhalele  uNgqongqoshe  wesifundazwe  noma  mina  ngqo  ukuze
sikwazi  ukubhekisisa  kahle  ukuthi   kwenzekani   okuphambene   nomthetho.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We do have a programme, which we have long been announcing, for those who
are not satisfied with the way they are treated and about those who
transgress the law, as to how they can communicate with us. We do have a
programme of dealing with complaints. You can go to the local clinic or
write to the MEC for the province or to myself, so that we are able to
check thoroughly as to what it is that is taking place which is against the
law. Thank you.]

Ms J M MASILO: Modulasetilo, ke lebogela le dikarabo tsa Tona e e
tlotlegang. Ke batla go botsa gore ... [Chairperson, I want to thank the
Minister for her reply. My question is ...]

... how does the department control the women who seek a termination of
pregnancy more than twice? We have experienced that in the Northern Cape,
where women go for a termination of pregnancy three or four times. Do you
have any mechanism in the department to limit the number of times women can
seek terminations of pregnancy, even though I know that it is their right
to do that? Thank you, Minister.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Just to set the record straight, I do not think it
is the responsibility of the department to limit people’s choices because
indeed this is the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act. However, there
are certain things that we can do as a department - providing the family
planning facilities and whatever is available and counselling. In this
regard, as I’ve said, we would also rely on the members of the family.
There is information all over the place. Obviously, before a pregnancy is
terminated there is always counselling, but I don’t think we can stop
people’s choices, we can only advise and counsel.

  Legislation for the improvement of people’s lives; and results concerning
                   health derived from the Ten Point Plan

104.  Ms N F Mazibuko (ANC) asked the Minister of Health:


      (a) How many pieces of legislation have been implemented to improve
      the lives of the people and (b) what results and new experiences
      concerning health have been derived from the Ten Point Plan?
                                        CO2018E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, in line with your ruling as I answered
the first question, the answer is pretty long, and obviously, some of the
issues that are being asked are addressed annually in the department’s
annual reports. May I, therefore, table the response? Thank you.

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo ngiyabonga, nakuba sengizophuthelwa ithuba lokuthi
ngibuze futhi omunye umbuzo kodwa ngizokwemulela impendulo ebhaliwe.
[Chairperson, thank you. Even though I will now miss out on an opportunity
to ask a follow-up question, I will nevertheless accept a written reply.]

  Particulars regarding the development of an Information and Communication
   Technology system to be used in the administration of patients’ records

105.  Mr O M Thetjeng (DA) asked the Minister of Health:


      (1)   With regard to the plan of the Limpopo Department of Health to
           develop an Information and Communication Technology (ICT) system
           to be used in the administration of patients’ records, (a) which
           company was awarded the first phase of the tender, (b) for how
           much was the tender awarded, (c) at what stage did the project
           fail and (d) how much has been spent by her department to revive
           this project;

      (2)   whether any steps will be or have been taken against the company
           for failing to deliver the service as set out in the tender
           specifications; if not, why not; if so, what steps?
                                             CO2029E

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Sihlalo, mangikusho ukuthi empeleni, ngokwami
ukubona, mhlawumbe lo mbuzo ubungaphenduleka kahle khona le eLimpopo, kodwa-
ke ngizozama ngoba nakhu sengibuziwe. Imibuzo enje, ngokwami ukubona, kuba
ngcono uma iphendulwa yisifundazwe uqobo lwaso. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, let me say that, as far as I am
concerned, this question could have been answered appropriately by the
Limpopo province. Nevertheless, I shall try to answer it, now that it has
been asked. As far as I am concerned, it is better to have such questions
answered by the province concerned.]

The answer to 1(a) is: The International Business Machines Corporation was
awarded a contract to implement a hospital information system, which
included the administration of patients’ records in 40 hospitals. In answer
to 1(b), the contract was worth R110 million, and 1(c), IBM had implemented
the Medicom hospital information system in 17 of the 40 hospitals targeted
during their contract period. When the contract expired, they had not
implemented such a system in the remaining 23 hospitals.

A new contract has been awarded to LHC Health Solutions. This contract not
only covers the patients’ record system but also implements a provincial
health information system, and we are working hard to try to complete this
as a whole. In terms of this contract, the amount awarded is estimated at
R261 million.

The answer to the second part of the question is: There is no need for any
steps to be taken against any company other than the termination of their
contract. Therefore, when the contract of IBM expired, the department ended
the relationship with the said company. LHC Health Solutions is still
implementing the system at this stage, and there is no reason to believe
that they will fail to deliver the service. Obviously, we must watch their
performance as well. Thank you.
Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, on the basis of the information provided, in
23 of the 40 hospitals IBM has not implemented the programme as it was
supposed to in terms of the contractual obligations. Isn’t it a requirement
in terms of the Public Finance Management Act that, since they have not
performed to the specification that they were supposed to, and if money has
been paid in full and they haven’t done their job, the government should
get the money back from the company for failing to deliver on the project
that they were supposed to have carried out? Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: In fact, I omitted to immediately mention that
point. I just want to say that, of course, as you know, we have the tender
processes. The tenders are awarded by the Treasury and we are in
consultation with Treasury, just as we are in consultation with Treasury
with regard to the faulty condoms, as to what steps need to be taken. Thank
you.

        Particulars regarding the deportation of Zimbabwean refugees

106.  Mr O M Thetjeng (DA) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   How many Zimbabwean refugees does her department deport on a
           daily basis and (b) how far into Zimbabwe are they dropped;

      (2)   whether there are any arrangements between her department and
           Zimbabwe for receiving the deportees; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether this deportation is a fruitless expenditure as many of
           these Zimbabweans simply return to South Africa; if not, what is
           the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                          CO2030E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, thank you, hon Thetjeng.
[Interjections.] The Department of Home Affairs does not deport refugees as
refugees are protected by law. They’ve already been granted refugee status
- political asylum in the country - and therefore you may not deport them.
So we are not in the habit of deporting refugees in South Africa. Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you very much, hon Minister.
I’m not sure whether there will be a follow-up on that question, because
substantively there might have been an error, perhaps a typing error which
led him to a substantive misapplication of law, because legally you cannot
deport a refugee – it’s a fact – and I’m not sure if there has to be any
follow-up arising out of that. What would the legal basis of it be?
However, I want to test whether members want to continue. A refugee is
somebody who has been accepted as such, whether economic or whatever the
case may be. I’m not sure, hon members, may I be granted the opportunity to
move to Question 107?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

  Proposed establishment of facility to search trains at Beit Bridge border

107.  Mr A Watson (DA) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      Whether her department is planning to establish a facility to search
      trains leaving and entering South Africa and Zimbabwe at the Beit
      Bridge border; if not, why not; if so, when? CO2031E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, thank you, hon Watson. The
answer is no, the Department of Home Affairs is not planning to establish a
facility to search trains at the Beit Bridge border post as it is not our
mandate and therefore not the mandate of immigration officers at ports of
entry to search conveyances.

This work falls under the custodianship of the hon Minister of Finance and
the SA Revenue Service. They are responsible for customs and excise and the
relevant legislation pertaining thereto. Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Yes, thank you, Chair. Maybe the typists aren’t doing that
well, because this question does not necessarily refer to goods which fall
under the ambit of finance and customs and excise. The point that this
question addresses is that, other than refugees, illegal immigrants are
actually stowed away on trains and therefore slip through the Home Affairs
and entry-visa checking points. If the trains aren’t searched, then they
come into the country and I suppose they then become refugees. The point is
about people not about goods.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon Watson, we will still not
search trains, buses, trucks or any moveable object that transports people,
because it is not our responsibility to do that. Our responsibility is to
regulate the movement of people. We attend to those people who come in
through the border. And I am sure you are aware that even when it comes to
those who have been reported as jumping over the fence or crawling under
it, it is not the responsibility of immigration officers to patrol a border
and therefore we will not do that either.

But there is the instance in which we identify a person as illegal without
having to be going all out, sniffing around and looking for people who are
illegal migrants in the country. If we did that, quite honestly, it
wouldn’t be any different from what used to happen in the country when
people would wake up and raid places to look for people who did not have
the permits to be in designated areas.

In any event, two or three years ago there was a suggestion that perhaps
our inspectorate should develop the capacity to go and raid schools,
looking for illegal children and to go to hospitals, and we cannot do that.
If we did that, I think it would be a serious setback for democracy in
South Africa.

We need to find ways of regulating, managing, assessing and evaluating
whether we are managing this. I think it is also important for all of us to
understand that there isn’t a time when South Africa will not have illegal
or economic migrants. That time will not come.

It doesn’t matter how tightly your borders are patrolled. It doesn’t matter
if you do away with porous borders, as it has been reported in the past
that we had porous borders. There will never be a time when South Africa
will not have economic migrants from other countries, precisely because of
our own political and economic stability, which therefore acts as a magnet
for those people who live in distressed areas.

If you read about what happens in other countries where you have very
stringent measures taken to ensure that illegal migrants do not enter those
countries, you will still find that a number of people in those countries
are in fact illegal. In spite of the stringent measures and tight security
in those countries, they still have illegal immigrants because people will
move from areas where there is hunger and starvation. They will move from
areas where there is instability and they will look for greener pastures in
countries where there is a better life.

I just think it is a reality we have to live with and find ways of managing
in the country. What purpose will it serve to believe that people should
actually go all out and search trains and raid places and do all sorts of
things looking for illegal migrants, except to create a sense of paranoia
and instability in our communities?

I think that we need to talk about this as Members of Parliament and
discuss this with our own communities and educate our people that South
Africa and the South African dream has created miracles and has had this
particular effect on peoples of other nations who live in conditions of
squalor. They will come to South Africa because there is a better life. In
terms of the way we go about this as MPs, I think we do have this
responsibility of talking to our people to say, “It doesn’t matter what
government does; you will never be able to prevent a hungry person from
going out to look for food.”  Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, I nearly thought you made the decision for me. From the
Minister’s answer, if I understood correctly, can she confirm therefore
that the checking and passport control and everything else that goes on at
borders are only for the honest people and the hunters that bring in a bit
of biltong, and that the crooks can come into this country freely will and
go anywhere? [Interjections.] That is exactly what she said. Please confirm
it.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Watson, I’m sure you’re not implying that
all illegal migrants are crooks. I’m sure I don’t hear you say that. I’m
sure that is not what you are saying. [Interjections.] It is incorrect,
particularly because the people we are talking about here, in the main,
come from within the region of SADC; people are coming from Zimbabwe in
particular, and there has been this hype about Zimbabwe, and not all
illegal immigrants from Zimbabwe or Mozambique or any other country are
crooked.

The second thing is that we are not in the business of policing. It is the
responsibility of the police to look out for crooks, thieves and robbers.
It is not the responsibility, mandate or core function of the Department of
Home Affairs. I regulate immigration in the country. Thank you.

        Particulars regarding the irregular receipt of social grants

108.  Ms J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      In light of the fact that he had declared amnesty previously for
      persons receiving social grants irregularly, (a) what steps is the SA
      Social Security Agency, Sassa, taking to ensure that public servants
      do not receive the grants irregularly, (b) how much has been repaid to
      date, (c) how many of these persons have defaulted on the repayments
      and (d) what steps has his department taken against the defaulters?
            CO2032E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the answer to the
question is that due to the scope and impact of the fraud identified on a
national level, the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, has entered into a
formal working agreement with the Special Investigating Unit to assist with
the legal process in fraud management. In addition, Sassa has conducted a
fraud risk analysis and the anticipated completion date is 15 November
2007. The fraud risk analysis will now be used to review and compile a
fraud prevention plan.

The fraud prevention plan includes proactive monitoring and reactive
mechanisms in ensuring fraud prevention. Sassa is implementing a number of
fraud prevention strategies to minimise grant fraud. One of the strategies
is to conduct data matching between Socpen – the Social Security Pension
System - and Persal to identify government employees registered on both
systems. This is done on a quarterly basis because of the lack of interface
between the two systems.

The answer to the (b) part of the question is that the amount repaid to
date is R10 214 719. It should be noted that Sassa is continually
uncovering money owed. However, no guarantee exists that alternative
illegal recipients of grants will not default on their monthly repayments
in the process.

The answer to the (c) part of the question is that the number of defaulters
is 1 558.

The answer to the (d) part of the question is that Sassa will institute
legal action against defaulters based on the State Attorney’s advice. In
addition hereto, Sassa is collaborating with the Department of the Public
Service and Administration and the National Treasury to enable it to
recover the fraudulent grants through direct Persal deductions. In terms of
the agreement and acknowledgements of debt signed, amounts due to the state
will be recovered at an interest rate of 15% per annum. Thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I want to raise a point of order against the
Chair. In terms of the Rules of the House, when a question is asked, the
Chair must check whether we get four questions. Then, if there are more
than four questions, the people cannot be identified. With regard to the
previous question to the Minister of Home Affairs – the Minister has left
now – the only person who raised a follow-up question was the hon Watson. I
raised my hand very strongly and was not indicated. To me that is a point
of order, because that is against the Rules of the House. Thank you very
much.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): You are out of order, because I
pointed to hon Watson. Even if 10 of you raise your hands, the Rules allow
me to use my discretion in terms of the first four hands that I indicate,
irrespective of how high the other six hands are raised.

   Position regarding councillors who are allegedly still receiving social
                                   grants

109.  Ms J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   Whether his department has investigated certain persons (names
           and details furnished) who recently became councillors and who
           are allegedly still receiving social grants; if not, why not; if
           so,


      (2)   whether, they qualify for amnesty; if not, what action is being
           or will be taken against them; if so, why?
                                                   CO2033E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, the answer to the first
part of the question is that information was verified on Socpen and there
is an investigation under way to determine whether the individuals
mentioned are receiving grants unlawfully. Exact identity numbers have been
matched against Socpen and Persal to determine if these individuals are
registered on either system. Any details relating to the investigation
cannot be disclosed at this early stage as such disclosure might jeopardise
the investigation at hand.

The answer to the second part of the question is that if the individuals
are found guilty, amnesty will not be granted. However, the result of the
investigation will determine the action to be taken against them. Thank
you.

  Employment of school principals on the basis of a performance management
                                   system

110.  Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether her department has considered employing principals of schools
      on the basis of a performance management system; if not, why not; if
      so, (a) when will this be implemented and (b) what are the further
      relevant details?                       CO2034E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION (on behalf of the
Minister of Education): Chairperson, on behalf of the Minister of
Education, I would like to respond by saying yes on the employing of the
principals of schools on the basis of a performance management system.

The proposed date of implementation was 1 July 2007. However, you are all
aware that the recent public-sector strike delayed this plan, so the
education management service has been incorporated into the salary
negotiations in the Public Service Co-ordinating Bargaining Council,
pertaining to the occupation-specific dispensation.

In terms of Resolution 1 of 2007, the education management service will
form part of the occupation-specific dispensation for educators with
implementation from 1 January 2008. The OSD for education is subject to
further negotiations with teachers trade unions in the Education Relations
Council.

With regard to the second part of the question, the education management
service, which is school-based, provides the standardised framework for the
remuneration and performance management of deputy principals and principals
on the salary levels 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12. Thank you, Chairpeson.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I think that the question was answered by the
Minister for the Public Service and Administration. She has an overarching
policy dynamic within the Public Service. If principals are found not
performing, I want to check whether the policy implemented from 1 July
allows such principals to be demoted from principals to ordinary teachers
on the basis of nonperformance. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION (on behalf of the
Minister of Education): Chairperson, first and foremost, I don’t get
involved in overarching policy dynamics, but as a member of Cabinet I am
exposed to policy development and adoption by Cabinet.

I do want to repeat what I said that, originally, this particular
performance management system was due to be implemented in July. It will
now be implemented as from January next year. Obviously, as is the case
with any performance management system, there will be procedures and
principles around its application and, depending on the severity of
nonperformance, a range of measures could be taken. Clearly, if considered
appropriate, demotion could be factored in.

I think it is difficult for us to pre-empt the details, because this has to
be concluded in negotiations. Thanks.

  Job opportunities under Expanded Public Works Programme for women in low
                                income groups

111.  Ms H Lamoela (DA) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      Whether the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) is also intended to
      open up job opportunities for low-income women; if not, why not; if
      so, what are the relevant details?      CO2035E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, the answer to the
question is yes, the Expanded Public Works Programme is actually a
government-wide programme, which is led by the Minister of Public Works.
The Expanded Public Works Programme can facilitate the creation of entry-
level jobs, and many of these jobs would be characterised as low-income
jobs. All jobs are open to women and men. If they were not, we could be
taken to the SA Human Rights Commission.

The emphasis of the Expanded Public Works Programme within the Department
of Social Development is on skills development through further education
and training, and on improving the working conditions of early childhood
practitioners, and home-based care workers.

The social cluster is building capacity to assist our people to take
advantage of work opportunities in the job market. At the same time, the
Departments of Social Development and Education are engaged in efforts to
improve early childhood development. Thank you, Chair.

Ms H LAMOELA: Chairperson, I thank the Deputy Minister. My follow-up
question is: Is there any timeframe set for more advanced skills or
training for these people, so that they would be able to move to higher
levels, at least earning a higher income? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, within the Expanded
Public Works Programme there are no such timeframes, but within the other
programmes of government it becomes possible, because people are being
skilled, that they would be more likely to be able to utilise the labour
market and the jobs that are on the market, which are a result of other
attempts by the Department of Trade and Industry, for example, and so on. I
hope that answers the question.

    Challenges faced by provinces in implementing the recovery programme

113.  Mr B J Tolo (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      (1)   (a) What are the challenges in implementing the recovery
           programme in each province following the public sector strike
           and (b) how much has this programme cost each province to date;

      (2)   whether this programme was budgeted for by provinces; if not,
           from which programmes did each province allocate money to
           accommodate it?                              CO2130E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION (on behalf of the
Minister of Education): Thank you very much, Chairperson. In terms of the
challenges in implementing the recovery plan programme, I would want to
state that no funds were initially available to support the recovery plan.

Once it became clear that there was a protracted strike, the plan was
developed and it was clearly seen that there was a need for implementation
on an urgent basis without the normal lead times that allow for the
procurement and distribution of materials. The total cost of this programme
hasn’t been finally determined as yet, since most of the activities are
ongoing.

However, according to the report from the provinces, the Minister of
Education is able to report that Mpumalanga has spent R96 million on
teacher remuneration for Saturday and holiday classes, and the funds come
from their existing communications budget. Additional funds have been
requested from the provincial treasury.

The North West has spent R70 million on teacher remuneration. Additional
learner-support material and additional funds have been sourced from the
provincial treasury. Gauteng has incurred no additional costs for the
recovery plan to date, because they have used savings from the personnel
costs during the strike – and those are to be reprioritised with Treasury
approval to fund spring schools.
In KwaZulu-Natal the reports are as with the other provinces – that there
have been difficulties in negotiating with teacher unions over the amount
of additional teaching time to be spent on the recovery plan.

With regard to the second part of the question, as stated earlier the
provinces did not budget for the recovery plan. In some instances, the
budgeted funds of the National Strategy for Learner Attainment were used
with the strategy being intensified in support of the recovery plan. Thank
you, Chairperson.

Mr B J TOLO: Thank you, Minister, for the response. What I just want to say
is that it does look like the provinces are not on a par in terms of the
implementation of this plan. Other than KwaZulu-Natal, which other
provinces are still lagging behind? Do we have plans to enable those
provinces to actually advance and be able to cover the work before the
exams for the Grade 12s? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION (on behalf of the
Minister of Education): Thank you, Chairperson. I am unable to deal with
all the details around this. But I do know that the Education Council did
have a meeting where they discussed this in a fair amount of detail. They
are quite determined to put this plan in place. It’s important for our
children and it’s important for our future, generally speaking.

We are aware that if there is an industrial dispute, it’s very clearly a
decision from the side of employees to withhold their labour. As such, they
clearly would not want to do this to the complete detriment of the public,
because it’s also in their interest that they win and regain public
support. So, I would assume that it’s also in the interest of organised
labour to try to resolve differences wherever they are. From what we have
seen, in relation to the recovery plan, the Minister of Education, the
Deputy Minister and the team have taken into account all issues that should
be taken into account.

The report here says that KwaZulu-Natal - I would assume the other
provinces are those that have not been mentioned, such as the Free State,
the Northern Cape and so on - has some difficulties around implementation.
But I am quite confident that these matters can be ironed out and resolved,
because as I said earlier, it’s in the interests of all parties to ensure
that we regain the confidence and trust of the public.

The best way for organised labour to do so is to plough back through a
programme such as this one in terms of which they will indicate that they
consciously withheld their labour in order to get a particular salary
outcome. Having done so and because they know there has been a loss of time
on the side of learners, they will now look at how best they invest in a
manner that will be to the benefit of the public which is important for
them. Thanks.
       Provision of essential professional services in special schools

114.  Mr B J Tolo (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      (a) Why are special schools not provided with essential professional
      services such as speech therapists and psychologists and (b) why do
      provinces like Limpopo deploy ordinary teachers with no special skills
      in these schools?
                  CO2131E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION (on behalf of the
Minister of Education): Thank you very much, Chairperson. With regard to
the question, the distribution of posts amongst schools, including special
schools, is based on each school’s relative need for teachers, therapists
or psychologists. It’s the prerogative of the schools how posts are filled
and distributed according to the curriculum and other support needs.

There are 404 special schools with 87 866 learners, and 7 294 educators.
There are long waiting lists for admissions. Not all staff are
appropriately qualified, and the Minister of Education indicates that the
department is short of therapists and other health professionals.

In some provinces ordinary teachers are also employed to deal with ordinary
teaching in special schools. A human resource plan for inclusive education
is being developed to address any deficiencies in the deployment of staff
to special schools.

Now, I’d like to pre-empt any follow-up questions because my detailed
knowledge is a bit limited in this area. I would suggest that follow-up
questions be submitted to the Minister of Education for response. Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thanks, hon Minister. I think, hon
Minister, that is common sense for every human being – that you are not
dealing with the day-to-day operational things and you may not be able to
answer some of the questions. [Laughter.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I would just like to note that we have
skipped Question 112.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): We will come back to that now. Thank
you for alerting me. Hon Chief Whip, you wanted to say something?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, it was on a lighter note that I think
members ... [Inaudible.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Chief Whip, could you sit down,
please. These “lighter notes” can cause chaos in this House. Hon members, I
nearly made a serious omission. I will go back to the question posed in the
name of hon Lamoela, which is Question 112. Fortunately, the hon Deputy
Minister of Social Development is still here. She will respond to that
question which relates to the 20 000 nonprofit organisations’ funding.

    Monitoring and evaluation of nonprofit organisations in social sector

112.  Ms H Lamoela (DA) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (a) Who is responsible for monitoring and evaluating the 20 000
      nonprofit organisations (NPOs) in the social sector and (b) to whom do
      they report?                                       CO2036E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, according to
section 17 of the Non-Profit Organisations Act, all registered
organisations must keep accounting records of all their financial
transactions, according to the standards of Generally Accepted Accounting
Practices - that is section 17(1)(a) - and preserve the organisation’s
books of accounts, supporting vouchers, membership records, financial and
other documents.

In terms of section 18 of the Act, all registered organisations have a duty
to provide reports and information to the director of nonprofit
organisations, which is in the Department of Social Development. An annual
report, that is a narrative of the activities, financial statements and
accounting report, as contemplated in section 17 of the Act, must be
submitted within nine months after the end of the organisation’s financial
year. Thank you, Chair.

                         REPLY TO QUESTION 87 TABLED

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Are there any follow-up questions?
There are no follow-up questions. Hon Tolo, I think Question 114 was your
question. Am I right – on special schools? No, no, we have dealt with that
question.

I just want to bring to the attention of hon members that, as per the
request of the hon Minister of Health and in concurrence with the hon Mzizi
who posed Question 87, which was supposed to be disposed of, the Minister
has tabled the reply to the question. It has been handed over to the Table
staff. It will first go to the hon Mzizi, and it will be printed so that
all members will be privy to that knowledge.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 17:33.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                          FRIDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill, 2007,
         submitted by the Minister of Trade and Industry. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee
         on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


    (b)    Standards Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of Trade and
         Industry. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
       Research Council (MRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
       Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 172-
       2007].

                          MONDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

2.    The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Productivity
         Institute (NPI) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
         Education and Training Authority (LG-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 69-2007].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education and
         Training Authority (Teta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         76-2007].

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     Please note: The following item amends item 3(f) under the entry
     “Tablings” published on page 1692 of the Announcements, Tablings and
     Committee Reports of 6 September 2007:

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
         Board for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T070910 reprint – insert –PAGES 1698-1714

                         TUESDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister of Finance

         (a)     Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2007/08 Financial
              Year) [B 37 – 2007] (National Assembly– proposed money Bill)


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

2.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (a)    Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 30B – 2006] – Act No 6
         of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 3 September 2007).

    (b)    Municipal Fiscal Powers and Functions Bill [B 9B– 2007)] – Act
         No 12 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 3 September
         2007).

National Council of Provinces
The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 11 September 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Co-operative Banks Bill [B 13B – 2007] (National Assembly
              – sec 75).


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
              of the National Council of Provinces.


         (b)     National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31B – 2007] (National
              Assembly – sec 76(1)).
              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
              Economic and Foreign Affairs of the National Council of
              Provinces.


2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Economic
         and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
              Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 59-2007].

          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mining
              Qualifications Authority (MQA) for 2006-2007, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2006-2007 [RP 72-2007].

          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
              Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and
              Training Authority (MER-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2006-2007 [RP 71-2007].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of
              Public Enterprises for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for
              2006-2007 [RP 196-2007].

          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Forestry Company Limited (SAFCOL) for 2006-2007, including
              the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007.

          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pebble Bed Modular
              Reactor (Proprietary) Limited for 2006-2007, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007.

          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
              Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 93-2007].


          (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Information
              Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies
              Sector Education and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2006-
              2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 68-2007].

          (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
              Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
              Training Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2006-2007 [RP 70-2007].

          (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit
              Insurance Corporation of South Africa for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              National Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
              Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 64-2007].

          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
              Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority
              (FoodBev-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
              65-2007].

          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
              Education and Training Authority (Agri-Seta) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 56-2007].


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
              Institution for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
              153-2007].


          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre
              for the Arts for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
              Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 191-
              2007].


          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
              South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
              175-2007].


          (e)     Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust
              for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Library for the Blind for 2006-2007, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007.

          (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Heritage Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2006-2007, including
              the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              for 2006-2007 [RP 195-2007].

          (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the National English
              Literary Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
              Council for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 192-
              2007].


          (j)     Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company
              for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (k)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
              Education (CHE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (l)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
              Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) for 2006-2007, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2006-2007 [RP 180-2007].

          (m)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
              Bloemfontein for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (n)     Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007.


          (o)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
              Theatre for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 156-
              2007].

          (p)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts
              Council of South Africa (NAC) for 2006-2007, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2006-2007 [RP 186-2007].

          (q)     Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island
              Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 161-
              2007].

          (r)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
              Language Board (Pansalb) for 2006-2007, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007 [RP 174-2007].

          (s)     Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys
              Art Gallery for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (t)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and
              Video Foundation (NFVF) for 2006-2007, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007 [RP 150-2007].


          (u)     Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of
              Cape Town for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Weather Service (SAWS) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
              [RP 114-2007].


          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism
              for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007.


          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia
              Wetland Park Authority for 2006-2007, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007.


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the
              Public Protector of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2006-2007 [RP 193-2007].

          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
              Defence for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements of Vote 21 for 2006-2007.




          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments
              Corporation of South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 101-2007].


     (7)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
              Southern Africa Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report
              of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
              2006-2007.
          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2006-
              2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting
              Standards Board (ASB) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
              the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007 [RP 85-2007].

          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial
              Intelligence Centre for 2006-2007, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
              [RP 133-2007].

          (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and
              Fiscal Commission (FFC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007 [RP 143-2007].

     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation and the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
              Relations Council (ELRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007 [RP 145-2007].

     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs for consideration:
          (a)     Strategic Plan of the Marine Living Resources Fund for
              2007 to 2010.

     (10)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Finance
         for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
              Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 67-2007].

          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector
              Education and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2006-2007,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 57-2007].

          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Finance,
              Accounting, Management Consulting and other Financial
              Services Sector Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for
              2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 63-3007].


     (11)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Economic
         and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
              Education and Training Authority (Services Seta) for 2006-
              2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 88-2007].
          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
              Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
              (CTFL-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
              60-2007].


          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
              Retail Sector Education and Training Authority (W&R-Seta) for
              2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 78-2007].

          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
              Retail Sector Education and Training Authority (W&R-Seta) for
              2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 78-2007].

     (12)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises, the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs and the Select Committee on Education and
         Recreation for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism,
              Hospitality and Sport Education and Training Authority
              (Theta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 77-
              2007].


     (13)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Social
         Services for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
              Sector Education and Training Authority (HW-Seta) for 2006-
              2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 66-2007].


     (14)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training
              and Development Practices Sector Education and Training
              Authority (ETDP-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
              [RP 62-2007].


     (15)   The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial
              Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for
              2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
              on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


          (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
              Commission for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 102-
              2007].


     (16)   The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and the Joint Monitoring Committee
         on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children,
         Youth and Disabled Persons for consideration and report:

          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth
              Fund (UYF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
              2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 142-2007].

National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T070911 – insert – PAGES 1728-1820


