---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 March 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-03-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 MARCH 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:08.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                        AGREEMENT IN NORTHERN IRELAND

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without
notice:

  That the House –


  (1) notes -


         (a)      that Catholic and Protestant parties in Northern Ireland,
              who were traditionally enemies for decades, have agreed to a
              new constitutional arrangement in terms of which they will
              share power; and


         (b)      that in a world beset by trouble and strife it is greatly
              encouraging to witness this historic moment; and


  (2) wishes Northern Ireland good fortune in all its endeavours.

Agreed to.

                      CONGRATULATIONS TO BAFANA BAFANA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

  That the House –

  (1) notes that Bafana Bafana beat Chad 3-0 in an African Cup qualifying
        match on Saturday, 24 March 2007;


  (2) recognises that this was their first official game under new coach Mr
        Carlos Alberto Parreira;


  (3) extends its congratulations to both Mr Parreira and the team; and
  (4) wishes them well for the rest of their  qualifying  matches  for  next
        year’s African Cup of Nations.

Agreed to.

                           EXPLOSION IN MOZAMBIQUE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E NGALEKA: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Acting Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I hereby move without notice:

  That the House –

  (1) notes that -


       (a)  on Thursday, 22 March 2007, an explosion occurred at the
            military depot in Maputo, Mozambique; and


       (b)  the explosion claimed the lives of more than one hundred people
            and that more than five hundred have been injured when debris
            fell on nearby residential and commercial sites;


  (2) wishes the injured a speedy recovery; and


  (3) conveys its deep-felt condolences to the government and the people of
       Mozambique.

Agreed to.

                            DEATH OF BOB WOOLMER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T D LEE: Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

  That the House -

  (1) notes with profound sadness the death of former Proteas and Pakistan
       cricket coach Bob Woolmer on Sunday, 18 March 2007;


  (2) recognises that he was an outstanding coach and one of the fathers of
       the development of South African cricket;


  (3) acknowledges the fundamental role he played in the advancement of
       previously disadvantaged cricketers;


  (4) further acknowledges that he will be sorely missed by the cricket
       community; and


  (5) conveys its condolences to the Woolmer family.
Agreed to.

                      EXTENSION OF PERIOD OF OPERATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E NGALEKA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby move on behalf of the Acting Chief
Whip of the Majority Party:

   That the House concurs that the President by proclamation in the Gazette
   extend the period of operation of sections 51 and 52 of the Criminal Law
   Amendment Act, 1997 (Act No 105 of 1997), in terms of section 53(2) of
   the said Act for a further period of two years, with effect from 1 May
   2007.


Agreed to.

     RECONVENING OF COMMITTEE ON OPERATIONS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC
                                  PROTECTOR

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E NGALEKA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby move on behalf of the Acting Chief
Whip of the Majority Party:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Ad Hoc Committee on Operational Problems in  the  Office  of
            the Public Protector was established by the Speaker in terms of
            Rule 214 on 31 July 2006  and  subsequently  ratified  by  this
            House on 15 August 2006; and


       (b)  the House adopted the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on 7
            September 2006, which recommended substantive confidence-
            building measures and the reconvening of the Committee before
            the end of March 2007 to assess progress made and to determine
            any further action that may be required to ensure that the
            office is able to fulfil its constitutional and legislative
            mandate; and


  (2) resolves that the Ad Hoc Committee on Operational Problems in the
       Office of the Public Protector be reconvened, the committee to -

       (a)  assess progress made and to determine any further action that
            may be required to ensure that the office is able to fulfil its
            constitutional and legislative mandate;


       (b)  exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying
            out its functions; and


       (c)  submit a report with its findings and recommendations to the
            House by 2 July 2007.

Agreed to.

                            FIRST READING DEBATES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E NGALEKA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby move on behalf of the Acting Chief
Whip of the Majority Party:

  That the House -

  (1) approves, for a trial period until the end of  the  Second  Term,  the
       implementation of the provision in Rule 246(1) for  a  First  Reading
       debate on bills introduced in the Assembly, except  money  bills,  in
       accordance with the  following  guidelines  and  notwithstanding  any
       Rules to the contrary:

       (a)  A First Reading debate may be conducted on bills  introduced  in
            the Assembly.


       (b)  There shall be no speakers’ list for a First Reading debate.


       (c)  The member in charge of a bill, be it a Minister, a member or a
            representative of a portfolio committee, must be allocated
            fifteen minutes to make an introductory speech on the
            background to, reasons for and objects of the bill, and to
            reply to the debate.


       (d)  In the case of a bill introduced  by  the  Executive,  a  Deputy
            Minister may participate in the First Reading debate on  behalf
            of a Minister.


       (e)  Members may speak on the bill for no longer than  three  minutes
            each.


       (f)  With the exception of the member in charge of  the  bill,  or  a
            Deputy Minister participating on  behalf  of  the  Minister,  a
            member granted an opportunity to speak  will  not  be  given  a
            second opportunity in the same debate.


       (g)  Members intending to participate in the debate  must  press  the
            “to speak” button on their desks.


       (h)  Decisions regarding the scheduling of First Reading debates  are
            taken by the Programme Committee.
       (i)  If a bill is introduced in the  Assembly  during  a  non-plenary
            period, it may be scheduled for a First Reading debate as  soon
            as possible upon the resumption of plenaries.


       (j)  Once the speeches have been made, a bill is regarded  as  having
            been read a first time.


       (k)  No amendment to a bill is allowed on its First  Reading  and  no
            decisions will be taken by the  House  after  a  First  Reading
            debate; and


  (2) agrees to an assessment and review of these measures by the  Programme
       Committee after the expiry of the trial period and, if required,  the
       recommendation of specific Rule adjustments to the Rules Committee.

Agreed to.

                   ASSISTANCE TO THE POLICE TO FIGHT CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mong S L DITHEBE (ANC): Motlatsa-Spika, dibekeng tse pedi tse fetileng,
eleng ka 10 Hlakubele 2007, baahi ba Ward 10, Masepaleng wa Matjhabeng ba
hlahetswe ke koduwa ya ho fenethwa ha batjha ba bararo eleng Nozlilo Moeti
le Masechaba Moeti, ba hlabilweng ka thipa le ho thungwa, e ka sita le ho
betwa ke mmolai wa bona. Motswala wa bona eleng Teboho o fenethetswe ka
thipa sebakeng se seng hoole le lapeng labo. Re tshepa hore le mona,
seponesa se tla fumana phunyeletso dipatlisisong tsa sona.

Ka letsatsi le hlahlamang ke ile ka tshetlehela matshwele a baahi puo mmoho
le baemedi ba seponesa ha mmoho le baetapele ba bang ba setjhaba. Teng
baahi bane ba tshwere, kapa hona ho phahamisa dipolakathe tse ngotsweng ka
tsela ena: “Masechaba, Nozlilo le Teboho ba fenithilwe; Motho e mong le
emong o na le tokelo ya ho phela, Ha re aheng metse e bolokehileng - build
safer communities”. Tse ding di ne di re: “kutlwelobohloko ho diphofu tsa
botlokotsebe – solidarity with victims of crime, Thusa seponesa ho fedisa
botlokotseba- help the police to fight crime”. Kopo ya setjhaba e nngwe ke
hore, ba batla ho phela ba sereletsehile mme ba ikemiseditse ho thusa
seponesa ho etsa jwalo.

Qetellong ya tshebeletso ya bofifi, seponesa se tlalehile hore ba babedi ba
babolai ba se ba tshwere. Setjhaba se thabetse hoo, empa kopo ya bona ke
hore, babelaellwa ba se fumantshwe beile ka baka la ketso eo e sehloho.

Ho dima ho le jwalo, emong wa babelaellwa o se a ile a fenetha morwetsana e
mong hona woteng ena dilemong tsa ka bang tse pedi tse fetileng. Ke rata
hore re theoletse baahi ba ward 10, haholo batjha ka hore ba nke qeto ya
hore batla paterola mebila mmoho le seponesa sa rona.
Tsela e tshepehang ya ho thibela dipolao tsena ke ho tsetela hlompho ya
ditokelo tsa motho emong le emong dikelellong tsa rona. Motho ke motho ka
batho- I am becaue we are and since we are therefore I am. Ebile re rata ho
lebisa le matshediso a rona ho lelapa lena la diphofu tsena tse seng di
bolokilwe, ebile re leboha le setjhaba ka thuso ya sona ya ho thusa ho pata
barwetsana bana ba babedi le motswala wa bona. Ka hoo ra a leboha.
(Translation of Sesotho member’s statement follows.)

[Mr S L DITHEBE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, two weeks ago, on 10 March 2007,
Ward 10 residents in the Matjhabeng Municipality experienced a tragedy of
the murder of three youths. Nozililo and Masechaba Moeti were raped,
stabbed and shot to death by their assailant. Tebogo, the cousin of the
deceased, was stabbed to death in a place not far away from his home. We
hope even here police will succeed in their investigations.

The following day I addressed community masses, including police
representatives and community leaders. Community members had placards on
which was written “Masechaba, Nozililo and Tebogo were murdered; Each and
every person has a right to live, Let’s build safe communities”. On others
was written: “Solidarity with crime victims, help the police to fight
crime”. Another plea from the community was that they need to be protected.
They are therefore committed to helping the police to do so.

At the end of the memorial service, police reported that two of the
suspects had just been arrested. The community was pleased with the report,
but made a request that the suspects should not be granted bail, due to the
gruesome deed.

In addition to these murders, one of the suspects once murdered a young
girl in the same ward about two years ago. I would like to applaud the ward
10 residents, especially the youth, for taking a decision to patrol the
streets together with our police.

The credible way of preventing these murders is to instil respect for each
and everyone’s human rights in our minds. I am, because we are, and since
we are, therefore I am. We would also like to convey our condolences to the
family of the victims that are already buried. We also thank the community
for its support in burying the bodies of these two young girls and their
cousin. We are therefore thankful.]




                            JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, while some reassuring
sentiments are expressed in the ANC’s policy document on the transformation
of the judicial system, nevertheless warning lights are flickering around
the issue of the rules of court, which is already making waves in the legal
fraternity. At present the Constitutional Court makes its own rules; judges-
president have limited powers to create rules while there is a rules board
chaired by a judge, which isn’t in charge of rules of court and rule
development.

In terms of the package of Bills undermining the independence of the
judiciary published by the Minister of Justice two years ago, which caused
such a furore, the Minister of Justice assumed responsibility for and
control over the rules of court.

There was great relief last year when President Mbeki himself eventually
stepped in and withdrew the Bills to be reconsidered in terms of a White
Paper on Judicial Transformation. The Minister of Justice has told
Parliament that the White Paper is still being prepared. However, the ANC
policy document affirms that rule making is a legislative competence and
the power of rule making is delegated to the executive.

At the same time, the document states that the Minister of Justice is
required to take into consideration the views of the judiciary in relation
to matters which have a bearing on the proper functioning of the courts and
administration of justice.

What the judiciary said about this in its memorandum to the department on
the controversial Bill is as follows:
  In principle, rule-making power should vest in neither the executive nor
  the legislature. The power of judges to make rules of court is an ancient
  one and underlies section 173 of the Constitution, which provides that
  the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court of Appeal and the High Courts
  have the inherent power to protect and regulate their own processes.

Hopefully, the Minister of Justice will be honest enough to share the views
of the judiciary around this and other aspects of judicial transformation
with delegates at the ANC’s upcoming policy conference. Thank you, Madam
Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]




               QUESTION FOR ORAL REPLY SUBMITTED TO PRESIDENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP submitted a question
for oral reply to the President of the Republic to Parliament’s Questions
Office. We wanted to ask the President whether he agrees that as political
office-bearers we are elected to serve the electorate and to be accountable
to them and if he believed that it is morally and ethically correct that
the ANC raises funds by selling membership to an elite group that may get
preferential treatment and potentially elicit favours from Ministers,
Deputy Ministers and senior civil servants.

The IFP believed, and still does, that this is a legitimate question to ask
the President, as members of his executive – the Cabinet which he heads -
were doing the fundraising in their official capacities, but we were
blocked by the presiding officers. The answer to this could have shed lots
of light on the ANC’s perception of what is morally correct and defensible
in a modern democratic state.

The IFP would like to reiterate that we believe that the funding scheme of
the ANC is immoral and it is proof of how they manipulate and misuse their
powers. Politicians are elected to serve the people and thus the ANC cannot
charge for the service.

Extremely impoverished people, who also fought in the liberation struggle,
are supporters of the ANC too. So, what is the ANC now trying to tell its
voters? That you can only spend time with the people you elected as their
leaders if you have between R3 000 and R60 000 for an ANC progressive
business forum membership? It’s ridiculous!

The IFP believes it is time for all voters to think seriously about where
they place their votes in future. Can South Africa continue having the
country governed by a party that only serves its paying sponsors?

Everyone agrees ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                                 RDP HOUSES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S M RASMENI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, we in this House would like to
commend the sterling work done by the ANC, in particular the ANC Youth
League in Maquassi Hills. Ha, umavukayibambe! [The ever-shining one!]

They have shown commitment in working together with government to identify
service delivery blockages in Tswelelang Extension 10, where RDP houses
built by contractors are in a state of collapse. No less than 50 houses
have cracked walls. Foundations are not up to standard and some walls are
literally collapsing. This in turn undermines the ANC-led government
programme of pushing back the frontiers of poverty. It also undermines the
principle of creating a better and a caring society. This is tantamount to
sabotage. Such corrupt practices must be brought to book as they are
damaging the image of the government. Let us name and shame such
construction companies and the individuals involved in such contracts.

Inefficient service delivery is no delivery. We call on the government to
intensify its monitoring mechanisms, to ensure that specifications and
standards are adhered to by contractors and even call on the NHBRC to
inspect all RDP houses built thus far. Thank you very much. [Applause.]
                            CRUELTY IN THE SUDAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the latest reports about the
Sudanese government’s cruelty and persistent drive in its ethnic cleansing
campaign in Darfur deserve strong condemnation. That brutal government and
the Janjaweed militia that has burnt and destroyed hundreds of villages,
killed and caused the deaths of at least 200 000 and raped and assaulted
thousands of women and girls, has now closed off the main supply route to a
town that was held by rebels about five months ago. Food assistance,
medicine and other vital supplies cannot be delivered by aid groups, as
their workers have been targeted by militiamen.

Government forces that have waged a systematic campaign of ethnic cleansing
against the civilian population who are members of the same ethnic group as
the rebels must be ordered by the international community to stop their
ethnic cleansing campaign and also be ordered to allow easy access of
humanitarian supplies to the sick and most vulnerable civilian population
in the south-east of the Jebel Marrah region. Children must be allowed
access to education, and clinics that are closed must be opened so that the
sick can receive medical treatment and medication. I thank you. [Applause.]


                              CHILD MAINTENANCE
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms F BATYI (ID): Chairperson, I have personally made a stand against men
who do not pay child maintenance. It was an issue that I took up in the 16
Days of Activism Against Gender Violence last year, but I have turned it
into the 365 days of action. So far, with the help of members of the
Mitchells Plain Police Station, in particular Inspector Eugene Goliath, we
have successfully made about 30 arrests.

Our efforts, though, are a last resort and it is a sentiment of those who
have to deal with maintenance from the side of the law that the current
system is inadequate. This was demonstrated recently when I helped in the
arrest of a man who had not paid maintenance for 13 years. The gentleman
then made bail.

It is unsatisfactory that he can pay bail and not maintenance. The ID would
like to ask for the current system to be re-evaluated and I ask more
Members of Parliament to encourage the men of this country to pay child
maintenance. I thank you.

                     ELECTRICITY INSTALLATION IN SISONKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T L MAHLABA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, hon members, the ANC-led government
has consistently displayed an ability to deliver on its commitment to the
people. Yet, we have certain targets that need us as members, as part of
our oversight function, to fight what could be stumbling blocks and
bureaucracy that could cause a failure to the achievement of the set goals.
The issue of electricity is one of the challenges that face the Sisonke
District Municipality.

Currently, the power stations around the area cannot cope with the demand
for electricity. This affects two district areas – Ugu Municipality and
Sisonke. Under Ugu you have Umzumbe and Vulamehlo and under Sisonke you’ve
Ubuhlobezwe and Ingwe Municipalities. Ubuhlobezwe Municipality has less
than 50% household connections currently.

The specific request from my community is for the Department of Minerals
and Energy to prioritise the building of the Canterton and Corinth power
stations. This should be followed by more funding provided to these
municipalities. The above will assist in areas like Hluthankungu, eGudwini,
Sangcwaba, Mahehle and the broader area of Ubuhlobezwe Municipality. The
community has trust in the ANC-led government and are prepared to work with
it. Thank you.




                              CHILDREN’S RIGHTS


                            (Member’s Statement)
Dr G G WOODS (NADECO): Madam Deputy Speaker, the greatness of a country is
not only found in its economic growth and social development towards
political stability, it is found in the way the country is able to advocate
and respond to issues affecting the future generation – the country’s
children.

Presently, there are members of our society whose rights as children are
not being adequately accommodated. In particular, our children face a
number of serious social challenges as victims of sexual exploitation and
other criminal activities.

If we consider, for example, that over 55 000 children are reported to be
physically abused annually in South Africa, we start to understand the
extent of the situation in the country.

Recent research has also shown that sexual predators are now targeting
Third World and developing countries. I think it is also the case of the
entertainment media – television, in particular, which exposes children to
much deviant and harmful social behaviour of a violent and sexual nature.

As Nadeco, we strongly believe that the sexual exploitation of children is
an offence to the dignity of all of us. We urge that this Parliament
strongly intervenes to expedite the finalisation and implementation of the
Bills such as the Children’s Amendment Act, the Sexual Offences Bill and
the Child Justice Bill. Thank you.

                                 CORRUPTION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Deputy Speaker, I think we have consensus across the
political spectrum that corruption is one of the most single debilitating
harnesses in the way of ensuring a better life for all.

We also agree that government has an important role to play in this fight
against corruption.

But it is the opposition that has an especially important role to play in
this regard insofar as it fulfils its primary duties of oversight and
keeping the government on its toes where these matters are concerned.

It becomes a problem, however, when the very people of all parties claiming
to have the corruption moral high ground, have in their own ranks people
who apparently occupy themselves with corruption of the highest order.

Die jongste hiervan, agb Adjunk-Speaker, is die bewering dat ‘n DA-raadslid
van Wyk 17 in die Kaapstad en haar handlanger die behuisinglys manipuleer
en mense tot R5  000 laat betaal om kastig te verseker dat hulle voorkeur
behandeling sal kry. Dit is ‘n ernstige aanklag teen die integriteit van
die DA en alles wat dié party tot dusver oor korrupsie te sê gehad het
aangesien hierdie raadslid juis in haar vorige termyn gebuk gegaan het
onder soortgelyke bewerings. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The latest of these, hon Deputy Speaker, being  the allegation that a DA
member of Ward 17 in Cape Town, and her henchman, manipulated the housing
list and charged people up to R5 000 under the pretence that they would
receive preferential treatment. This is a serious allegation reflecting on
the DA’s integrity and this party’s stance on corruption to date,
especially as similar allegations were levelled against this member during
her previous term of office.]

Madam Speaker, it is we, as the opposition party, who want to step on the
government’s toes when it is alleged that there is corruption somewhere,
and we need to make sure that we aren’t culprits ourselves. I thank you
very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]




                             SKILLS DEVELOPMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Deputy Speaker, there is nothing wrong with ``governing-
by-acronyms’’ if the results are produced and the direction is clear, but
not if it serves only as a platform for government from which to issue
vague statements that either gloat over insignificant or ineffectual
successes, admit that there’s a problem but ignore the particulars, or fail
to be engaged in possible solutions.

This, however, seems to be exactly what government is doing with the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa, Asgisa, and
particularly its skills arm, on the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills
Acquisition, Jipsa.

The Deputy President has just announced ambitiously that the skills
shortage is again high on intent, but low on content, and seems to promise
little more than to further entangle the ANC government in yet another
string of unaccomplished targets. We are not told how government aims to do
this.

Ostensibly everyone is also engaged in the departmental ``turf wars’’ that
are blamed for Asgisa’s woes or perhaps are rather blissfully unaware of
and excluded from the process.

The Labour department’s strategic plan presented to the portfolio committee
this morning also did not contain any word on it.

The Deputy President sought to address the skills development programme a
year ago at the launch of Jipsa. We still await her promised skills
revolution.

In the meantime the DA is after the barrage of possible solutions where
government remains floundering - most notably with the expensive red-tape-
driven with scandal- prone state information technology agencies, or Sitas.

South Africa, a lot of people who work in it, deserves better. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                   MULTIPURPOSE COMMUNITY CENTRE IN ZWIDE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N B FIHLA (ANC): Madam Speaker, this House must note some of the current
development initiatives in bringing about a better life for all. In the
Herald of 12 March 2007, it is reported that about R 30 million has been
allocated to build a multipurpose community centre in the Zwide Township of
Port Elizabeth.

We should warmly welcome this initiative. The initiative is taking place
within the context of the partnership between government and the business
sector to build community facilities in order to provide better services
for the people and the poor in particular.
We must remember that the Zwide Township is one of the communities that
were ravaged by apartheid in our country. As the ANC, it is important to
ensure that development does not become a project for the elite section
within the historically oppressed communities. Such community facilities
should be developed in the interest of the poor.

In the context of the Correctional Services, this multipurpose community
centre will help to advance social integration of offenders through
counselling services and technological skills training of the ex-prisoners
or parolees, it will help to advance community correction and help to
implement noncustodial sentences by way of offering different programmes
for different needs for different offenders. I thank you.

                              UNDERAGE DRINKING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof E S CHANG (IFP): Deputy Madam Speaker, the IFP welcomes the recent
closure of the Refresh Nightclub in Overport, Durban after 57 underage
drinkers were caught in a surprise raid. The discovery of the drinking
teenagers has caused a huge public outcry about the prevalence of underage
drinking and drug abuse in a country in which the rate of crime and sexual
abuse is really high.

Alcohol is also seen as a chief factor among the three leading causes of
death of young people, namely automobile crashes, homicides and suicides.
The recent shooting and wounding of a 16-year-old girl outside the same
Refresh Nightclub is a testimony to the ongoing nature of the worst
behavioural effects associated with underage and heavy drinking. Sanca in
Durban treats hundreds of young victims from the age of 12 to 18 every year
as a result of susceptibilities to harmful substances.

The IFP, therefore, calls upon the Liquor Licence Board and the entire law
enforcement agencies to get on top of nightclubs and shebeens that sell
alcohol to underage drinkers. The IFP is concerned that this kind of
lawlessness and the moral decay of the young generation is not only limited
to KZN but has serious national dimensions. The law therefore should not
only be applied but it must be seen to be applied. I thank you.

                                WOMEN’S MARCH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D B MBOMBO (ANC): I need protection from my colleagues, Madam Chair. The
Cabinet meeting on 7 December 2005 tasked the Department of Arts and
Culture to lead the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the women’s
anti-pass march of August 1956.

Two book launches on 8 and 9 March held respectively in Johannesburg and
Cape Town drew the 50th anniversary commemoration to a close. Three books
specifically commissioned for the commemoration were launched at these
events. The first was a photographic essay executed by a number of South
African women photographers, entitled Women by Women. The second is a
collection of writings by South Africa women dating from the mid 19th
century to the present, titled The Face of the Spirit, and the third is an
anthology titled Tshimakadzo, featuring new women poets who have hitherto
not been published.

ISebe lezoBugcisa neNkcubeko liqonde ngokukodwa kwiintombi ezikwizikolo
zamabanga aphakamileyo, kumakhaya okhuseleko, nakwezihlala kwiindawo
ezisaphuhliswayo. [The Department of Arts and Culture is focused especially
on young girls who are at high schools, boarding schools, and on those who
stay in developing areas.]

We had three of them coming from informal settlements in the Free State.

Aba ndithetha ngabo bathathe inxaxheba kukhuphiswano lukazwelonke, saze
isiphumo soko saba kukuvakalisa amazwi amatsha, kwaze kwabhalwa nencwadi
yemibongo ... [Laphela ixesha.] [Those that I’m referring to participated
in the national competition for the development of new terminology which
resulted in the writing of a poetry book… [Time expired.]]




                     INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS DIRECTORATE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, last year the SA Police
Service’s Commissioner, Jackie Selebi, told the DA that the Independent
Complaints Directorate had “outlived its usefulness and could be
dissolved”, leaving the South African Police Service to police itself.

Yesterday the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security sat for five hours
interrogating the top structure of the ICD and we discovered that there had
been a 28% increase in the number of people killed whilst in police custody
by the police. This organisation that Commissioner Selebi wants to see the
back of had 4 950 cases of police abuse and negligence reported to it just
this past year and of those cases 439 referred to murders by the police,
with an additional 248 people who died in police custody.

Intentional shootings are up by 200% and being investigated by this
independent organisation, despite enormous capacity and budget constraints.
Let me point out to this House that if it were not for the ICD there would
be nothing to check on excesses by the police and nothing to uphold a very
democratic principle, a principle Commissioner Selebi would do very well to
attempt to grasp. Strengthen the ICD, don’t abolish it. [Applause.]




                            EDUCATION WHITE PAPER


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mong M J MZONDEKI (ANC): Ke ya leboha Motlatsa-Spikara. Mmuso o
etelletsweng pele ke ANC o ile wa nka qeto ya ho fitisa Molawana ho tsa
dithutho- The White Paper Number 6. Sepheho sa Molawana ona, ke ho
netefatsa hore barutwana ba sa itekanelang ha ba kgethollwe ka hore ba
qobeleha ho kana dikolo tse ikgethileng – special schools.

Molawana ona o netefatsa hore barutwana ba sa itekanelang le bona ba
amohelwe dikolong tse tlwaelehileng, e leng mainstream schools. Ho
netefatsa hore hona ho ya phethahala, tse ding tsa dikolo tse ikgethileng
di fetoletswe hoba di-resource centres, e leng dibaka tse tla eletsang
dikolo tse qalang ho amohela barutwana ba sa itekanelang.

Se seng sa dikolo tse sebetsang e le resource centre ke Leboneng Special
School, mane Welkom, Lejweleputswa District Municipality. Ketelong ya ka
sekolong sena ke hlokomedisitswe ka moo mathata a mangata a etsang hore
sekolo sena se seke sa sebetsa hantle jwalo ka Resource Centre. A mang a
mathata a hlwahilweng ke diphaphosi tse haellang, ho se be teng ha di
Therapist, sick bay, hosetele ya bana ba dulang hole le dipalangwa tse
haellang.

Mooki wa sekolong eo e leng ena ya  thusang dikolong ha ana sepalangwa sa
lefapha, o sebedisa koloi ya hae. Maemo ana a ya hlobaetsa, mme a tla etsa
hore re se fihlelle sepheho sa rona sa ho lwantsa kgethollo ya barutwana ba
sa itekanelang. Ke ya leboha. (Translation of Sesotho member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr M J MZONDEKI (ANC): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The ANC-led government
took the decision to pass the Bill on education – The White Paper 6. The
purpose of this Bill is to ensure that disabled learners are not
discriminated against by being forced to attend special schools.

This Bill ensures that disabled learners are also admitted to mainstream
schools. In order to make certain that this happens, some special schools
have been converted into resource centres, which will be used as centres
that give advice to schools that have just started to admit disabled
learners.

One of the schools that works as a resource centre is Leboneng Special
School in Welkom, Lejweleputswa District Municipality. While visiting the
school I was made aware of the many problems that hinder the proper
functioning of the school as a resource centre. Some of the problems
highlighted were: the shortage of classrooms, no therapist available, no
sick bay, no hostel for learners who live far away, and a shortage of
transport.

The school nurse who helps around the schools has no transport provided by
the department, she uses her own car. This is a worrying state of affairs
and will defeat our purpose of fighting discrimination against disabled
learners. Thank you.]


                      INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS STRUCTURE


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker,
it is a real pity that in South Africa there are still people who thrive on
controversy. I don’t understand how anyone could use a statement which is
not the official position and want to cast an attitude on the basis of such
a statement. The hon Kohler-Barnard is talking about a statement by the
National Commissioner.

The fact of the matter is that I spoke in this House and put the official
position. In fact, the official position is exactly as she is saying it,
because that is exactly what I said in this House. I reiterated this in the
NCOP as well and I did not just talk about these things. It is our view
that the ICD indeed must be strengthened and we’ve travelled quite some
distance in order for us to be able to do that.

It is not our intention to close down the ICD: that’s what I said in this
House. I said the ICD was a necessary structure in terms of our democratic
dispensation, which I said in the NCOP. That is the official position, and
all other positions will be taken up by people who want to continue to be
controversial. [Interjections.] [Applause.]




                           FUNDRAISING BY MEMBERS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: The hon member from the IFP presented a
gross distortion of the ANC’s fundraising endeavours. I think it is
important for the House to note the following: Firstly, ANC Ministers are
community members and they continuously interact with communities. This is
a duty and responsibility that we will continue to do. It is our task and
our mission!

Secondly, ANC Ministers continue, on a daily basis, to be invited to be
speakers and guest speakers by a whole range of organisations –
professional organisations, civil organisations and a whole range of NGOs.
We do this in a clear endeavour to consult, participate and interact with
people. That is what we continue to do and that is what we are going to
continue do. [Applause.]

Thirdly, ANC Ministers are also invited to attend the fundraising
endeavours of a number of civil society organisations. We do this. We sit
at tables and, to a large extent, the ANC Ministers are keynote speakers.
Those organisations and NGOs raise funds around those activities and we
will continue to do that. It is something that we believe in. [Applause.]

But, what we don’t understand is the whole avalanche of criticism when the
ANC used the resources at its disposal, both material and personnel, to
raise its own funds legitimately, legally and transparently. And I want the
member to tell us: Is there is anything wrong with the ANC organising a
fundraiser, inviting its own members to participate in that and raise
funds? If that is wrong, then what is right in South Africa? [Applause.]

                  ASGISA; INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS STRUCTURE;
                           EDUCATION WHITE PAPER;
                             SITUATION IN DARFUR

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I would advise the hon member, who has made the
most unfortunate comments concerning the Deputy President’s presentation of
her annual reports on both the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of
South Africa as well as the Joint Initiative on Priority Skills
Acquisition, to read both reports because then he would have the
information available to him which would assist him in not making wild and
inaccurate statements about what has been done. Those reports are available
and I certainly invite the hon member to go through them.

I think we don’t need to repeat what has been done with respect to the
skills focus. He could read the annual reports of the Department of
Education and he will find in my own strategic plan that in fact there is a
key reference to the very programmes that the Deputy President has referred
to.

We have indeed completed a great deal of the recapitalisation of FET
Colleges; the 11 programmes I referred to last year and modern skills
development programmes are in place in the FET Colleges throughout the
country; we have admitted 24 700 students to these new programmes;
engineering, information technology, media studies, and a whole range of
skills areas are being addressed; we will admit 24 000 more students in
2008. Therefore, the objective of 50 000 young people in these new
programmes would have been achieved.

With respect to universities, we have made available to the institutions
that have engineering faculties additional funding for them to admit
expanded numbers of students to pursue degrees in engineering, to improve
their engineering workshop facilities, and to improve tutoring to students
so that the throughput rate is improved.

With respect to graduate placement, we have been working with engineering
societies to ensure that registration of graduates is indeed completed.

With expanding Maths and Science, we continue with our initiatives in
schools and at university level. You are aware of the National Youth
Service and the expansion of the programmes there. You are also aware of
the worth of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund where it seeks to appoint and support
young people in entrepreneurship programmes.

As a Member of Parliament, you should be aware, you should be reading the
reports and you should be coming here as the hon Mzondeki has done to point
out where there might be inadequacies. I will certainly follow up, hon
Mzondeki, the Welkom school situation because the resource centres should
indeed be adequately supported. But, I would encourage the hon member to
look at the reports, both with respect to Asgisa and the economic work that
you fully know is being carried out – the infrastructure development, the
various programmes in the public sector as well as the state-owned
enterprises.

You are aware that we are retaining attention to the core-fundamentals of
our economy as we pursue the 6% growth target. You are fully aware that
government is intent on ensuring it achieves its objectives of growing the
economy and massively eroding the levels of poverty that we see in our
society.
So, I would urge you to come to the House with accurate information and
perhaps an indication of the steps you will take to ensure that these
objectives, which in the interest of all the people of South Africa, are
indeed pursued and achieved.

In conclusion, if I could say, one would certainly agree that we must
ensure promotion and support for the rights of the people of Darfur and
continue the efforts of the AU in finding a solution to the current plight
faced by the people of Darfur. So, we would agree with the leader of the
ACDP that certainly as Parliament, perhaps at the IPU as we engage with
colleagues from other Parliaments, we look at how we as parliamentarians
could play a greater role in advancing civil rights and the observance of
the International Human Rights Law in the Darfur context - both by the
government of Sudan as well as the rebels within the Darfur region.

I certainly would also agree with the hon member from the ID that we must
continue as Members of Parliament, and not as women Members of Parliament
but all Members of Parliament, to fight for maintenance to be paid for all
children who we give life to as adults in our society. So, certainly we
would support that approach. [Applause.]

We also would agree with the hon Gavin Woods that the rights of children
must be protected and that if there is an instance where the media is
perhaps not playing the role that it should, action should be taken, both
in law and in statute, to ensure that our children are not abused or
presented in a negative fashion through the media. Thank you very much,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

                            SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, I
think Minister Naledi Pandor has already covered this, because I was going
to speak on the Sexual Offences Bill, and with regard to the Sixteen Days
of No Violence Against Women and Children, and the 365-day campaign, but it
has already been covered.
Thank you.

   EKURHULENI DECLARATION ON THE FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION; THE FORTHCOMING
       GLOBAL FORUM ON COMBATING CORRUPTION AND SAFEGUARDING INTEGRITY

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Speaker, the
South African government, together with the African Union Commission and
the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, hosted the first-ever
Africa forum on fighting corruption in Gauteng earlier this month.

This gathering brought together some 450 delegates representing
governments, multilateral organisations and structures of civil society
from across the African continent, under the theme ``Towards a common
understanding of corruption’’.

We all agreed that corruption is a direct impediment to Africa’s
development. The forum gave us an opportunity to share perceptions and
experiences of corruption strategies and best practices, as well as to
deliberate on how we work together to create effective structures, policies
and programmes to counter corruption.

We also adopted the Ekurhuleni Declaration as a lodestar in the ongoing
fight against corruption. The Ekurhuleni Declaration defines corruption as
including theft, fraud, bribery, extortion, nepotism, patronage and the
laundering of illicit proceeds.

This marks a significant departure from the traditional and narrow and
restricted definition which focuses the gaze of attention on the recipient
of the bribe in cases where there is abuse and misuse of public power and
public resources for private benefit.

There was and is an agreement that corruption occurs both in the public and
private spheres of society, and organs of civil society are also
susceptible to acts of corruption. There is a supply side and a demand side
to corruption. There is the corruptor and the corrupted.

That corruption was largely seen as a public sector vice is due in part to
the use of tools such as the corruption perception index as a measure of
corruption. This index, pioneered by Transparency International, surveys
the opinions of the private sector on public sector corruption in
developing countries, and it is based primarily on the perceptions of
business on whether they have to pay bribes to the public sector in
different countries. Not only does it not focus on whether companies have
actually been asked to pay bribes or have paid bribes, it focuses only on
the taker of bribes and imputes no culpability to the payers of bribes.

The recently released report on corruption in the private sector in South
Africa, commissioned by the National Anti-Corruption Forum Private Sector
Component, highlights the significant incidence of bribery and corruption
in the private sector.

It also highlights the low level of awareness of business of the statutory
requirements to report corruption to the police. Seventy-nine per cent of
companies were unaware of this.

The Africa Forum called for standardised methodologies to measure
corruption and for baseline studies to be undertaken so that the
effectiveness of policy interventions can be assessed over time. The
broader definition of corruption requires that new and more comprehensive
measures be implemented to counter corruption. It demands that it is not
just the developing countries that need to take action, but that
international and cross-border co-operation is vital in halting the tide of
unscrupulous behaviour. The African Forum agreed on the kinds of measures
that need to be implemented on the continent, and it's now up to us to
pressure the developed countries to co-operate with us in prosecuting acts
of corruption when committed by their nationals, whether natural or legal
entities.

What is very important, however, and which was considered by the Africa
Forum, was the centrality of a national integrity system in the bid to
combat corruption, and the forum stressed that it must be premised on a
sound value system that draws upon traditional, communal, egalitarian and
democratic principles.

These national values should permeate the structures of the state and civil
society with the principles and practices prevalent in a vibrant democracy,
including transparency, freedom of speech, access to information, free and
fair elections, a strong judicial system and holding the executive to
account.

Our values have been distorted and corroded by colonialism and apartheid.
The onus on the leadership echelon in African society, in all sectors, not
just political leaders, is to resuscitate our traditional value systems
based on the concepts of Ubuntu and Ujamaa, and to marginalise the trend
towards possessive individualism, spawned by market fundamentalism, in
which the scramble for material possessions takes precedence over the
collective good.

It is opportune that today Parliament launches its new emblem with “the
people” at its base and with a commitment to an open and inclusive society.
The new emblem combines the traditional forms of societal engagement, of
people working together, as depicted by the drum with the modern principles
of democracy as enunciated in our Constitution. So, we all have a
commitment. We all have a responsibility to take it forward. Our commitment
is to a people-centred society where justice shall prevail. It is these
very principles that must transform our approach to combating corruption.

The structural component of the national integrity system is based on a set
of institutions that provide checks and balances in the execution of state
power, as well as law enforcement bodies and organs of civil society.
Addressing this House, I must emphasise that this institution lies at the
centre of these structures. It is the primary institution that exercises
oversight over the government. Other bodies that monitor government report
to Parliament, and funding for other state bodies and law enforcement
agencies are approved by the legislature.

Parliament has implemented a Register of Members' Interests and promulgated
the Executive Members Ethics Act. Both these codes of conduct encompass
conflict of interest rules. There are other organs of state that contribute
to an integrity system. This includes the judiciary, the Auditor-General,
and the Public Protector, amongst others.

The forum itself paid due attention to the issue of training and capacity-
building of personnel and institutions to intensify the fight against
corruption. It acknowledged and welcomed the role that civil society plays
in the fight against corruption and advocated the creation of national
compacts between governments, business, the media and civil society to
strengthen the campaign. Civil society organs have a crucial role in
developing public awareness of corruption and its implications.

We should bear in mind, however, that civil society is not immune to
corruption itself, and does not always measure up to the standards of
probity and openness that it demands of others.

It was agreed that the media has a responsibility not just to investigate
and expose corruption when it occurs, but also to inform and educate the
public about corruption generally so as to generally increase awareness
about it in our midst.
A properly structured integrity system provides a comprehensive backbone to
a democratic system of governance. It knits the various checks and balances
into an effective tool against corruption. A national integrity system
therefore provides both the institutional and philosophical basis for both
enforcement and preventive action against corruption.

The Africa Forum and the Ekurhuleni Declaration acknowledged the steps
taken by African states in regional organisations and the African Union to
promulgate and implement instruments to tackle corruption, but conceded
that a greater harmonisation of legislation and actions was required to
ensure that these noble instruments become effective.

There was concern about the costs of ratifying and implementing the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, the African Union Convention on
Preventing and Combating Corruption, and the regional protocols that are in
place.

It was emphasised that greater co-operation in the spheres of money-
laundering, cross-border crimes and asset forfeiture was particularly
required. The forum generally noted the desire for strong, capable states
to meet the needs and aspirations of the African people.
Having forged a consensus on the shape of the fight against corruption on
the continent, we now look forward to the Global Forum V meeting in
Johannesburg from 2 to 5 April this year. We are proud to host this
gathering called "Fulfilling our Commitments: Effective action against
Corruption."

This forum will explore the interrelationship between the UN Convention
against Corruption, its implementation mechanism, which is the Conference
of State Parties, and the Global Forum. The implementation of sub-regional,
regional and international instruments is strongly promoted through the
Global Forum. Any development and engagement that would strengthen these
relationships is welcomed. Through such relationships, the integration and
co-ordination of global efforts is strengthened and enhanced.

We will present the Ekurhuleni Declaration to the Global Forum and call
upon all states to intensify co-operation and deepen the global onslaught
against corruption.

I have referred to the recognition by the forum of the values of ujamaa and
ubuntu, "I am what I am because of who we all are", which is the essence of
our commitment to fighting corruption. It is with this commitment to social
cohesion that we call on other sectors of society to increase their
participation in this fight that is critical to the strengthening of our
democratic society.

The endorsement of the declaration by this House will be a historic
milestone in strengthening the battle and the commitment across society to
advancing the frontline of this battle. It is in this same spirit that we
will be approaching business, in the next month, to support a campaign,
both through material resources as well as creative ideas, to embark on a
mass communication campaign, a campaign to make the people of our nation
aware of the tools that we have to fight corruption; a campaign to
publicise the national Anti-Corruption Hotline, 0800 701 701, so that every
citizen knows where and how to report corruption; a campaign to make
business aware of their legal requirements to report any attempts to engage
in corrupt practice, and to promote whistle-blowing as a patriotic act of
commitment to a corruption-free society.

We have proclaimed the 21st century as the African Century and we have,
together with the broader international community, welcomed the
articulation of the Millennium Development Goals. We are continually
striving to implement policies and programmes to give effect and substance
to these objectives of lifting the African people out of economic and
social deprivation. We strive for sustained economic growth in a more
egalitarian global economic order, despite the bumpy road we have thus far
travelled. We have raised the bar for our continent and our people deserve
no less.

The developed countries need to ensure that that bar will be set for them
as well, because we will not fail our people or the people of the world.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I F JULIES: Madam Speaker, the DA has long held that a clear and strong
message must be sent by government that corruption, whether in the private
or in public sector, will not be tolerated. To this effect, we last year in
this House called for a debate on fraud.

Specifically, we were interested to hear the ANC take on the impact of the
public support shown by government officials for fallen comrades convicted
of crime on the seriousness with which fraud and corruption were viewed in
our society. But unfortunately, courtesy of the ANC-dominated programme
committee, that was not to be.

Corruption and economic crime are a big problem in our government
departments as well as in our public entities. My colleague, Mark Lowe, is
fond of referring to the problems besetting the Sector Education and
Training Authorities. Members serving on the Communication Portfolio
Committee may have noticed from the front page of today’s edition of a
leading business newspaper that the problems in this regard with respect to
the Post Office have also not yet been resolved.

Not even this House has escaped without being tainted, as even two members
of Cabinet were recently found to have made use of travel privileges to
which they were not entitled, without as much as a beat being skipped by
the powers that be.

The Germans say that the fish rots from the head down. It would seem that
in South Africa the situation is no different. Judging by the extent to
which corruption and economic crime have taken root in our private sector,
it would seem that the bad apples in the business fraternity have done
excellently in emulating their counterparts in government.

Transparency International’s own corruption perception index,
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Global Economic Crime Survey and KPMG’s African
Fraud and Misconduct Survey have found that fraud and corruption are a
severe problem in South Africa, and in terms of how South Africa is viewed
internationally.

As such, the DA supports the Ekurhuleni Declaration on fighting corruption,
in particular Resolution 10 that entails capacitation of national
legislatures to provide oversight and ensure accountability. We hope that
in this process government and particularly the members on my right will do
their part. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Madam Speaker and hon members, the IFP welcomes a
statement by the Minister. Hon members, it was Seneca who wrote so
brilliantly, almost twenty centuries ago, that corruption is not a problem
of times but of man. The debilitating effects of corruption are only too
well known, deepening poverty, undermining political and economic systems,
also the high levels of corruption scandals, the inequities and the blatant
greed have pushed corruption to the top of the political agenda.

It is well known that many corruption schemes originate at the public-
private interface where public officials can be tempted to accept or
solicit bribes. The key to any anticorruption measures is building
integrity institutions. It is about injecting ubuntu and ethics into all
facets of life, both personal and public. It is about right living, as
Aristotle would say.

The second key is effective law-enforcement agencies. Efforts to combat
corruption are never easy, neither is detection, but confront it we must.
We must raise an onslaught against corruption, not just because it is
morally wrong, but because it exerts a heavy toll on the nation’s social,
political and moral wellbeing. In short, corruption poses a threat to the
functioning and credibility of our democracy, dangerously weakening the
system.
Let us not forget that democracy does not automatically mean a level
playing field. Corruption is a symbiotic relationship, when one exercises
public power for private benefit. When tolerated long enough, it leads to
the decay of the system and thereby its demise.

To defend the legitimacy of the democratic state, transparency and
accountability are the answer. Coupled with this is the value of public
opinion and a vigilant media. Hume once wrote that concerning any system of
government, it must be known that man is a scoundrel lacking in any other
purpose but his own private interest.

Let us not forget that ethics and good governance are conjoined twins.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, fighting corruption is the biggest challenge
facing South Africa and the African continent. Corruption is destroying the
very fibre of our society. The ACDP fully supports the fight against
corruption and we give support to any organisation in its fight to save our
nation from being robbed of its destiny.

We welcome every effort to combat this cancer in society, in business and
in governments. Civil society needs to be mobilised much more strongly.
Television, radio and the print media should become the media to educate
people against crime and corruption. Awareness is of the outmost
importance.

The ACDP especially supports the recommendations to empower the South
African courts and oversight bodies to increase their capacities to combat
crime by way of the swift judgment of offenders.

We also support the adoption of the plan of action as proposed by the
African Forum on Fighting Corruption on 2 March 2007. Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Speaker, ons kan hoeveel planne op die tafel sit,
ons kan in soveel woorde sê dat ons teen korrupsie is – natuurlik is almal
teen korrupsie, die Vryheidsfront Plus is ook teen korrupsie, maar solank
as wat ons nie ons woorde in dade omskep nie, vorder ons nie ’n enkele
millimeter nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Hoekom moet ons in die media lees van fluitjieblasers wat hulle werk
verloor omdat hulle korrupsie ontbloot het? Hoekom gebeur dit dat
byvoorbeeld ’n munisipale bestuurder van Klerksdorp korrupsie gepleeg het
maar hy word net deur die ANC-beheerde stadsraad by ‘n ander stadsraad
aangestel?

Agb Minister, tree op. Ek het ’n vraag in hierdie Parlement vyf jaar gelede
gevra oor ’n persoon wat oumense se geld gevat het en korrupsie gepleeg
het. Hoekom word daar nie teen hom opgetree nie? Want hy sê net: Ek het ’n
lidmaatskapkaart van die ANC. Hou op om te praat, agb Minister. Laat ons
ophou om planne te maak. Kom ons voer dit deur, dan kan ons vorder en
korrupsie bestry. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Speaker, we can lay however many plans on the
table, we can in so many words say that we are against corruption – of
course, everyone is against corruption – the FF Plus is also against
corruption, but as long as we don’t transform our words into deeds, we will
not advance a single millimetre. [Interjections.]

Why must we read in the media of whistle-blowers who lost their jobs
because they exposed corruption? Why is it that, for example, a municipal
manager of Klerksdorp committed corruption, but he is then just appointed
to another city council by the ANC-led city council?

Hon Minister, you have to act. Five years ago I asked a question in this
Parliament about a person who stole money from the elderly and committed
corruption. Why has no action been taken against him?  Because he merely
says: I have an ANC membership card. Stop paying lip-service, hon Minister.
Let us stop making plans. Let us rather follow it through, then we can
progress and combat corruption. [Interjections.]]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Speaker, the PAC is in support of the Ekurhuleni
Declaration of 2 March 2007, aimed at fighting corruption, made by the
African governments, intergovernmental organisations and civil society
organisations.

Corruption by its nature is like a cancer. If not prevented it may
ultimately result in the destruction of mankind. Corruption manifests
itself in many forms: nepotism, land dispossession, tenders and other
government favours for friends and associates.

Corruption hampers development and destroys the economy of countries. In
Kant’s categorical imperative studies we learn to "act as if the maxim of
thy action were to become by thy will a universal law of nature". It
teaches us to be immune from corruption, and that is what all government
and nations should master to create corruption-free societies.

The Ekurhuleni Declaration supplements other declarations of its nature
made by the African Union in preventing and combating corruption and the
united convention against corruption is most welcome as an endeavour in
fighting and preventing corruption wherever it emerges at all times. I
thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the MF strongly agrees that corruption is a
serious problem if not epidemic, eating away at society and robbing our
people of a better life. We stand committed to poverty alleviation,
socioeconomic development and succeeding in attaining the millennium goals.
However, corruption seriously hinders our progress and retards these
commitments.

The MF agrees that corruption needs to be stopped by apprehending the
offender, but crucial to the fight against corruption is educating the
nation on corrupt activities and the hazardous impact they have on our
country.

As Parliament, we have a duty incumbent upon us to stamp out corruption. A
system of integrity is supported in managing checks and balances of the
process. The law needs to enforce severe punishment of corruption
perpetrators to deter them from committing this offence.

We need to take this anticorruption campaign to our constituencies so that
we may intensify the fight against corruption. The MF supports the
Ekurhuleni declaration and denounces corruption. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN:  Madam Speaker, the FD welcomes the Minister’s statement on
corruption. We believe that any attempt to combat corruption must be
lauded. But we also believe that without the political will to rule
democratically and justly, the strong and powerful who bribe and exploit
will always win the battle of influence over the politically corrupt. South
Africa’s people deserve much better. Steve Biko said: “The most potent
weapon in the hands of the oppressor is the mind of the oppressed.”

If we apply his thinking on the issue of corruption we can equally state
that the most potent weapon in the hands of the perpetrators of corruption
is when a weak political will nullifies the good laws of a country. The FD
welcomes the statement and we believe that corruption is a human rights
violation and must be opposed by everyone, and we have practical methods of
opposing corruption. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M R BALOYI:  Madam Speaker, the Ekurhuleni Declaration includes a
detailed programme of action to give priority attention in the fight
against corruption. We have no reason to doubt that Africa will rise
to the challenge to see to the implementation of all recommendations
contained in the declaration.

The forum was an encouraging step ahead for Africa. More so as it provided
an opportunity for stakeholders to do an assessment of themselves and
reflect on the prevalence, the manifestations and the impact of corruption
on the continent and in the world, as well as how such problems may be
tackled.

The declaration raises a concern among other things about negative
perceptions of corruption in African states and of the ability of such
states to control it. In analysing this observation by the forum, it
becomes clear that whereas we may be tempted to say this of those who are
portrayed as bad examples of clean governance, the forum noted - and that
may be what reality is - that we may not say that all that glitters is
gold, as half of their stories may not have been told.

Similarly, the analysis will also caution all of us not to be hypocritical
as we speak of those than whom we may choose to portray ourselves as being
cleaner, because in the same vein we may only be fooling ourselves.

The truth is that the negative perceptions suggest a negative rating by the
nations of the world and they have to be managed as they define a nation’s
competitive stance with the rest of the world. As Parliament and
stakeholders, we have a major role to play and the declaration assesses the
importance of strengthening the integrity and independence of oversight
bodies such as this institution.

Accordingly, we ourselves have to engage in introspection in the face of
the challenges that are confronting us in the fight against the scourge of
corruption. Having developed legislation and policies and set up structures
to deal with corruption, it is perhaps time we assessed the impact thereof
in the fight against corruption.

Having adopted and ratified conventions and treaties to deal with
corruption at the global level, we need to make sure that we do oversight
work on the implementation of such international instruments, as that is
what defines their worth.

The Ekurhuleni Declaration, the fifth Global Forum conference will come and
pass, leaving footprints in the declaration that will also guide us as to
how we see nations of the world developing a common understanding on
corruption.

Let us learn from that conference. In fighting corruption we say: Each one
alerts one.

Ti tlhomana mincila. Ku hlula eka nyimpi ya vungungundzwana I ku fikelela
xiyimo xa le henhla xa leswaku munhu i munhu hi van’wana vanhu. Hi ta
fanela ku tidyondzisa ku chava ku tsongola swa van’wana leswaku Afrika
Dzonga ya hina, Afrika ya hina na misava hinkwayo ya hina swi ta hluvuka
swi ndlandlamuka ni ku humelela eka swikongomelo swa swona.

Hi ri ANC hi tixaxameta na ku hlambanya ko hlula vungungundzwana lebyi nga
endliwa Ekurhuleni. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Each one alerts one. We will overcome the war against corruption if we
adopt a higher position that no man is an island.   We will have to teach
ourselves to refrain from any form of wrongdoing so that South Africa,
Africa and the entire world may develop and realise their objectives.

As the ANC, we align ourselves with the declaration made in Ekurhuleni
against corruption.]

As we say that, Minister, we want to quote what you said at the forum:

   Corruption hurts the many and benefits the few. It inhibits the ability
   of government to respond to citizens’ needs and to utilise scarce
   resources in the most efficient and effective manner. It takes away
   resources from priority areas such as health, social development and
   education. It also hampers the continent’s efforts to instil sound
   political, socioeconomic and corporate governance.

I hope that Mr Julies was listening, as it would seem that he is still bent
on understanding what he understood as corruption. He is not keeping pace
with developments with regard to how we approach and deal with corruption.

As the ANC we say halala, Ekurhuleni Declaration, halala! [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, we move the
motion as it stands on the Order Paper.
   That the House –

   (1)      recognises  that  the  fight  against  corruption  is  one  that
        involves all sectors of society;


   (2)      recognises that it is only through an  integrated,  co-ordinated
        response from these sectors as  well  as  across  our  region,  the
        continent and globe that progress will be achieved in this battle;


   (3)      believes that elected representatives have a central  leadership
        role to play in fighting this scourge that undermines  development,
        weakens  democracy  and  takes  its  greatest  toll  on  the   most
        vulnerable of society;


   (4)      endorses the Ekurhuleni Declaration on Fighting Corruption which
        was adopted on 2 March by the Africa Forum Against Corruption  with
        the participation of Members of this House; and


   (5)       commits  itself  to  supporting  the  implementation   of   the
        recommendations of the Declaration  and  the  Programme  of  Action
        attached to the Declaration.


Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: That concludes the business for the day. I would like to
remind members that Extended Public Committees will commence in five
minutes in the Old Assembly Chamber and Committee Room E249.

The House adjourned at 15:20.


