---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 February 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-02-15
---

THURSDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2007
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                            NO NOTICES OF MOTION


The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! By agreement, I will not call for notices
of motion and motions without notice today.




              DEBATE ON PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS


                             (President’s Reply)

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, hon
Deputy President, hon members, fellow South Africans and members of the ANC
Women’s League, ... [Applause.] ... ambassadors and high commissioners, I
would like to thank all the hon members who participated in the debate on
the state of the nation address. Once again, I would like to assure the hon
members that the Presidency will indeed examine the proposals and requests
conveyed by the hon members and respond to them.

In this regard, I would like to thank the hon Bantu Holomisa for his letter
to the President dated 12 December 2006. When I responded to ``Questions to
the President’’ on 15 November last year, the hon Holomisa made a
suggestion concerning the SA Police Service. I then asked the hon member to
elaborate further on the idea he had expressed and convey it to me.

He did this in the letter of 12 December to which I have just referred.
Both the hon Minister of Safety and Security and I have considered the
contents of the letter carefully and will respond to the hon member. Once
again, I would like to thank the hon member for respecting my request and
apologise for the delay in responding to him.

As I listened to the 51 speakers who participated in the debate, often the
poem by W B Yeats ``The Rose Tree’’ flashed through my mind. Here is what
it says in the first stanza:

   ‘O words are lightly spoken,’
   Said Pearse to Connolly,
   ‘Maybe a breath of politic words
   Has withered our Rose Tree;
   Or maybe but a wind that blows
   Across the bitter sea.’

These words came to mind, because in quite a few instances I did indeed
think that words had been lightly spoken, and truly politic words, but
which in their toxicity could, like the wind that blows across these parts
of our country and across the bitter sea to our south, indeed wither our
rose tree.

Necessarily, therefore, I could not but hear the words that were not
lightly spoken, when the hon Pieter Mulder said:

  We do not know each other and do not debate with each other. Two-minute
  speeches from this podium are not debates.


  Ons ken mekaar nie, en debatteer nie met mekaar nie. ‘n Twee-minuut
  toespraak van hierdie podium af is nie ‘n debat nie.
  [We don’t know each other, nor engage in debate with each other. A speech
  of two minutes from this podium is not a debate.] [Applause.]

Similarly, I also heard the words that were not lightly spoken when the hon
Tony Leon said:

  As a nation we should spend more time listening to each other, and not be
  too quick to judge as illegitimate the concerns and expressions of any
  group.

I could not but hear the words that were not lightly spoken, when the hon
Minister for the Public Service and Administration said:


  We must guard against the habit that is setting in, this habit of
  painting with very broad strokes, generalising to large groups and entire
  institutions.

Neither could I miss the words that were not lightly spoken, when the hon
Minister of Education said that for us to be national agents for social
change -


  We have to throw off the cloak of self-imposed superiority that seeks to
  pretend that some of us know it all. We also have to throw off the cloak
  of imposed inferiority that causes some of us to define ourselves as
  unequal to deep challenges.

But have listened as carefully as I could, both to the words that were
lightly spoken and those that were not, I am still uncertain as to whether
we have developed sufficient national cohesion enabling all of us to speak
in a common vocabulary that we share, whatever language we use.

The hon Minister of Education recalled what we said in the state of the
nation address:


  We must, today, renew our pledge, to speak together of freedom, to act in
  partnership to realise the happiness for all that should come with
  liberty, to work together to build a South Africa defined by a common
  dream, to say, together, in action - enough of everything that made our
  country to contain within it and represent much that is ugly and
  repulsive in human society!

The hon Mangosuthu Buthelezi said:


  We must respond to the President with a cross-party approach which
  creates a new spirit of national unity in dealing with these challenges.

He said:

  I appeal to both sides of the aisle to consider the need to join hands to
  provide our contribution in our respective roles by placing the interest
  of the country above that of our own parties or politics in general.


The hon Craig Morkel said:


  What we need is to see eye to eye and establish common ground on the
  basis of our common patriotism.


And yet, presumably because, like me, he had heard the words that were
lightly spoken, the toxic politic words, when the hon Bantu Holomisa said:


  The President’s appeal for unity and Madam Speaker’s theme for the year
  of deepening the debate indicate that we as South Africans have not yet
  found each other on a number of issues.

As I considered these words that were not lightly spoken, I wondered
whether the hon Holomisa did not here speak to the symptomatic
manifestation of another and deeper problem, the problem identified by the
hon Pieter Mulder when he said, ``We do not know each other.’’

If we do not know one another, we cannot develop the common vocabulary to
which I have referred. Without that common vocabulary, we will find it very
difficult to find one another on the matters on which we disagree. We will
therefore find it difficult to enter into the national partnership that we
have insisted we need in order to engage in a determined drive to eradicate
everything in the common matrimony that still represents that which is ugly
and repulsive in human society.

Inevitably, we would have to ask ourselves the question: How many of us
heard the hon Minister of Education when she said that having entered into
-

  ... a social compact that involves us in leading a process of social
  transformation ... we need to ask [ourselves] what more can we do, what
  can we contribute?

Ten years ago, in June 1997, three years into our democracy, I spoke from
this same podium and posed questions about whether we could in fact speak
of a national consensus or of matters we had defined together as
constituting the national interest.

Because of its continuing relevance, I will take the liberty to quote
today, in 2007, what I said in 1997, concerned then as I am concerned now,
having heard the words that were lightly spoken, about whether that most
distinctive feature that makes for our superiority relative to the rest of
the animal world, our minds, has changed sufficiently for us to be able to
act in unity to confront what should be shared challenges.

On 10 June 1997, standing at this same spot, I said:


  In 1986, Prof Frederick van Zyl Slabbert had resigned his leadership of
  the Progressive Federal Party, as well as his seat in the tricameral
  parliament, arguing that to stay on in that institution would merely
  serve to lend it legitimacy.


  Recognising the historic importance of this decisive break with the
  apartheid system by an Afrikaner, the leadership of the ANC made bold to
  salute Professor Slabbert as a “new Voortrekker”.

  These events are now ten years behind us. Sadly, for many of us, they and
  other landmarks we passed on our road to the new, are but elements of a
  dim recollection of a past that is dwarfed by the giant heritage of
  today’s democratic society, towards whose birth the “new Voortrekkers”
  made their own and not insignificant contribution.

  We say “sadly” because to forget them is to put outside our conscious
  activity, to omit from our daily agendas, the task of confronting the
  challenge which remains with us, namely to continue interacting as South
  Africans, so that we evolve a national consensus about the things which
  will constitute the most fundamental features of the new South Africa,
  and thus define the path which we, as a people, must travel together as
  the new Voortrekkers.

  It is important that we resist the temptation to abandon this path and
  retreat into a laager, as some recent developments seem to suggest.
  Presumably the question must arise as to whether there can be such a
  thing as a national consensus on anything, except in the most vacuous
  sense. Is it possible to have a national agenda - to say in a practical
  way that these matters make up the national interest to which all can
  adhere, regardless of partisan interests?


  Or are the very concepts of national interest and national consensus
  nothing more than the dream of fools, an illusion best left to the idle,
  who have nothing to do but to build sand castles?


  After all, whereas we proclaim ourselves a nation daily, are we a nation
  that can share in a national interest, or are we merely a collection of
  communities that happen to inhabit one geopolitical space?


  We are emerging, but only emerging slowly and painfully, out of a deeply
  fractured society. This is a society which continues to be characterised
  by deep fissures, which separate the black people from the whites, the
  hungry from the prosperous, the urban from the rural, the male from the
  female, and the disabled from the rest.


  Running like a structural fault through it all, and weaving it together
  into a frightening bundle of imbalance and inequality, is the question of
  race and colour; the fundamental consideration on which South African
  society was built for 300 years.
  Is it therefore not an idle thing to imagine that out of this amalgam of
  inequity, where some have everything and others have nothing, where some
  instinctively behave as superiors and others know it as a matter of fact
  that they are seen as inferior, where some must experience change, or
  otherwise perish, and others fear they will perish as a result of change,
  there can emerge a national consensus?

  But may it not be that the question to pose is whether, for it to survive
  and develop, a society so deeply fractured within itself does not need to
  make a conscious, determined, sustained effort to build a national
  consensus about those matters which will ensure that indeed, and in
  reality, a nation is born?


  The birth of that nation demands that we fundamentally transform our
  society. The new nation cannot come into being on the basis of the
  perpetuation of the extraordinary imbalances we have inherited from the
  past. It cannot be founded on the entrenchment of the apartheid legacy.


  I am certain that all the hon members of this House will agree with these
  sentiments, regardless of party affiliation. After all, we all subscribe
  to the noble sentiments contained in our Constitution, which commits the
  country to promote and protect human dignity, to achieve equality and
  advance human rights and freedoms, to promote nonracialism and nonsexism.

  I believe that we all supported these constitutional provisions and
  continue to do so now, because we understood that the absence of a
  settlement containing these objectives would not end the conflict in our
  country, but would condemn it to a destructive civil war.


  By this means, we recognised the fact that there can be such a thing as a
  national consensus around a national agenda. We accept that the
  advancement of the very interests of each, regardless of their race,
  their colour, their gender or social class, demanded that we bend every
  effort to ensure that the kind of society described in the Constitution
  is born.


  Together, we adopted a position which recognises that no legitimate
  sectional interest can be served or aspiration realised unless it was
  pursued within a society characterised by equality, nonracialism,
  nonsexism and human dignity.

  We are convinced that precisely because we were and are engaged in a
  complex and all embracing process of fundamental social transformation,
  proceeding as we are from our past of division, of conflict and mutual
  antagonism, it was and is important that we develop a national consensus
  about those matters, such as those reflected in our Constitution, which
  will define the fundamental and permanent nature of our society.

On all occasions when we meet, as we have since last Friday, we speak of
change - some about our success in changing our society for the better, and
others about how we have failed to effect any significant change, each
speaking from his or her opposing trench, such that, in the end, we appear
to be speaking about different countries, one of which might be called
South Africa, and the other, to give it a name, whatever its meaning, might
be called Azania. [Laughter.]

When we talk about change, we speak, as we must do, about the number of
jobs created, about the number of houses built, about the provision of
water, sanitation and electricity, and about rates of economic growth.

But we rarely speak about the change or the absence of change in our minds.
Each time anybody dares to venture into this area, in many instances to
decode a vocabulary that has learned to disguise old insults by presenting
itself as the vehicle for the dispassionate presentation of objective
reality, a deluge of condemnation descends on the daring soul,
communicating the message to all who would dare that these should forever
be mindful of the advice - only fools rush in where angels fear to tread!

If I may, I would like to suggest that the fact that it was necessary today
to repeat verbatim what was said 10 years ago makes an immensely sad
statement about us all. It must surely be a matter of profound distress
that almost at the end of the 13th year of our emancipation, questions must
still be asked as to whether we are, as a nation, capable of uniting to
pursue a commonly defined national agenda, as to whether it is to expect
too much to believe that, as individual members of our society, we are
capable of honestly asking ourselves the questions - what more can we do,
and what can we contribute?

After the hon Minister of Arts and Culture had spoken, saying that “Thomas
Paine once wrote that we esteem too lightly that which we gain rather
cheaply”, I wondered whether toxic words had not been lightly spoken in
this House, because there are some among us whose hearts had absolutely no
possibility to be moved when the hon Minister spoke of “the tears, the
blood and the very lives of the martyrs ...”

The hon Diale commanded us to remember what Oliver Tambo had said 40 years
ago when he paid tribute to the South African and Zimbabwean heroes who
fell in Hwange to secure our liberty, that “those illustrious combatants
... fell on the fields of Zimbabwe with the warrior cry on their lips -
victory or death!’’

If I may say this, it alarmed me greatly that one of us, supposedly a
people’s tribune, a tribune of the South African people among whom I’m
privileged to belong, the hon Rev K R J Meshoe, could say from this same
podium:

   We must warn the President that if violent crime is not drastically
   reduced or even eradicated in this country, then the privilege of hosting
   the prestigious 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup might slip through our
   fingers, despite the many assurances we have received from Mr Sepp
   Blatter, who is a friend, admirer and supporter of South Africa.

President Sepp Blatter is indeed a friend, an admirer and a supporter of
South Africa, and a principled fighter for the restoration of the dignity
of the African people universally. Regarding the incidents of violent crime
in our country and its relevance to the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup,
President Sepp Blatter would say that he knows that the people of South
Africa would host the world of football in conditions of safety.
[Applause.] He would say that having considered the report of its technical
committee which assessed the various bids to host the 2010 Tournament, and
which drew attention to the challenge of safety and security in our
country, the Executive Committee of Fifa decided, deliberately and
consciously, that our country should host the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup.
[Applause.]

He would say that he has told others in the world, who have been greatly
encouraged by remarks emanating from our country, such as those made by the
hon Rev K R J Meshoe two days ago, a tribune of our people, that the
decision has been made - the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup will not slip
through the fingers of the people of South Africa. [Applause.] It will take
place in South Africa. [Applause.] It will be a resounding success.
[Applause.]

The hon Rev K R J Meshoe ... [Interjections.] ... was very correct when he
described President Sepp Blatter as a friend, an admirer and supporter of
South Africa. In this context, I must repeat that we have been reluctant to
ask ourselves a critically important question about what has happened to
the South African mind during these 13 years of freedom. This is perhaps
because we know that an honest answer to this question might shatter the
beautiful image of a rainbow nation, which I have no doubt we must continue
to propagate.

But having avoided what we should have done, and should still do, it will
be difficult to answer the question that if President SEPP Blatter is a
friend, an admirer and supporter of South Africa, as the hon Rev K R J
Meshoe said, what then is the tribune of the people of South Africa who
sits in this House of representatives, the hon Rev K R J Meshoe!
[Applause.]

When President Sepp Blatter stood at the Fifa podium in Zurich,
Switzerland, and slowly pulled out the card that read “South Africa,”
[Interjections.] the people of our country of all races, our continent, the
African Diaspora, friends of Africa throughout the world, as far as New
Zealand, took to the streets in a spontaneous display of joy.

For measly partisan reasons, the hon Rev K R J Meshoe now believes, quite
wrongly, that he can convince Fifa and the football world that these
millions in our country, in Africa, the African Diaspora and the rest of
the world did not mean it when they confirmed, through their celebrations,
that they are determined to ensure that the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup will
be the best ever. [Applause.]

I believe that whatever our problems, our nation shares the common resolve
to make the 2010 Soccer World Cup the best ever. I believe that this common
resolve communicates the unequivocal message that regardless of our
fractured past, and despite the reality of the stubborn persistence of the
legacy of that past, we are indeed capable of arriving at a national
consensus about how to respond to our most important challenges, about what
we need to do to identify and act in unity to advance that which we will
have agreed constitutes the national interest.

Perhaps we should take a deliberate decision together to institute a
national process that will help us to identify the issues that we would
determine as the matters on which we should act in partnership, inspired by
a common patriotism that would enable us to build the cross-party
partnership that would be united by a voluntary national consensus.

Consistent with this reflection, the hon Bantu Holomisa said: Perhaps it
might not be a bad idea to form a steering committee composed of all South
African stakeholders to begin to identify areas where we need to deepen the
debate as a nation. Such a process should culminate in a National
Convention where resolutions would be taken. This is the type of action
that I believe is required; we cannot simply talk of unity and deeper
debates if it doesn’t result in something concrete.

Parliament will, in its wisdom, decide what to do with this suggestion. If
Parliament, which represents the will of the people, constituted such a
steering committee from within its ranks, and it asked me to suggest three
domestic topics that might be addressed, I would suggest that these should
be: social transformation, including the important issues of national and
social cohesion and a national value system; the eradication of poverty;
and the reduction and eradication of crime, especially crimes against the
person.

I would add this note of caution, that the participants in the process that
the hon Bantu Holomisa proposed should not set themselves short timeframes.
I would say that they would have to learn to be patient. I would say that
they should respect what the hon Peter Mulder namely said, namely that we
do not know one another. I would advise that there would be no difficulty
whatsoever in getting everybody to agree that there must be social
transformation; that poverty must be eradicated; and that crime must be
defeated, totally and permanently.

Similarly, I would advise that the steering committee should expect that
the seeming unanimity about these outcomes would, certainly in the first
instance and whatever else would happen later, dissolve into a fractious
wrangle, even about the definition of the issues about which there was
apparent unanimity, to say nothing about what would have to be done
practically to respond to these challenges.

I would also advise the steering committee to pay the closest attention to
what the people say, regardless of what many of us in this House think
about our country and government, and indeed about ourselves as a people’s
oracle. I say this to recall what various hon members, who actually work
among the people, said about what the people say about where they have
been, where they are and where they know they will be.

I refer here to testimonies given by hon members such as the hon Elizabeth
Thabethe, J B Sibanyoni, Sindi Chikunga, Maggie Sotyu, Richard Baloyi,
Spetho Asiya and Nomhle Dambuza. These and other testimonies brought the
voice of the ordinary people into this House - the masses who know what
pain and suffering mean; who know what subjection to merciless and brutal
physical and psychological, economic and cultural violence means; who know
what sacrifice mean; who know what a word of honour and a solemn commitment
means; who understand what the hon Pandelani Nefolovhodwe meant when he
spoke of “factors that the poor are subjected to, which contribute to the
dehumanisation of people and lead to feelings of inferiority and
hopelessness”; who agree with hon Themba Godi “that the freedom we have
attained should address itself to these two: poverty and inequality that
afflict the majority”; who will have known that the hon Obed Bapela told
them of the future of which they are certain when he used the idiom: “Mma o
tlile; tlala o nyele.” [“Now that mama is home we will no longer starve.”]
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

These words convey the feeling of happiness that all of us must surely feel
at the success of the Proteas against Pakistan. It bodes very well indeed
that we won both the test and the ODI series ... [Applause.] ... and
triumphed in such a spectacular fashion in the 20/20 match. We wish the
Proteas success in the Cricket World Cup in the Caribbean ... [Applause.]
... confident that they have now fully mastered the mathematics of the
Duckworth-Lewis method. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

We also welcome to our country the new coach of Bafana Bafana, Carlos
Alberto Parreira, and wish him success in his important work. [Applause.]
We are glad that he is now, legally ... [Laughter.] ... a member of our
national cadre of professional workers. [Applause.]

Our hearts are full of joyful song as we join the Soweto Gospel Choir ...
[Applause.] ... in celebration of the Grammy Award they have just won,
which confirms a distinguishing feature of our nation, that we are indeed a
people that carries in its blood a joyful culture of hope. [Interjections.]

Later this year, we will celebrate the 10th anniversary of the formation of
the National Council of Provinces. This will give us an opportunity to
assess how well the institutions of our democracy are functioning.

In the meantime, I would like to take this opportunity to salute the
National Assembly, and all of you, hon members, for your devotion to the
task to serve the masses of the people who elected all of us. I am aware of
the frustrations about the executive that you have sometimes felt. I’d like
to assure you that our Deputy President, as Leader of Government Business,
is working hard to address your concerns in this regard.

Equally, I am aware of the legitimate sentiment shared within the judiciary
that you must pay closer attention to the quality of the drafts of the
legislation, which only you can approve. I accept that if there are any
weaknesses in this regard, the executive must also bear its own share of
responsibility.

I know that on occasion we have made honest mistakes, both as an
institution and as members. I know too that some have sought to exploit
these failings to communicate a message about the hon members that is
patently unjust. As I have interacted with the people, I have not heard any
conclusion made that the people view this House as being little more than a
den of thieves.

Nevertheless, I am certain that all of you are as aware as anybody else in
our country that you must do everything possible, and necessary, to
maintain the integrity and dignity of this premier expression of the will
of the people. [Applause.]

I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the hon Tony Leon for taking the
trouble to inform me about his impending retirement as leader of the DA ...
[Laughter.] ... before he made this public. I am certain that all of us
will miss his lively engagement as a party leader in the public debate that
must and will continue, whatever our views about the rights and wrongs of
the arguments he advanced, and the manner in which he advanced those
arguments. [Applause.]

From where I sit, I would never have the courage to argue that he served
merely as a Chihuahua ... [Laughter.] [Applause.] ... because, indeed, he
has the bark of a bull terrier! [Laughter.] I wish the DA success as it
engages the process to elect a successor, whom I am certain will be no less
a defender of the mandate of the DA and its supporters than the hon Tony
Leon. I am certain that whatever else he does, having voluntarily
surrendered the leadership of the DA, he will succeed. [Applause.] Should
he need a helping hand, which I doubt ... [Laughter.] ... we are
nevertheless ready to lend that hand. [Applause.] Tony, best wishes!
[Applause.]

As I approach the conclusion of my response to the lively and important
debate on the state of the nation address, let me return to the issue of
crime, which a significant number of hon members discussed.

The hon Molefi Sefularo said that the hon Rev K R J Meshoe -

  ... chose to take upon himself the task of amplifying the voices that
  insist that the President, the government and the ANC do not care about
  the tragedy and the pain of those who fall victim to crime. Like the
  Pharisees, he wants the President to wear the sack cloth and flagellate
  himself.

I too have heard reports of the voices to which hon Sefularo has referred.
This I must say, for 64 years I have never had either the ability or the
courage or the need to resort to grand theatrical gestures. I know this as
a matter of fact, that the overwhelming majority of the masses of our
people would be gravely offended if tomorrow, to respond to the demand of
the Pharisees, I should take to the stage to weep tears meant for the
camera to convince them of what they know, that the ANC, of which I am a
proud member, now, for the first time in 95 years, has at last understood
their pain and is at one with them in lamenting their individual tragedies.
There will be no empty theatrical gestures, no prancing on the stage and no
flagellation, but we will continue to act against crime as decisively as we
have sought to do throughout the years of our liberation. From us, from the
government, we’ll issue no words that are lightly spoken.

For the fiscal year 1994-95, the police budget was R7,7 billion. Five years
later, for the fiscal year 1999-2000, the police budget had doubled to
R14,6 billion. Five years after this, for the fiscal year 2004-05, the
police budget had increased to R25,4 billion. Two years later, for the
fiscal year 2006-07, the police budget had increased yet again to R32,5
billion - an increase of R7 billion in a mere two years, equal, in nominal
terms, to the entire budget for 1994-95. The Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework visualises that the police budget for 2009-10 will be R43,6
billion, more than 600% of what it was when we achieved our freedom.

The number of members of the Police Service increased from the low figure
of 116 774 in the year 2001-02, which reflected the adjustment that had
taken place during the difficult phase of creating the new SA Police
Service, to 139 000 two years later in the year 2003-04.

Two years later, in 2005-06, the number increased to 155 500. In terms of
our MTEF planning, three years after this - as I indicated broadly last
Friday - for the year 2008-09, the number will be 183 000. What this means
is that in seven years we have increased the size of the Police Service by
at least 67 000 officers, significantly more than 50% of its size in 2001-
02.

These figures tell a simple story about the resources that our government
has, through the years of freedom, allocated to the struggle for the safety
and security of all our people, precisely because the achievement of this
objective has always been one of the principal and therefore priority
strategic objectives of the democratic revolution. About this, we will not
apologise to anybody. [Applause.]

During the course of the debate, the hon Minister of Safety and Security
reminded the House, and the nation, of an analysis published in the 2005-
2006 SAPS annual report, which reflected on the crimes of murder, attempted
murder, rape, serious and violent assault and common assault, precisely the
crimes that produce the greatest levels of insecurity among our people.

The hon Minister reported that -

  What the exercise revealed was that 81,5% of the murder victims were
  killed by persons they knew. The killers in 61,9% of the cases were
  relatives, friends or acquaintances of the victims. In 75,9% of rape
  cases, the victims knew the rapists, while in 56,9% the rapists were
  relatives, friends or acquaintances of the victims. Cases of assault
  showed higher percentages of perpetrators known to the victims, including
  relatives, friends or acquaintances.

These figures tell the very obvious story that by far the bulk of violence
against the person in our society occurs in specific social circumstances,
within communities that are poor, marginalised and afflicted by an almost
irreversible sense of hopelessness. With regard to murder and rape, 20% of
these would then occur throughout society as a whole, outside the
relatively narrow circle of relatives, friends, acquaintances or people
known to the victims.

With regard to all this, the hon Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi made the entirely
correct observation that –

Today the largest number of victims of crime are among the poor, including
the older people attacked in townships by youngsters who pillage their
wages at the end of a hard week’s work, or the small emerging businesses
trading in the rural and growing urban areas alike.

Furthermore, the hon Dr Buthelezi made a call, to which all of us must
surely respond, that -
   At a deeper level, we need to go back to basics and inculcate a respect
   agenda among our youth. A transforming society, such as ours, need not be
   an uncivilised society.


[Applause.]

   The seeds of crime and lawlessness are often sown at a young age. We must
   bring back a sense of respect in our schools, communities, townships and
   cities.

To this I would add that we must welcome and respond with great vigour to
what the hon Minister of Social Development said, namely that -

   strengthening families is fundamental in the quest for social cohesion
   and building the social fabric of our society.” He said, “We intend to
   release for public discussion later this year, a national family policy.”
   And he said, “We hope it will stimulate dialogue on our common vision of
   the family as a core institution in our country, and the rock upon which
   our communities are founded.

In the state of the nation address I said that we would “improve our
analysis of crime trends to improve our performance with regard both to
crime prevention and crime combating. In this regard, we must respond to
the cold reality that, as in other countries, the overwhelming majority of
violent crimes against the person occur in the most socioeconomically
deprived areas of our country and require strong and sustained community
interventions focused on crime prevention.”

I stand by these conclusions, and reaffirm that the government will do
everything possible to act on what we have promised. I am indeed very
pleased that when it celebrated its 95th anniversary, the ANC committed
itself, once more, to mobilising the masses of our people to join the
partnership against crime, in the same way that they acted in unity to
defeat the apartheid crime against humanity. [Applause.]

In the end, what we are about is a revolutionary act of the creation of a
new society. None of us has any prior experience of this process. Those of
us who have no choice, or have chosen to be agents of change, will indeed
at all times ask ourselves: What more can we do; what can we contribute?

We know that those who contributed nothing, or very little, to the struggle
to end the very long years of oppression, those who were too scared to face
the consequences of being new Voortrekkers, or have become, as the hon
Minister of Defence said, “eloquent spectators speaking from the
exaggerated comfort of European cities”, will stride down the sidewalk as
we march along the long and difficult highway to the better life to which
we are committed, forever mocking, forever throwing our inevitable
temporary failures in our faces, forever triumphant whenever we falter,
forever finding fault even with the way we walk, always predicting that
nothing but despair will be our reward whenever we come to the end of our
long journey to that new South Africa that will be free of everything that
is ugly and repulsive in human society.

These are the people, compatriots and residents of the common geopolitical
space and their kindred spirits elsewhere in the world, who will, as some
did in this House this week, utter words that are lightly spoken.

The poem, “The Rose Tree” continues:

  “It needs to be but watered,”
  James Connolly replied,
  “To make the green come out again
  And spread on every side,
  And shake the blossom from the bud
  To be the garden’s pride.”


  “But where can we draw water,”
  Said Pearse to Connolly,
  “When all the wells are parched away?
  O plain as plain can be
  There’s nothing but our own red blood
  Can make a right Rose Tree.”

Fortunately, there will be no need for us to give of our own red blood to
make a right rose tree. As long as we embed in our deepest consciousness
what the hon MaNjobe said, our water wells will not be parched away. She
said that –

  as South Africans, we must reclaim ubuntu, put emphasis on mutual
  understanding, appreciate differences, and tolerate diversity in the
  multicultural environment we live in. The ubuntu values we promote must
  sufficiently meet the challenges of reconciliation, reconstruction and
  development.

As the hon Lechesa Tsenoli said that so noble is the project to create a
new South Africa that it cannot but be a product of a lifetime of selfless
endeavour. He said that this reality compels and entitles us together to
say, “Siz’olibamba lingatshoni! [We will make sure that the sun shines on
all alike!]” Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:57.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


         (a)     Convention on International Interests in  Mobile  Equipment
              Bill [B 1 –  2007]  (National  Assembly  –  proposed  sec  75)
              [Explanatory  summary  of  Bill  and  prior  notice   of   its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No  29118  of  10
              August 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee  on  Transport
         of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint  Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the  classification  of
         the Bill may be submitted to the  JTM  within  three  parliamentary
         working days.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

    National Assembly


1.    Sixth Report of the Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts  on  the
    Government Communication and  Information  System,  dated  15  November
    2006:

    The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA), having considered  a
    request by the Government Communication and Information  System  (GCIS)
    relating to the Sixty-Ninth Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public
    Accounts:  Unauthorized  Expenditure:  Government  Communications   and
    Information System, dated 24 May 2006 and subsequently adopted  by  the
    National Assembly on 12 September 2006, reports as follows:

    1.      Background to Sixty-Ninth Report of SCOPA

        1.1      The SCOPA recommended  that  the  amount  of  R1  698  400
             million owed by Mr Kotane be written off from the books of  the
             GCIS.
        1.2      The recommendation further  states  that  the  High  Court
             Judgement against Mr Kotane should continue to apply until such
             time that the 30 year period lapses.
        1.3      The writing off  of  the  debt  should  also  be  done  in
             accordance with the National Treasury Regulation  11.4.1  which
             states that “The Accounting Officer can only  write  off  debts
             owed to the State if he or she is satisfied that all reasonable
             steps have been taken to recover  the  debt  and  the  debt  is
             irrecoverable”. It further states in  11.4.3  that  “all  debts
             written  off  should  be  disclosed  in  the  annual  financial
             statements, indicating the policy in terms of  which  the  debt
             was written off”.


    2.      Background to GCIS request


        2.1      The original debt amount of R1 698 400  million  increased
             in the books of the GCIS due to accumulated interest.
        2.2      The actual amount reflecting in the books of GCIS as at 27
             October 2006 is R3 578 703,31. The interest, being greater than
             the original debt, amounts to R1 880 303, 31.
        2.3      This amount excludes  other  debt  which  has  since  been
             accumulated due to the legal costs of the Department of Justice
             who were pursuing the recovery of this debt.  This  amount  has
             been recorded as a debt in the books  of  the  GCIS.  This  was
             meant to be recovered from Mr Kotane.
        2.4      The legal costs accumulated due  to  the  legal  processes
             undertaken by the Department of Justice  to  recover  the  debt
             amount of R110 038,67.
        2.5      The total debt as a result of the unauthorised expenditure
             then amounts to R3 688 741,98.
        2.6      The implication of effecting the decision of the  National
             Assembly as adopted  on  12  September  2006  would  imply  the
             writing off of the debt of R3 688 741,98. According to Treasury
             Regulations a debt can be written off against a  savings  of  a
             department. The GCIS is therefore required to have a saving  of
             R3 688 741,98 to be able to write off the debt.

    3.      Request by GCIS

        3.1       The  GCIS  in  consultation   with   National   Treasury,
             approached the SCOPA to waive the interest accrued.
        3.2      The GCIS further requested SCOPA to  grant  permission  to
             write off the capital debt over a two to three year period.
    4.      Committee decision


        4.1      After considering the request the Committee  approves  the
             waiving of the interest  accrued  on  the  books  of  the  GCIS
             relating to the principal debt and the legal costs incurred  by
             the Department of Justice.


        4.2      It furthermore agrees to the request by the GCIS to  write
             off the debt of Mr Kotane over  a  two  to  three  year  period
             provided  that  this  does  not   violate   National   Treasury
             regulations.


      Report to be considered.

