---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 22 May 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-05-22
---

TUESDAY, 22 MAY 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting of
the Council I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with distress the long arm of injustice, putting a man in
         jail for nine years before he is put on trial and then at a later
         stage he is acquitted;


      2) further notes that more prisoners are awaiting trial for a long
         period before they are put on trial;
      3) acknowledges that this is unacceptable and should be given
         immediate attention; and


      4) urges that the wheel of justice should be armed so that justice is
         dispensed equally.


                             SUPER 14 CUP FINAL


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   Dat die Raad –

   1) kennis neem dat –

            a) die finale wedstryd van die Super 14-eindstryd deur twee Suid-
               Afrikaanse spanne gespeel was op Saterdag 19 Mei 2007 in
               KwaZulu-Natal;


            b) die Bloubulle en die Haaie ’n redelike goeie wedstryd gehad
               het; en

            c) die beste span gewen het; en


   2) wens al die spellers en die bestuurders van beide spanne en die
      toeskouers geluk met hulle prestasie en dat hulle ons land se sport so
      goed verteenwoordig.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

   [That the Council –


   (1)      notes that -


            a) the Super 14 Cup Final was contested by two South African
               teams on Saturday, 19 May 2007 in KwaZulu-Natal;

         (b)      the Blue Bulls and the Sharks both played fairly well; and




         (c)      the best team won; and


      2) congratulates all the players and the managers of both teams and
         the spectators on their achievement and for having represented
         country’s sport so well.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on a lighter note, I didn’t
know that when a member is campaigning for a certain position in his party
... [Laughter.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Chief Whip, move your motion!

                   Mr O J TLHAGALE INVOLVED IN AN ACCIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes that -


         (a)      the hon Mr O J Tlhagale, a member of the UCDP, was
               involved in an accident on 9 April 2007 and remained in a
               coma until 4 May 2007; and


         (b)      he has since recovered and was discharged from the Garden
               City Clinic on 16 May 2007;


   (2)      takes this opportunity to wish the hon Tlhagale a speedy
         recovery; and


   (3)      trusts that he will be in a position to witness the white
         wedding of his party leader, the hon Lucas Mangope.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 30 – Public Enterprises:

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Voorsitter, ek moet aan die begin sê
dis baie moeilik vir my as ’n Haaie-man om te aanvaar dat die beste span
gewen het, maar ek aanvaar die uitslag. [Gelag.] [Chairperson, I have to
say at the outset that it is very hard for me as a Sharks man to accept
that the best team won, but I accept the result. [Laughter.]]

Chairperson, hon members of the National Council of Provinces, ladies and
gentlemen, it is indeed an honour to stand before you once more and table
Vote 30 of the Department of Public Enterprises. This past year was one
marked by much activity in state-owned enterprises, for which my department
is mandated to provide oversight and strategic direction.

The state-owned enterprises or SOEs carry out their activities in virtually
all provinces, and often play a key role in those provinces. Accordingly,
it is important for the provincial leadership to be familiar with their
activities. We are making copies of a new Department of Public Enterprises’
publication, which will be available to you today. This deals with a number
of the strategically important developments that will be undertaken by the
SOEs.

While it is not possible to provide all the details of SOE-activity in each
province, I hope that my address will provide some useful information. A
second publication concerning introducing the supply and development
programme, I believe, will also prove useful to the business community.

I will speak on each of the SOEs in detail later, but I would like to say,
at the outset, that we are very pleased that we were finally able to
conclude a settlement agreement with the Richtersveld community. This is a
landmark agreement, and allows for restoring ownership rights and the
payment of compensation to the community. We look forward to its speedy
conclusion and implementation, and I believe that a successful
implementation of this settlement will have a positive developmental impact
on the Northern Cape and the broader Namaqualand area in particular.

Although it is encouraging to note that the economy is now growing at above
4%, we recognise that we still have some way to go in fulfilling our
objective of facilitating economic growth of 6% and above, as well as
ensuring that more South Africans are employed and integrated into the
first economy.

The year ahead will indeed be a challenging one, as we continue in our
mandate to ensure that the SOEs are effective and contribute meaningfully
to accelerated and shared growth. The state-owned enterprises have a
strategic role to play in the economy and they are critical to the success
of any developmental state. We have decided to use state ownership in key
economic areas to ensure that we achieve strategic objectives in those
sectors. I shall say a little more about this when we look at the proposed
shareholder management legislation.

Key to the formation of any developmental state is clearly political will
and capacity, institutional strength and responsiveness, and the necessary
resources to give leadership to the national economy and provide for the
most vulnerable members of our society. After all, all our efforts would
have been in vain if we failed to create an economy that is growing but
fails to take care of the poorer and more destitute members of our society.

In order to mobilise resources in the national and international capital
markets, our state-owned enterprises must be financially sound and stable.
This requires that they have strong balance sheets, and that they are able
to partner with private capital. The SOEs need to maintain a balance
between maximising economic outcomes and ensuring their financial success.

The scale of the infrastructure programme and the need for the SOEs to be
orientated towards growth pose an additional set of challenges for the SOEs
to implement major investment programmes whilst maintaining their financial
strength and operational efficiency. The SOE activities also need to be
undertaken within a predictable, effective and transparent governance
system.

Let me now briefly discuss the achievements and challenges of each of the
SOEs. I will do so in alphabetical order, starting with Alexkor. The land
settlement agreement which we signed recently will make the Richtersveld
community owners of a viable company involved in land mining and, in
addition, with prospects of sea mining rights and an opportunity to expand
their activities at a later date.

This agreement allows us to convert a vulnerable community into a
prosperous one. The implementation of the land claims settlement will allow
the community to use Alexkor as a commercial vehicle for their own
development. It will also provide the basis for the rationalisation of the
Namaqualand diamond fields.

We have come a long way with the process, with almost 10 years of
consultations. The community leaders also proved to be tough negotiators
and quite capable of representing their interests. We hope that we will be
able to implement the settlement agreement, which we believe will be of
great benefit to that community.

Moving on to Broadband InfraCo, the high cost of broadcast availability is
constraining economic growth, depriving South Africa of the opportunity to
interact speedily and more effectively with the rest of the world. The
establishment of InfraCo as a stand-alone SOE is an important development
in our economy and we look forward to the opportunities that it will help
to unlock. Under the leadership of its CEO, Dave Smith, Broadband InfraCo
will ensure that South Africa develops broadband infrastructure.

As a result of the establishment of InfraCo, and the expected lower
bandwidth costs, we believe more businesses will exist which could not have
done so before. The InfraCo Bill has been gazetted and we will have public
hearings on that Bill soon. InfraCo will indeed provide a series of new
platforms for bandwidth expansion and affordability. This will be done with
partners such as the South African Square Kilometre Array and the South
African Research Network, two major science projects in our country.

Moving on to Denel: the recent announcement by Denel on the Hoefyster
project, which is worth approximately R8 billion, is Denel’s biggest
contract to date, and this suggests that the potential for the company to
turn itself around into a once again profitable entity is a real
possibility. Denel, which has thus far earned some R400 million in revenue
as a result of the disposal of some of its non-core assets, will finalise
the disposal of the remaining non-core properties in the 2007-08 financial
year.
The formation of equity partnerships with global original equipment
manufacturers or OEMs, such as the partnership between Denel Aerostructures
and SAAB, the Swedish company, which was finalised during the year, is a
key pillar of Denel strategy.

Fragmentation in the South African defence-related industry is undesirable,
and we would much rather see consolidation taking place, which we believe
will make the industry more sustainable. In this regard, the relevant
government departments will focus on interventions to help develop the
industry. This will ensure that Denel is better able to serve South
African, regional and international defence requirements.

The Defence Evaluation and Research Institute, Deri, will also be
established for the co-ordination of tests and evaluation facilities. A
catalyst for the transference of advanced manufacturing technologies and
know-how to the broader manufacturing sector will be the establishment of
manufacturing clusters by Denel. These are expected to be world-class
suppliers of subsystems and componentry, and will also, critically, allow
for the development of skills. We have no doubt that the management and
board of Denel will achieve the turnaround of the entity and we are looking
forward to the year ahead.

Regarding energy, Eskom and the pebble bed reactor, Eskom’s R150 billion
investment programme for the next five years will certainly improve the
security of supply, which is key to supporting a growing economy. We need
to secure long-term, environmentally sustainable electricity for the
country, and Eskom as well as the PBMR will be key in this regard.

The most viable alternative to the use of coal as a primary source of
energy is nuclear energy. With the planned larger nuclear usage by Eskom
and the progress on the Pebble bed Modular Reactor project, we look forward
to forming a new nuclear energy division within Eskom, that will have very
positive implications for the future of the nuclear engineering industry in
South Africa.

The construction of the pilot fuel plant at Pelindaba, for the pebble bed
reactor, and progress with approvals for the construction of the first
power plant in the Western Cape, are expected in the current year. These
are all with reference to the pebble bed technology.

Locally, the private sector interest in the pebble bed reactor has grown.
Recently, Sasol indicated that it is in talks with the pebble bed reactor
representatives regarding a number of the process heat applications. This
indicates, in our view, that the pebble bed is indeed a commercially viable
option. We will be working closely with the Department of Minerals and
Energy to fast-track the introduction of independent power producers in the
electricity system, which we believe will be a valuable addition to energy-
generation capacity in South Africa.

With regard to SAA and the new entrant to our portfolio, SA Express, the
high-quality, affordable and cost-effective air transport will allow South
Africa to link with its regional and international trade partners.
Therefore, this has a big role to play in economic growth.

It is with this in mind that we have chosen to retain ownership of SAA,
and, following legislative processes, SAA is now a stand-alone entity
reporting to the Department of Public Enterprises. We have started a wide-
ranging restructuring and recapitalisation process, aimed at turning the
company into a profitable airline.

The Department of Public Enterprises and the board are fully committed to
the programme, which is now in progress. SA Express will also be converted
into a stand-alone entity, that is we are taking it out of Transnet as
well, following legal processes similar to those we followed with SAA.

Now, SA Express’s expertise is in operating regional services in smaller
gauge aircraft up to 100 passengers, while SAA, as an African airline with
global reach, operates on more heavily used routes with larger aircraft.
The business and operations of SA Express thus differ fundamentally from
SAA’s core business.

Due to the type of equipment it operates, SA Express is also an ideal
vehicle to help develop African air routes on a more economical basis. SA
Express has had a remarkable turnaround into sustainable profitability
after its mission was clearly defined and we look forward to a positive
year for the company.

With regard to forestry and Safcol, Cabinet approved the disposal of the
last remaining package of Safcol, which is the Komatiland Forests. This was
a carefully considered decision, based on the significance of Safcol in the
forestry industry. Essentially, what we found was that Safcol was a
relatively small part of the total forestry industry, but that it is an
important asset, accounting for some 30% of the saw-log production.

So, in the disposal, we will have to carefully design the process, because
of the nature of the Safcol asset. However, we believe that the disposal,
in the coming year, could have a significant impact, particularly in the
province of Mpumalanga, where most of its assets are situated. We will, of
course, as the process unfolds, make further announcements during the year,
as is appropriate.

On Transnet, I will not spend that much time because I think it has
achieved a very successful turnaround and is now very much focused on its
key objective, which is to be a world-class freight logistics company. Its
turnaround has seen the company more focused and the next five-year capital
budget of R78 billion will certainly ensure that the company’s investments
in ports rail, and pipeline improve the transport infrastructure, making
the transportation of goods more efficient, and the fast-tracking of
economic growth a real possibility. I should add that I think the disposal
of non-core assets has gone very well, and we hope to complete virtually
all of those processes in the coming year.

Interestingly enough, and differently from previous years, there is now far
more legislative activity within the Department of Public Enterprises
portfolio. In addition to the SA Airways and SA Express, and Broadband
InfraCo Bills, it is our intention in the latter part of this year to table
a new piece of legislation dealing with the shareholder management model or
structure that DPE proposes. This piece of legislation will allow us to
better define our role as shareholder to the SOEs and to crystallise the
role of the state in these activities, as well as our expectations of these
entities.

We refer to this as defining the strategic intent of the enterprise, and
Parliament will have a role to play in this process. This is by no means a
simple task, and poses interesting intellectual, technical and legislative
challenges, but I am quite sure that both the department and Parliament
will be well up to this exciting new challenge.

Let me begin drawing to a conclusion by extending my sincere thanks to the
Director-General, Portia Molefe, and her team of young and committed staff.
The past few years have been taxing and we expect the next few years to be
even tougher, as the SOEs and the department carry out what I would call
mission-critical activities, which will see us attain our primary
objectives of economic growth and job creation.

I also wish to extend really sincere thanks to the boards, chief executives
and staff of the state-owned enterprises. Without the commitment of these
people, we would be unable to attain our goals. And, I think we now have
excellent boards and managerial teams in place.

Then, let me offer my very sincere thanks to the hon Priscilla Themba and
her committee members who are here. We will thank them a little bit more
fully later. The support with which you provide us, despite your heavy
workload, where you cover a number of different portfolios, is really
valued by us as the Department of Public Enterprises. I look forward to
your active future participation in the very successful autumn schools that
we are now running each year, that I think are both informative for
parliamentarians and for the department itself. Our senior management learn
a great deal from the interaction with MPs.

I am confident that our aims will be realised and that the Department of
Public Enterprises and the state-owned enterprises will continue to attend
to the matters mentioned above with the necessary vigour and attention that
they require. I hope that this House will also accept the budget that has
been allocated to the Department of Public Enterprises.

As a mark of our increased efficiency in the state sector, I would point
out to you that I have taken less time than you allocated me, and we will
use this time profitably, I am sure, for questions and debate on your side.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I state from the
onset that the select committee supports the budget allocation for the
Department of Public Enterprises. I do this to highlight the magnitude of
the responsibility assigned to this department. When stocks rot because a
town has experienced yet another power outage; when the Internet is so slow
that an e-mail sent today communicating a major global contract only
reaches the recipient the following day; when perishables have to be dumped
because of delays at the ports; and, when businessmen or women fail to get
to their meetings on time because SAA flights were late, then our economy
suffers.

Efficient and reliable energy, communication and logistics services are
imperative to every well-functioning economy. Before we can speak about job
creation and poverty eradication, before we can speak about being among the
most competitive in the world, we have to address the fundamentals. The
fundamental in this instance is that our infrastructural logistical
services are not functioning as optimally as they should. At the very
least, let us maintain what we have and provide a service of good quality.

Here, I am not only speaking to the department and the Minister or to the
people who are managing these state-owned enterprises, I am also speaking
to all of us, the workers and the rank and file, and I am saying that we
want to use labour-intensive methods. We want to retain jobs. That can only
happen if we improve our levels of productivity and improve the quality of
services.

Every time there are outages, communications fail, there are port blockages
and delayed flights, business suffers and jobs are lost, as I have
mentioned earlier. What is worse, then, is that when businesses experience
these logistical inefficiencies, they become reluctant to invest in our
country. They lose confidence in our ability to provide the stable,
reliable infrastructural backbone to make their businesses viable.

Hence, it is incumbent upon us all to ensure that our services are of
impeccable standards. Of course, we are quite conscious that maintenance of
existing infrastructure is not adequate.

South Africa is experiencing positive growth and we are participating in a
global economy. State-owned enterprises have to ensure therefore that they
expand in order to meet the surge of domestic and global economic activity.
SOEs have to have modern, world-class equipment and reduced productivity
inefficiencies. We, therefore, welcome Eskom’s commitment to increase their
five-year capital expansion in allocation to R150 billion, and we welcome
Transnet’s allocation of R78 billion.

We believe that the department’s determination to advance the production of
the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor is bold and visionary, and we will support
your request, Minister, that the initial capital outlay should come from
the fiscus. Likewise, we agree with you, Minister, that the expansion of
InfraCo to improve broadband availability and, in the long run, reduce
telephony costs should be funded by the state.

We take cognisance of the fact that government cannot sustain the funding
of these entities on a constant basis, and we welcome the department’s role
in supporting the entities to stabilise their balance sheets and function
at corporate levels. Without a doubt, our SOEs are among the biggest
corporations in the country and it is astounding to see how well they are
being managed.

While there is always room for improvement, Minister, I would like this
House to note the positive corporate governance practices of these
institutions, the high levels of integrity that they display and the fact
that they have completely dispelled the myth that government entities are
corrupt. We are incredibly proud of them and incredibly proud of how you
have been directing them.

South Africa is a developmental state. While we want our SOEs to maintain
healthy balance sheets and focus primarily on being facilitators of
economic growth, the fact that they are state-owned implies that they
cannot be exempted from contributing to broader socioeconomic objectives.

We accept that SOEs have to be streamlined to focus on their core
functions. Let this exercise be done with minimal job losses. When we say
that Safcol contributes to only 2% of the forestry industry and therefore
is not of strategic significance, let us not lose sight of the fact that we
are speaking about human beings here and that every human being is of
significance in a developmental state.

Disposals should be done sensitively, should be participatory and should
preferably be beneficial to the communities where the entities are located.
The sensitivity displayed regarding the management of the Richtersveld
community settlement should be carried through in all engagements of the
department.

Likewise, SOEs’ big plans offer enormous opportunities for job creation in
local communities. Where tracks are being upgraded, where pipes are being
laid and where plants are being built, let us make it as labour-intensive
as possible and let us employ local people. Even in the semi-skilled and
high-skilled areas, let us target one or two brilliant graduates to work
alongside the experienced engineers so that skills are transferred.
Your competitive supplier development programme offers a significant
opportunity for supporting black-owned and women-owned enterprises as well
as co-operatives. Possibly, you could build in twinning criteria whereby an
international company that accepts a large contract is encouraged to twin
with a local co-operative to sharpen their capacity in that field.

There is also the issue of service to the second economy. Let us not
relegate the responsibility to the policy department. It is the very same
SOE that is reporting to you that has to service the townships and rural
areas. Please ensure that this issue forms part of the corporate plans,
even if it is not necessarily going to come from their budget.

As for the constant call by the DA to privatise, I strongly disagree. It is
precisely because of the fundamental role that SOEs play in driving the
economy that they have to remain under state control. The cost of
infrastructural investment is high; the short-term returns are low or even
no-existent. Private companies will only invest where they will derive
direct benefit. Furthermore, there is no guarantee that profits generated
by them will be redirected towards capital expansion.

The state, in the interest of the public, has to ensure that energy,
communication and transport logistical services are rendered efficiently
and economically. The state also has to ensure accessibility. Where
partnerships with the private sector are required, we accept that this has
to occur, but let it be done in a manner that will not compromise the
strategic intent of the state.

As for SA Airways, we believe that, though it is not as essential as Eskom
and Transnet, at this point in time it has a vital role to play in air
passenger and freight transport, domestically and on the continent. We
continue to call for SAA to remain in state hands.

If these enterprises are to remain in state hands, the state has to have
the capacity to manage them. The Department of Public Enterprises, in
particular, has to have sufficient authority to direct these entities. We,
therefore, welcome the endeavours of the Department of Public Enterprises
to strengthen governance and regulatory systems.

While your presence, Minister, as a very senior and highly capable
Minister, ensures significant coherence in the activities of the SOEs, we
have systematic interventions in place to secure these practices. Our
committee is therefore looking forward to the shareholder management
legislation that we shall be tabling this year. We will particularly be
using it as an opportunity to reflect upon the role of Parliament in
supporting the oversight work of the department.

We are tremendously pleased with your performance in this short period of
time. Under your supervision, the SOEs have become focused and more
vigorous in respect of implementation. We also wish to commend your
excellent team in the department for their absolute dedication and zeal.

I reiterate what I said in my introduction, that the Department of Public
Enterprises is one of the most important departments in the country and
should be resourced accordingly. The Select Committee on Labour and Public
Enterprises supports the Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, Minister, comrades and colleagues, during
our visit to the port of Cape Town last week we met with three companies
that raised the same issue – the availability of land at Cape Town harbour.
Minister, all these companies said that the Department of Public
Enterprises, through the National Ports Authority, is not keen to make land
available for ship repairs. Having been taken to the areas on the dry dock
where this is done, NCOP representatives, together with the standing
committee on economic affairs in the legislature, felt we should raise the
matter here so it can get the necessary attention.

Secondly, we met with representatives of the Cape Town boat-building
initiative that has registered students with False Bay College. Together
with the Department of Trade and Industry, they participated in the Dubai
International Show. I must say that this is quite a good show, but, again,
there is no space available. Having looked at other options, we thought
maybe some space could be made available at the port of Saldanha, something
that will bring more business to the West Coast region. As a member from
the Western Cape, can I ask the Minister whether ship repairing in our
province is not a priority, as is the container terminal?

Another issue of concern during this negotiating time is what we read in
the media, namely that SAA is going to retrench 1 000 workers. In the past,
when we met with the department, they assured us that there would be no
retrenchments. Is this going to be done to assist SAA, which does not seem
to be doing well, or is it some kind of recovery of the loss or is it being
done to achieve better specialisation within core functions of the
department?

I must congratulate the department on the restructuring that will bring
focused programmes on energy, broadband infrastructure and mining
enterprises. Also, Minister, even though it is still in its initial stages,
we congratulate you and the department on the amicable resolution of the
Richtersveld land claim. As a time-tested member of the ANC, your handling
of the matter was very good. We have also learnt that the Joint Project
Facility has been taken out of the former corporate strategy to become a
separate programme.

The Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Public
Enterprises undertook an assessment of state-owned chemical companies, with
a view to understanding how well their activities are aligned to
government’s objectives, as captured in the chemical strategy developed by
the Department of Trade and Industry. The funding obligations of the
Department of Public Enterprises, with regard to this assessment, totalled
R464 000, and it was completed at the end of last year. Will you be putting
more money in, or can we assume that there will be no more expenditure on
this?

The department’s restructuring seems to be a very good move, hoping also
that there will be settlement on mode of operation programmes and that
there will be more focus on these programmes.

Denel has brought in a good investment of R933 million. What is Alexkor
bringing to the Department of Public Enterprises? How will the department
make sure that, in this financial year, SAA will bring in more investments?

In conclusion, Minister, the ANC says: Keep it up, so that even other
countries, particularly in the region, can learn from your department how
to handle state-owned enterprises, and so that those that are not
productive are sold to recover any loss. The ANC unreservedly supports this
Budget Vote and urges other political parties to do so as well. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, the
Department of Public Enterprises’ mandate is to provide shareholder
management of all eight state-owned enterprises, namely Eskom, Denel,
Transnet, SA Forestry Company Ltd, SA Airways, Alexkor Ltd, Broadband
Infrastructure Company, and the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor.

While the ideal situation should be that the department should ensure the
efficiency as well as economic effectiveness of these state-owned
enterprises, the reality is, with the specific mention of SA Airways, that
the taxpayer has had to foot the bill over and over again.

When we recently debated the SAA Bill, I made it clear what the DA’s
position was on the privatisation of SAA, and even after listening to you
carefully in your response when you explained why it should remain state-
owned and controlled, I still maintain that it will be in the best interest
of the taxpayer as well as the country to privatise the company.

Surely, the funds used to bail SAA out, time and time again, could be put
to better use? I know that you are committed to using state-owned
enterprises to drive national development, but the price to pay is too high
in SAA’s case. I would like to quote the DA’s finance spokesperson, Ian
Davidson:


   State funding should be a last resort and restricted to long-term public
   goods like basic infrastructure.

I recently attended a community policing meeting dealing with rural issues
in Potchefstroom. One of the issues raised related to Eskom. The illegal
tapping of electricity is causing a lot of frustration amongst residents,
especially those from the farming community who have to fork out huge
amounts of money to buy generators in order to ensure that they can carry
on with their farming activities.

It was also reported that the contractors that are supposed to disconnect
the illegal and dangerous connections have a very difficult task because of
threats made to them. In this case, it is the municipality’s responsibility
to ensure that no illegal tapping of electricity takes place. But, up to
now, the issue is unresolved, and illegal tapping in Potchefstroom stands
at 19%, almost four times higher than the national average of 5%.

During the budget briefing, two weeks ago, I discussed the issue with the
department, and hoped that a solution could be found, because there is no
way in which illegal tapping of electricity can’t have an extremely
negative impact on Eskom’s ability to adequately provide electricity to all
consumers, especially with the cold weather that we have currently. I thank
you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Baie dankie, Voorsitter. In 2001 was daar ’n
reserwekrag van 25% vir Eskom se kragvoorsiening. Tans is die reserwes
tussen 8% en 10%, terwyl dit ideaalgesproke 15% moet wees. Dit is ongeveer
die helfte van wat dit behoort te wees.

Op die oomblik blyk dit dat kragvoorsiening in die volgende vyf jaar steeds
onseker sal bly. Mens dink maar net aan wat gaan gebeur met die wêreldbeker
indien daar kragonderbrekings kom. Daar sal stellig noodopwekkers wees,
maar dit is nie waaroor dit gaan nie. Dit gaan oor die beeld wat
uitgestraal sal word as Suid-Afrika op ander terreine met kragonderbrekings
gaan sit.

Professor Eberhard van die Universiteit van Kaapstad het onlangs voor die
portefeuljekomitee die argument, naamlik dat die hoër as verwagte
kragaanvraag te wyte is aan die uitermate hoë ekonomiese groei, verwerp.
Maar selfs al is die geleerde professor verkeerd en die argument
heelwaarskynlik korrek, blyk dit dat dit nog steeds ’n verantwoordelikheid
is wat die regering, en by name die Ministerie van Openbare Ondernemings,
het om tydig voorsiening en alternatiewe planne te maak. Nie net om die
planne te maak nie, maar ook om die planne te implementeer en uit te voer.

Die Nasionale Energie Reguleerder, Nersa, het in ’n onlangse oudit van die
belangrikste verspreiders bevind dat sowat R850 miljoen per jaar benodig
sal word om die huidige, steeds ondoeltreffende kapasiteit te voorsien -
die Minister het inderdaad verwys dat, ek glo ek het dit reg, R150 biljoen
oor die volgende vyf jaar benodig sal word. Dan word hierdie argument van
Nersa in elk geval inderdaad deur wat die Minister nou gesê het ondervang.

’n Probleem is klaarblyklik die onvermoë van die regering om die
verspreidingsnetwerk effektief te herstruktureer deur 184 munisipaliteite
te konsolideer in ses of sewe operasionele
streekselektrisiteitsverspreiders, afgekort Reds, en dit het nou niks met
die Reds Rugbyspan te doen nie, want hulle het maar sleg gevaar in die
Super 14. Die onbetroubaarheid van elektrisiteitsvoorsiening in Suid-Afrika
het ernstige gevolge op inwoners en besighede. Onlangs is berig oor die
kragonderbreking in Bedfordview wat drie dae lank geduur het.

Die aanduiding van die Minister, naamlik dat daar na alternatiewe
energiebronne, veral kernenergie, gekyk sal word, word verwelkom. Die punt
is net dat dit uitgevoer moet word. Die Minister het inderdaad gesê wat
benodig word in al hierdie staatsondernemings is die politieke wil en
kapasiteit. Wys vir ons, Minister, dat u dit het. Ons glo dit is daar. Voer
dit uit. Bring vir ons die resultate.

Wat die publiek betref, op die oomblik met die televisieverskynings van die
“alert” ten opsigte van die kragbeskikbaarheid wil dit tog voorkom asof dit
’n sukses is. Daar is ’n gewilligheid ook by die publiek om saam te werk
ten opsigte van die kragsituasie en ons vertrou dat die ministerie die
goeie planne wat hulle het, soos ek nou na die Minister geluister het, sal
uitvoer. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Chairperson. In 2001 there were reserves of
25% for Eskom’s power supply. Today the reserves are between 8% and 10%,
whereas ideally, it should be at 15%. That is approximately half of what it
should be.

At the moment it appears that the electricity supply will still remain
uncertain for the next five years. One tends to think of what would happen
to the World Cup should power outages occur. Emergency power generators
will certainly be in place, but that is not the point. The point is the
image that would be portrayed of South Africa should power outages affect
other spheres.

Prof Eberhard of the University of Cape Town recently stated at a portfolio
committee meeting, that he rejected the argument that the higher than
expected power demand, is due to extremely high economic growth. But even
if the learned professor is wrong, and the argument most probably correct,
it still appears to be a responsibility of government, namely the Ministry
of Public Enterprises, to make provision and alternative arrangements
timeously. Not only to make arrangements, but also to implement and execute
them.

A recent audit by the National Energy Regulator, Nersa, of the most
important distributors, found that approximately R850 million per year is
needed just to maintain the present, but still ineffective production
capacity  – the Minister has indeed mentioned a figure, I believe I am
correct, of R150 billion that will be needed over the next five years. Then
this, in any case, actually endorses the argument of Nersa, on account of
what the Minister has now stated.

A problem is apparently the inability of the government to restructure the
distribution network effectively by consolidating the 184 municipalities
into six or seven functional regional electricity distributors, in short,
Reds, and this has nothing to do with the Reds Rugby team as they have
performed rather poorly in the Super 14. The unreliability of the
electricity supply in South Africa has grave consequences for residents and
business. Recently it was reported that Bedfordview had a power outage that
lasted for three days.

The indication by the Minister, namely that alternative energy sources,
specifically nuclear energy, would be looked into, is welcomed. The point
is just that it has to be carried out. The Minister has indeed stated that
what is needed in all these public enterprises is the political will and
capacity. Show us, Minister, that you have got it. We believe you are
capable. Put it into effect. Bring us the results.

The present “alert” screenings on television, indicating availability of
electricity as a result of consumption by the public, appears to be a
success. There is willingness, also on the part of the public, to co-
operate on this issue with regard to the electricity situation and we trust
that the good plans the Ministry has, which the Minister has alluded to,
will be put into action. Thank you.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe nozakwethu ... [Chairperson, Minister
and colleagues ...]

... one of the aims of the Department of Public Enterprises is to support
and promote economic efficiency and competitiveness for a better life for
all South Africans. This is very important, considering the lofty economic
growth targets contained in the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative
for South Africa.

The department will therefore have an important role to play with regard to
economic growth. If the department is to fulfil its mandate and make a
meaningful contribution to economic growth, it is imperative that the state-
owned enterprises are efficient and effective performers. This, however,
has not always been the case.

The performance of some of the state-owned enterprises has left a lot to be
desired. Eskom and SA Airways, in particular, have not performed up to the
standard that would promote economic efficiency and competitiveness. Their
performance has, in fact, been bad, to say the least.

The many blackouts and power shortages that now seem to be common
occurrences in our country are definitely not conducive to economic
efficiency and competitiveness. They have in fact had the opposite effect
and contributed to economic losses and inefficiency, regarding the affected
individuals and businesses.

With the winter months now upon us, and the demand for energy increasing,
Eskom will have to ensure that there is a consistent supply of energy to
households and businesses.

The airline industry is very competitive and if SAA is to be a major player
in this industry, then drastic changes are needed. It cannot continue to
rely on the government for funding. The sooner SAA is competitive and
starts making a profit, the better for the South African economy as a
whole.

We, in the IFP, have always been strong advocates of the free-market
system, which promotes the efficient allocation of resources. But, we do,
however, understand that this department has an important role to play in
the economic development and prosperity of South Africa. It is, therefore,
in the best interests of all South Africans that our state-owned
enterprises function efficiently and effectively, as this will contribute
to the department’s aim and help us attain a higher level of economic
growth. We support the budget. Thank you.

Mr D G MKONO: Madam Chair, Minister, hon members of this august House,
officials, this afternoon this Council deliberates upon the budget of the
Department of Public Enterprises. The Budget Vote before us should be a
beacon of hope for many South Africans, particularly those who live in
poverty. It should, therefore, not be seen as a routine matter of business
to be discharged as quickly as possible.

Budget Votes are an opportunity for hon members to scrutinise the work of
the department and ensure that it will deliver on the mandate that the
people of this country have given us – a mandate to create work, a mandate
to eradicate poverty, a mandate to reduce inequalities and to expand
economic opportunities for all.

Within the National Council of Provinces, this scrutiny takes on additional
dimensions. As representatives of South Africa’s nine provinces, members of
this Council are particularly concerned about how the work of the
department will improve the economy of their provinces and regions.

Through this budget, the department plans to achieve objectives that, I
believe, we all share, which include, inter alia, unlocking the economic
potential of all our towns, cities, villages and communities, our different
regions and provinces, so that the geographic spread of economic growth and
development is more equitable.

The department aims to provide an effective state-owned enterprises’
shareholder management system, and to support and promote efficiency and
competitiveness for a better life for all South Africans. There has been
renewed emphasis on the role SOEs must play in a developmental state, in
that they will remain government-owned to play a vital role in economic
growth.

In line with this, the Department of Public Enterprises defines its medium-
term mandate as having the following three elements: disposing of non-core
assets that no longer serve a strategic purpose, ie infrastructure – I am
saying this under protest, Mr Minister; the ongoing management of SOEs
against the achievement of their strategic purpose; and establishing new
SOEs to achieve a strategic purpose, particularly in the event of market
failure; and, most importantly, to strengthen SOEs’ balance sheets and also
to leverage the SOEs’ capex programme in order to catalyse economic
activity.

Apart from implementing an effective shareholder management system, the
department will also look at four subprogrammes. These are the ICT Sector –
Broadband, which is responsible for setting up the new SOE Broadband
InfraCo, overseeing the necessary agreements between the relevant parties,
assessing the business plan, monitoring the commissioning of the full
services network, and providing the overarching shareholder management; the
Mining Sector, which provides oversight on the turnaround of Alexkor, with
a particular focus on the settlement negotiations and the separation of
Alexander Bay Trading from Alexander Bay Mining; the Energy Sector, which
provides oversight of Eskom and is responsible for the generation,
transmission and distribution industries, with a particular focus on
analysing the regular framework and tariff-related issues; and the Initial
Public Offering, which includes transfers to the Diabo Trust and the
Khulisa Trust where Telkom shares were housed.

In conclusion, as part of service delivery objectives, this year’s
departmental expenditure should ensure the implementation of the
infrastructure investment programme, characterised by the restructuring
process currently taking place amongst some state-owned enterprises. I hope
the House will adopt this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, members of the
department and hon members of the House, the efforts made in this Budget
Vote are noted. Recruitment of people who are differently able should
become a priority, as this is presently a challenge in the Department of
Public Enterprises. Issues relating to women, children and the youth should
be the focal point towards addressing it.

The state-owned enterprises, SOEs, are required to carry out infrastructure
investments so as to raise capital in the markets in which they operate.
Hence, it is expected that recapitalisation will decrease. The Northern
Cape province is rich. During the provincial week, the Premier of the
Northern Cape brought to the attention of the delegates the richness of
manganese that we have. What can the input of public enterprises be in this
regard?

In a previous speech, I referred to the treatment of employees of the SAA
in a positive way. The ID is no longer so positive about this issue, in
view of the fact that the hon Minister pointed out in the media that 1 000
employees would have to leave. The country has a high unemployment rate. It
is not expected of the state to increase these figures.

The attention of the hon Minister also needs to be drawn to the situation
where Eskom demands 80% occupation before electricity is provided in the
Northern Cape province. I thank you, hon Chair.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair ... [Interjections.] Can you protect me
please, hon Chair? Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon members and officials, this
Ministry is a vast one, with many facets and varying enterprises. As I have
a limited time slot, I wish to laud the Minister and the CEO, Ms Molefe,
and their dedicated staff in their attempt at rectifying and turning around
ailing SOEs. I wanted to start with that, in case I got cut off before I
could say it.

We are extremely happy to see that Denel no longer depends on Rooivalk
sales to get into the black. Though SAA is still a problem child, we
believe, with extra attention and good service, it could right itself.
Perhaps, the SAA CEO’s bonus must be results-driven.

The winter has come with a vengeance, and I hope Eskom will not have any
loose bolts flying around. The decision to build the pebble bed reactor is
a brave one and we support it. We wish the department well. However, we
trust that the funding will come from the fiscus, and that the rates will
not increase. Similarly with Telkom, we feel that the rates are way out of
line, if we compare them with rates worldwide.

Alexkor and the Richtersveld, is a worrying point. Therefore it needs close
monitoring so as to ensure that the people there are fairly treated. We
depend on you, Mr Minister, to do just that. We know you will do that. It
is a poor community that has suffered for many years.

We eagerly await the revitalisation of goods and passenger trains through
the Karoo so as to bring a breath of life back into the dying towns and
dorpies [small towns], and this will encourage tourism. We know that you
are busy with such things and we are looking forward to that.

Unfortunately, there is definitely no way that we can stand by idly whilst
CEOs of various enterprises rake off millions of rands as remuneration and
bonuses. To say the least, that is embarrassing for us. Just how do we
justify this kind of madness to the people on the ground? Sir, the argument
that these are market-related payouts holds no water, because, at the drop
of a hat, you could probably get managers who would do this at half the
pay.

So, Mr Minister, we want to tell you that we fully support you and that we
have every confidence in you and your staff. You have a big job to do, and
the economy and the people of South Africa depend on you to do just that.
We fully support this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J M SIBIYA: Comrade Chairperson, hon Minister, officials of the
department, comrades, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I have never been
to an economics classroom, neither have I ever been to an economics lecture
hall, but what I know for sure has been learnt from the wisdom of the
Shangaan-speaking people in this country and Mozambique. Like any other
national group, they have a very interesting proverbial expression from
which, I think, we can all learn a lot. In English it says: Do not sell the
little you have, otherwise you become a beggar of the highest order. And
they put it in this way in their language:

U nga dyeli hi timpfuvu u nga rimanga enhlalukweni. [Do not let your food
be destroyed by the hippopotami, if you did not plant at their drift.]

Privatisation as a concept, especially wholesale privatisation, is
anathema. It increases unemployment, poverty and landlessness. It
undermines human dignity and human rights – aspects which the ANC will
never allow to be violated. It also creates the mentality of individualism
– I, and then the rest. Above all, in philosophical terms, it creates the
mentality of living on unearned income. What I have said has never been of
service to our people, neither are these part and parcel of their
vocabulary, let alone that of the ANC-led government in this country.

The ANC considers human dignity and human rights as inviolable, unless
there are compelling and inexcusable reasons. The above emanates from its
philosophical belief that a human being is of the highest value in the
whole universe. The Freedom Charter, the people’s document which was
adopted in 1995 - I was there but only three years old, so, I couldn’t
understand what was going on [Laughter.] - says in clause 7, and I quote,
“There shall be work and security.”

The Minister, to whose department the Budget Vote we are debating today
belongs, is well versed in the above-stated positions. If one studies the
strategic plan for his department for the 2007-08 financial year, one will
be quick to deduce what I am saying, unless one does not know the ANC
philosophy nor understands the contents of the Freedom Charter. If that is
the case, then hard luck to that person, and there is very little we can
do.

The Budget Vote that we are debating today is a monetary expression of the
programmes and activities to be carried out by the government in the
current financial year. Put in broad terms, the government, through this
Vote, aims to do the following: to ensure that corporate strategies of
Eskom, Alexkor and others are aligned with government’s strategic
objectives as defined in the policies, regulations and economic strategies;
to ensure the provision of effective legal services, corporate government
systems, risk management frameworks and secretarial services to the
department itself and state-owned enterprises as a whole; to ensure
effective SOE strategy analysis against strategic intent as well as SOE
financial and operational performance monitoring; to ensure that the
strategy, investment plans, commercial philosophy and operational
performance are aligned with the strategic intent of the government; and to
enable the development of projects that leverage the assets, activities
and/or capabilities of the SOEs and the economy as a whole.

The ANC believes that the overall strategy of the budget we are discussing
now is to contribute greatly to the facilitation of the fulfilment of the
programmes we have as a government. First and foremost, it is about service
delivery to our people.

The mining sector, for instance, intends to provide the oversight of the
turnaround of Alexkor with a particular focus on the settlement of
negotiations with the people concerned, thereby bringing about the
atmosphere of co-operation between Alexkor and the people concerned, and,
in that sense, creating room for the government to concentrate on its core
business.

The building of the SOEs is one of the most promising endeavours by our
government and we believe that it is one of the cornerstones of the
policies of the ANC-led government, especially taking into account the
commitment to creating jobs and fighting poverty.

It is only when enterprises are built that jobs can be created, leading to
the consequence of people being hired, work being available. As such, they
contribute to the dignity of the people. The prevalence of work and
security contribute greatly to the welfare of the people, but also to their
human rights and dignity. In a political sense, the move will contribute
towards reducing poverty. As a country, we aim to halve poverty by 2014.

The subprogramme of infrastructure building and the sector investment
strategies will greatly contribute towards the realisation of Asgisa, as a
government policy. As the ANC, we believe that the budget as a whole will
strengthen the SOEs, departmental governance and the administration system.
We believe that this will, in turn, improve management of SOEs and bring
about cost-effective, commercially viable logistics, infrastructure and
services.

To us – the ANC - the above is a way to service delivery efficiency, lower
production costs and improved competitiveness. It is for these reasons, in
part, that the ANC unreservedly and fully committed, supports the Vote and
urges this House to do the same, as Comrade Ntwanambi said. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, I must say, very
sincerely, that it is always a great pleasure for me to attend these
debates. There is a certain quality about the NCOP which makes it deal with
things in a very practical and realistic way. I thoroughly enjoy it, and I
say that sincerely. [Applause.]

I am going to jeopardise my credibility because I am so impressed by this
debate that I would like to answer the issues in full. I hope that, if I
stray just a little bit over 10 minutes, Madam Chair, you will exercise
that gentle quality of mercy that falls like the rain from heaven in Cape
Town. [Laughter.]

Let me deal with a number of the very interesting issues that have been
raised by hon Themba. Thank you for your comments about the department. I
also believe that both the SOEs and the department have worked very hard.
Specifically, with regard to some of the issues that you have raised, let
me say that, concerning Safcol and any disposals of Komatiland Forests, our
policy on this matter is very clear. Our objective would be to sell these
as going concerns. In terms of the labour laws, that would be a section 189
process. We seek thereby, with the unions involved, with the new owners and
with ourselves, to integrate into any disposal agreement some security for
workers, both in terms of their employment and in terms of their benefits.
I think this is an approach we take in any disposal; it is an important
approach.

Let me also say that a number of speakers have raised the issue of skills.
We are putting a tremendous effort, as state-owned enterprises, into skills
development. We are doing it from the schools through to the engineers and
professionals. Let me illustrate one programme that we are very pleased
about. It comes as a result of our skills project in the department.

We discovered that Denel had a very good programme, where they adopted
schools, particularly from poorer areas. They took young people whose
parents could probably not afford to put them through further education.
They took them to our college in Kempton Park, at the airport, and then
allowed them to be tutored by the local college of further education and
training and to write matric again. These were youngsters who had passed
mathematics and science with standard grade. At the end of the year they
wrote again, at higher grade. I must say that the success has been
fantastic, moving from bare minimum passes to upper second-class type of
passes.

We will expand that programme, with all of the big SOEs. We are, of course,
doing a great deal to improve our training of artisans and we are working
very hard to train engineers. This skills process is very important and we
are putting a great deal of energy into it.

I did not mention the property project in my formal address. Really, it is
an important process of making available pockets of property in the
different provinces. We have published our guidelines on disposals, black
economic empowerment etc and this process will continue.

With regard to shareholder management, which a number of people have
raised, and was raised by the hon Themba, to begin with - I do think this
is a very interesting exercise. There is also a point that has been made by
many speakers from different parties. The DA made this point and the IFP
made this point, that there is always going to be some dispute about the
role that the state should play. Should it be involved in companies or not?


Now, the truth of the matter is that I am sure there is not a party sitting
in this House or the other House that does not accept that, as it happens
with all economies in the world, there will be state-owned enterprises. The
question is: In which sector and for what purpose?

Just because we are a state-owned enterprise, does not mean you don’t work
with the market. It does not mean you don’t have partnerships with the
private sector; you have very big ones. But this Act will allow us to make
a clearer statement on what it is that we are doing with an enterprise. And
I think that is good for everybody. It is good because it will clarify for
the boards and management what it is that we want them to achieve. It will
clarify to the world as a whole, be it in South Africa or anywhere else,
what it is we are going to do with an enterprise. So, I think it is an
exciting new development.

Let me deal very quickly with hon Ntwanambi’s point about the port of Cape
Town. This is actually something that is worrying us quite a lot. Now, in
our property project, together with Transnet, we had actually planned to
release quite significant land in the port, particularly for shipbuilding
and boatbuilding, which is a very successful industry in Cape Town. I know
a lot about that because we started it during my time with Trade and
Industry. It has been very, very successful.

Our difficulty is this: We had originally intended to expand the container
terminal, because the number of containers coming into Cape Town is
continually rising. Now we are having massive difficulties with the EIA,
because of objections that we may have an adverse impact on the beaches,
going around that coastline. And, frankly, it is taking so long that we
have a problem regarding the ports.

So, we have been forced to reserve land behind the port where we may have
to put container terminals. If that happens, we have to move a whole lot of
other stuff further back, meaning there will be very little land for other
activities. Now this is a difficulty. How do we grapple with it? It is
something we have to grapple with.

Saldanha, obviously, has space but most of the artisans and people are
here, because if you look at the quality of our boatbuilding, you will find
that it is of excellent quality. Some of the best yachts, crafts and
catamarans in the world are built here – it is really fantastic. You can
look how well Shosholoza did, it was manufactured here. So, it is quite
difficult to consider how we would move it away.

Let me deal with this statement, which is an interesting exercise, in the
press. You mentioned the bolt, and this statement is the same phenomenon as
the bolt story. Now, I have never said 1 000 people will be retrenched. In
the portfolio committee hearing, I never said that. So, when I approached
the journalist who wrote that, she admitted it and said: “No, you never
said it. I am sorry, my editor put it in.” They didn’t apologise or
anything – they put it in. Roger Makings then also quoted “1 000 people”.
People here quoted “1 000 people”. We didn’t say that. Yes, the chief
executive did once say in a hearing that we may have to consider this.

What I said is what the position is, that in this process we would have to
negotiate certain changes, and we cannot guarantee that there may not be
retrenchments. But, regarding the number or if it has to happen, involves a
negotiating process, and that is a normal situation. Sometimes the media
just creates facts: one quotes another one which quotes another one, but
the first one was wrong. So, I am afraid, that is the position.

Very briefly, let me say one or two words on Alexkor. It is an important
settlement, and it is a very complex one. So, I do need to clarify that. It
is complex, and this is what amazes me about that community, that they can
keep track of such complex negotiations. We will set up a partnership to
begin with, and we are starting work in a few days’ time on that issue. We
would hand over the agricultural and maricultural stuff to the community.
They have to set up companies to receive that. They have to form
partnerships with people that will help them manage. So, it is a very
complex project. But I think if we carry it through, as I indicated, we
really can make a difference to that community.

Let me say one or two words on SAA. The long and the short of it is, as
some speakers accurately identified, yes, SAA is different to Eskom or
Transnet. We are heading for a very intense period of tourism, visits etc.
Regarding the 2010 World Cup, we have to be absolutely certain. It is a
very big challenge for us. If you go and look at what happened in Germany,
they put on a massive number of new frequencies etc. And we are just not
prepared to take the risk in this period, that is if you privatise you have
absolutely no control over what will happen to that airline. We are not
going to take that risk. It is too important for us. Yes, we have to carry
out the changes.

Most of us are very critical of our airline, I know. It’s a national sport
in most countries, but if you actually look at SAA as an airline, it
compares very well. Most of you haven’t flown in the United States; I don’t
think so. I mean, fly in the United States and tell me what sort of service
you get there? I can tell you it is nowhere close to SAA’s. And that is
true of most of Europe too, if you fly there. So this is a good airline. We
are going to turn it around, we are going to make it more profitable.

I want to say a few quick things about electricity. Some questions were
asked about quantities of funding needed, etc. If we manage the process
carefully, and if we are very serious about saving electricity, then we
should minimise the impact of this tight reserve margin. But it requires a
joint effort. It requires the kind of effort we saw in Cape Town last year,
where we saved amazing amounts of electricity by joint activity. Now, we
all have to do that. We met with the mining industry yesterday, we meet
with business in a few weeks’ time, and everyone has to save. If we can do
that, we have a real prospect of getting through this process.

The figure of R150 billion doesn’t include some of the additional funding
that would have to be carried out in the actual distribution sector, in the
municipalities and the metropoles. And this, we all agree, is a cause for
concern, which is why we should delay the formation of the regional
electricity distributors, because we have to begin investing also in that
infrastructure.

Eskom is rapidly upgrading its distribution and transmission, but we do
sometimes have problems. Bedfordview was a very classic example: a fairly
old technology cable was punctured. So the insulation of this 135 megawatt
cable, this old technology where you insulate it with oil, was punctured by
construction workers somewhere. Now, it took us time to find out where the
puncturing was. We had to find out where someone had gone in and punctured
this thing. And it took us more time than we all liked to be able to repair
that. But it shows that we have to upgrade technology continuously. We have
to modernise that technology.

But let me say that if you compare the outages in South Africa, they
compare very well with the outages in Europe. In fact, we are still far
better than most economies in Europe on this. So, yes, it is a problem for
us in South Africa, because we have never had this before. Of course, we
want to change it but let’s not exaggerate that we are suddenly worse off
than everybody else - we are not. Our economy is still very strong when it
comes to energy, etc.

Let me make one or two last quick comments. Regarding manganese, one of the
projects is certainly to create a second channel of export from the
Northern Cape to Coega in the Eastern Cape. It will take us a few years,
but I think it is going to be a very interesting project which we need to
build up.

On the employment of the disabled, we are working very hard on it in the
Department of Public Enterprises and I think we are beginning to make
progress. It is very crucial.

Very quickly, concerning the Rooivalk, just to dispel some of the
editorials - and thank you for your leniency, Madam Chair - what we have
said is very clear: We will have to consider it. The reason we are
considering it is that we are actually continuing a further investigation
with the company to see whether a modified version of the Rooivalk would be
reasonable. Once that process is finished, it will allow us to make a final
decision, one way or the other. We will make that decision. If we find it
is not feasible, the programme will have to stop. If we find there is a
possibility of making this a feasible programme, we would continue, but it
would clearly be in a modified form. It is not going to be in the present
form.

On the remuneration of CEOs, most of the companies involved are the biggest
companies in South Africa. They are very complex and they are very big. If
you think you are going to find top executives in South Africa to run these
companies, they have to be really skilled. If you are going to pay them
peanuts, it’s not going to happen. So, basically, the guideline we have is
that, regarding all our big companies, we take approximately the median of
what we see in the market as our benchmark, and we pay around that. That
includes bonuses, basic packages and everything. But remember, these are
very big and very important companies. If you want good management, you are
going to have to pay for good management.

I thought that Shangaan Economics 101 was really excellent. [Laughter.] I
think that made a good point. But this debate is not a debate about
ideologies. This is a debate about economics. What is economically the most
effective proposition? So, why the ANC has been a successful movement is
that we are not driven by ideology. We are driven by analysis of the facts.

If you look at the Ready to Govern document of 1992, if you look at the RDP
document, you will see stated very strongly that we will deal with the
state on the balance of economic evidence, that is whether it should be
owning or not. And that is why, for example, with regard to the Freedom
Charter, we took a very clear and deliberate decision that in the modern
world, in the modern context, it would not make sense to nationalise mines.
It would have been a mistake.

But, what we knew was that the system of mineral rights was wrong. We were
one of a tiny number of countries in the world where the mineral rights
could be owned privately. That is wrong. You cannot take a natural asset, a
natural endowment, and make it privately owned. So, that is why we, if you
like, nationalised the mineral rights.

But I make that point because we will always make our decisions on the
balance of economic evidence, on analysis, on what’s correct and what’s
not, and we are not going to be swayed by ideology that says that the
market is God or ideologies that say the state is God. What is realistic
and what is practical is what we will do.

Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for your leniency. Thank you to the House
for listening for so long, and thank you for the debate. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We thank the hon
Minister for his valuable and informative contribution to the debate. Thank
you for your participation, hon Minister.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 15:21.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 30 MARCH 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)     Measurement Units and Measurement Standards Bill [B 21B – 2006]
         – Act No 18 of 2006 (assented to and signed by President on 25
         March 2007)

    (2)     National Land Transport Transition Amendment Bill [B 38D –
         2005] – Act No 26 of 2006 (assented to and signed by President on
         25 March 2007)

2.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      (a)   Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill,
         2007, submitted by the Minister of Defence. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Select Committee on Security
         and Constitutional Affairs.


3.    Translation of Bill submitted

    (1)    The Minister of Public Works


          a) Wetsontwerp op die Bestuur van Onroerende Regeringsbates [W 1
             – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Government
         Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1 – 2006] (National Assembly –
         sec 75).
COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE HEARINGS OF THE JUSTICE AND
      PROTECTION CLUSTER 2006


1.    INTRODUCTION     55
           1.1   Joint Budget Committee Mandate    55
           1.2   Process    56

2.    Department of Correctional Services    57
           2.1   Financial management aspects      57
           2.2   Human resource and capacity aspects    60
           2.3   Concluding requests and comments on Correctional Services
               60

3.    Department of Safety and Security 61
           3.1   Financial management   62
           3.2   Human resources and capacity      63
           3.3   Rural location of police stations 63

4.    Justice and Constitutional Development 64
           4.1   Financial management aspects      64
           4.2   Resource constraints including human, equipment and
               capacity     66
           4.3   General Comments 67

5.    The Department of Defence Vote 21 68
           5.1   Financial management aspects      68
           5.2   Human resources and capacity aspects   73
           5.3   General Comments -  Further Information required from
               Departments  75
           5.3   General Comments 11

6.    CONCLUSION 11

7.    RECOMMENDATIONS  12



1     INTRODUCTION


The Joint Budget Committee identified the Justice and Protection Services’
Cluster for its first oversight exercise on a sector. During the
deliberations on the Section 32 monthly financial management on a quarterly
basis reports, the Committee identified expenditure patterns which called
for more focused engagement with certain departments, to seek among other
issues, a further clarification of the relationship between expenditure and
strategic outputs and outcomes.





1.1   Joint Budget Committee Mandate


The Committee’s mandate regarding the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement
(MTBPS) requires it to consider the distribution of available financial
resources for expenditure against government policy priorities. This
mandate is distinct from that of the Portfolio and Select Committees on
Finance, which deliberate on the macro-economic, fiscal and
intergovernmental dimensions of the MTBPS respectively.



The Committee has interpreted its mandate to mean that it should consider:



   ▪ The likely impact of expenditure  allocations  in  the  MTBPS  on  the
     effectiveness and efficiency with which  departments  can  respond  to
     government’s stated policy priorities; and
   ▪  Whether  departments  are  making  the  tough  choices  required   by
     ensuring planned expenditure is informed by priorities,  and  choosing
     effective   strategies   and   pursuing    greater    efficiency    in
     implementation.


The Joint Budget Committee (Committee) on a regular basis monitors monthly
revenue and expenditure as published by the department to determine whether
expenditure is in line with budget projections in respect of outputs and
outcomes. The intention of the Committee is to explore whether the
department’s expenditure encompasses the following principles and best
practices:



      • Effective expenditure on identified policy priorities including the
        principle of value for money;
      • Strong  linkages  between  expenditure  and  stated  objectives  in
        strategic plans;
      • Ascertaining whether strategic plans are measurable, achievable and
        sustainable; and
      • Identification of critical success factors.



1.2   Process


The Committee conducted the hearings between 14 and 15 November 2006. It
planned to hear submissions from the National Departments within the
Justice and Protection Services excluding the Independent Complaints
Directorate. The Committee also identified the Department of Home Affairs
as requiring further scrutiny. After deliberating on the submissions and
studying the relevant documents the Committee has made certain
recommendations. The Committee expressed its concern that the Department of
Home Affairs did not present themselves for the submission as requested.
The hearings are a valuable part of the exercise of the Committee’s
oversight on the Budget process which include the Appropriations Bill, the
Division of Revenue, the MTBPS, the Adjustments Bill and the monthly
Section 32 reports which the Committee reports on, quarterly.



2.    DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES


The Department of Correctional Services highlighted their strategic
objectives during their presentation to the Committee. These strategic
objectives are:  Master Information Systems Plan, Seven Day Establishment,
Integrated Human Resource Strategy, Other Corporate Projects, Human
Resource Development, Security Equipment, Management of Remand Detainees,
Overall of Social Reintegration, New Generation Correctional Centres and
Development and Care.



2.1   Financial management aspects


During the current financial year the Department has focused on several
improvements to increase the compliance with internal controls. These
improvements were necessary as previous years’ audit reports highlighted
queries regarding internal control issues. However the Committee learned
that compliance has been improved in internal controls. These include on-
site verifications conducted by the departmental inspectorate and Internal
Audit Units, as well as the training of managers in logistics and financial
management.



According to the adjusted estimates per programme (2006/07), inter-
programme shifting of funds occurred. The bulk of the funds shifted were to
Compensation of Employees from the Programme Security to align the budget
allocation with new approved posts.  Inter-programme shifting of funds also
occurred from Programme Facilities to Programme Care. The specific shifting
of funds came from Goods and Services to finance nutrition under the
Programme Care.



From the current state of expenditure per programme, it is clear that after
six months of the current financial year, most programmes have been
spending more or less the same as the total spending for the vote (41.87%).
Only one programme, the Programme: Facilities has spent at 31.96% of its
budget by 30 September 2006. In terms of the ENE Baseline Allocations per
Programme, this programme has also been allocated 2.21% less from the
previous year.



Capacity constraints arising from the non-employment of staff were given by
the department as an explanation for the delay in the construction of the
Kimberly Prison Facility.



Allocated budgeted funds were insufficient to begin the construction of the
New Generation Correctional Centre in Kimberley which the department
indicated had led to serious financial challenges. The new design based on
the White Paper on Correctional Guidelines required the appointment of
private quantity surveyors re-cost expenses relating to the facility. These
increased costs and the significant escalation in the price of materials
led to the initial estimates projected. The construction and related costs
will be incurred over two years and the estimated expenditure for the
2006/07 financial year will be R 180 million.



With reference to the outsourcing of catering for correctional facilities,
the Department stated that it made more “practical sense while upgrading”
and would also “reduce costs”. This would be an interim measure during the
installing of the new planning system, training of offenders, and
renovations. Consequently, a pilot process of mobile kitchens was
introduced.



In the Committee’s opinion the achievement of strategic objectives poses a
serious challenge to the department which acknowledged that the objectives
were too broad, which hindered the measurement of the objectives.  The
department assured the Committee that they were working on improving the
strategic process.



During the current financial year the department has taken proactive steps
to monitor expenditure. The monitoring of expenditure became important
since the department has in previous financial years surrendered funds to
National Treasury.  The department has committed to set better time frames
and also to ensure improved expenditure management.



A shift occurred in funds from the sub-programme under Programme 4 Care
which the department indicated was a consequence of an escalation in
medical treatment – thus necessitating an adjustment.



The department confirmed they had experienced problems on extending the
Correctional Facilities at Leeukop and Pollsmoor. It had withdrawn these
plans to build on prime site which had been objected to by the private
sector. The department indicated that they were continuing their
interaction with the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security in respect
of the announcement of eight prisons in the State of the Nation address
during 2000, 2002 and 2006. The Committee was not entirely satisfied with
the department’s response that the escalation in terms of costs in the
building industry would determine whether four or five facilities announced
by the State President 2005, 2006 would be finally constructed.



The Committee intends engaging the department during the fourth quarterly
report regarding these costing analysis. The department assured the
Committee that it was not their practice to accelerate expenditure in the
final quarter.


2.2   Human resource and capacity aspects


Provision has been made in the budget for salary increases of level 6 and 7
personnel. To address the screening constraints experienced, as projected
to 2009, the department has established a section to screen staff for
selected positions dealing with sensitive documents.



The Committee learned that the integrity of the new IT security system
during its implementation had been compromised at Durban Westville
Correctional Facility and in some instances staff had caused the system to
fail. The department indicated that IT facilities are centralised from head
office. It further indicated that not all centres have IT specialists. At
present the department has a system whereby the 241 correctional facilities
countrywide are connected through a system of five dedicated centres. All
centres are connected but not all systems are installed.



The department is in the process of implementing the Balance Score Card
(BSC). The department is striving to have the BSC in place through their
strategic plans, and would strive towards excellence with implementation.



The department stated that the implementation of the recommendations of the
Jali Commission would have financial implications for which funding would
have to be sought. However, they confirmed that internal capacity had been
established.





4 Concluding requests and comments on Correctional Services


The issue around budgetary allocations for new Generation Correctional
Facilities and other unanswered questions should be responded to within
seven days, in writing.



During the next engagement with the Committee the department should ensure
their preparations include the linkages between stated outputs in their
strategic plan and expenditure utilised as well as projected expenditure to
ensure a more constructive oversight process.




3.    DEPARTMENT OF SAFETY AND SECURITY


The department’s should note that the key public spending priorities
defined in the Medium Term Budget and Policy Statement of 2006, among other
objectives is an emphasis on visible policing and improvement of court case
flows.



Spending as outlined in the New Economic Reporting Format Expenditure table
shows that current payments at 45.6% appears to be on track. Nevertheless,
the Committee believes the low expenditure of 21.6% on buildings and other
fixed structures gives cause for concern. However, it welcomed the
department’s 73.1% transfer and subsidies to provinces and municipalities
which should support effective and efficient expenditure in these two
spheres of government.



The department stated that it was operating under the principle of value
for money for projects it was involved in. It had linked the strategic
plans with strategic objectives, which are measurable, achievable and
sustainable, but that time would really tell if they would be sustainable.


3.1   Financial management



The Committee was impressed with close linkage of the information submitted
and responding engagement with the oversight requirement mandate of the
Committee. The department pointed out the growth of the budget from R17
billion six years ago to the current budget of R28 billion. During the last
financial year the department had a net surplus of only R1 000 which they
surrendered to National Treasury which underpins the robust financial
management.



One of the innovations to manage the maintenance budget while sustaining
the policy priority of effective police response timing, was to change the
procurement approach for maintenance by giving selected garages permission
to work on a threshold basis rather than following the previous tender
procedure route. In line with the department’s maintenance model,
associated with its assets, the vehicle crime response units were upgraded
with a new fleet of cars for the purpose of increasing response time.
However, the vehicle maintenance budget spent about R1 billion on fuel,
which was largely related to global market increases. With respect to
improving the response time to crime, the Committee believes the department
could increase its engagement with the private sector to support its
efforts in this direction. Perhaps the relevant Portfolio Committee could
also pursue this matter when exercising oversight of the department.



The department assured the Committee that it would be able to spend the
funds allocated for the 2010 World Cup, which included the acquisition of
Water Canons and Command Vehicles. The department illustrated this with
their expenditure patterns for their commitments in the Rugby and Cricket
World Cup. Furthermore, the experience they would gain from their contract
to co-ordinate the security arrangements at the 2007 Cricket World Cup in
the West Indies would be of great value. The department re-emphasized that
expenditure was informed by priorities.




3.2   Human resources and capacity


According to the department, the information technology system is regarded
as efficient to indicate staff turnover. It took the South African Police
Services four (4) years to develop and locate issues internally. The
department has a remuneration system for police officials to improve their
quality of life, with incentive systems similar to the merit system in
education.



In  response  to  the  Committee’s  questions  on  salary   challenges   and
performance, the department  indicated  that  the  salaries  of  the  police
officials who fall between the ranks of constable and senior  superintendent
has been raised by more than 34% over the last  three  years.  Further,  all
employees have the right to promotion but  most  importantly  the  promotion
policy of the department is based on performance. Staff  must  now  convince
the department of performance, which is in sharp contrast  with  the  former
practice of automatically promotion of officers.


3.3   Rural location of police stations


Much progress was evident in the linkages between allocative efficiency and
expenditure nevertheless the department needed to also link allocations to
government rural policy and locate police stations closer to rural people.
However, the department indicated that often the most suitable location was
on land that belongs to the chiefs. The Committee believes that
negotiations with chiefs, regarding location of police stations in rural
areas should be pursued.


4.    JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT


The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development has a history of
under spending and has received qualified audits for the last four years.
The key challenges highlighted in the MTBPS are the improvement of court
case flows, capacity, skills development, administration of justice, the
Justice College Programme, the Construction of the new head quarters in
Mpumulanga and Limpopo, and the management of Monies in Trust.




4.1   Financial management aspects


At the end of September 2006, the department had spent 38% in terms of
current payments. Goods and services, which form part of this category,
have the slowest expenditure with 33% expenditure, while compensation of
employees spent 42%. Overall, the expenditure department stood at 41% of
the budget at the end of six months of the current financial year.



The department has a history of huge under spending and this pattern is not
seen as good – last year’s under spending was R1 million, and under
spending is projected at R500 000 for the current financial year. The
repeat under spending is not good for the department since court services
are regarded as the department’s main focus. The Department could not
respond to the Committee’s inquiry on its involvement in multipurpose
centres (MPC).



Both virements and rollovers occurred during the first six months of the
year. The shifting of unspent funds was used to provide for expenditure for
a digital network system to the amount of R41.8 million. The digital
network system was introduced to replace the old analogue system in courts.
R35 million was rolled over to finance X-Ray machines and metal detectors
at courts, while R114.8 million was used to fund digital court recording
equipment.



Approximately R101 million was shifted from Compensation of Employees and
Machinery and Equipment to Goods and Services. The shifting of funds from
Compensation of Employees to Goods and Services was as a result of the non-
filling of posts. Between programmes, funds were also transferred from
Machinery and Equipment to Buildings and Software. Virements for software
were as a result of the March payment for software licences.



In response to the Committee’s observation on the high March expenditure
patterns the department indicated that the institution’s for which they
provide services close down during November and December, which led to the
expenditure peak in the final financial quarter.



The department informed the Committee that National Treasury had agreed to
its need to obtain an emergency certificate to procure the necessary
security equipment related to the re-prioritisation of services. However
National Treasury had warned the department that this departure from
regular tender procedures should not be seen as the norm.


The department also reported that they made payments to psychiatric
services, which was later claimed back from other departments, however this
may reflect negatively when analysing their financial position.





4.2   Resource constraints including human, equipment and capacity


Insufficient and under-utilised courtrooms contributes to the huge case
backlog which department said necessitates an increased budget for capital
works. The department confirmed that the Magistrates Commission was looking
into 500 to 600 courts. Location of courts in largely urban areas had also
contributed to long waiting lists. Lenasia and Protea courts were not
easily accessible to the community. The Committee believes that in the
short term the department could also explore alternative measures to better
utilise existing court facilities with low case loads. The provision of
transport and the use of alternative facilities that could be cost
effectively converted.



While the Committee acknowledged the difficult working conditions staff are
experiencing with no air conditioning, and no proper functioning facilities
in some courts, it also believes that if the budget of the department is
stringently analysed against its core priorities it may be able to resolve
the problems cited in capital works.



With respect to the current HR capacity challenges the department stated
that its problems are governance and systemic in nature. It added that it
is investigating a short-listing process and are also considering
outsourcing the HR function to respond to the exercise of short-listing of
candidates.



However, it had employed temporary staff as an interim measure. Retention
was also a huge problem especially below the salary 8 level which accounts
for the high under-expenditure.  In dealing with the management of
caseloads and the Court Roll, the department has re-employed retired and
recruited new staff in an attempt to bring trial dates nearer in managing
of case backlogs. This process is expected to cost approximately R60
million to implement. The department indicated that currently the National
Prosecuting Authority (NPA) has been advertising posts.



Notwithstanding the measures already taken the Committee expressed the
opinion that the department had not analysed its core business, which the
Director-General acknowledged. The type of employee required for the
department’s core business, which is advisory services, should be at a
higher skills level and administrative in nature. The minimum qualification
in the department nowadays is a tertiary qualification with two years
experience. To address the currently employed staff, who do not have the
degree qualification; the department confirmed that they would be trained
through SETA’S accredited training programmes.



Most stenographers became redundant with the implementation of a digital
system, however those who could be employed in alternative clerical
positions would be retained and re-skilled through SETA programmes.




4.3   General Comments




The Committee recognised that the department was working on matters where
they were experiencing major challenges but advised the department to work
with the relevant portfolio Committee. The Committee reminded the
department that it should prepare to make a submission on either the fourth
quarterly expenditure in May or the first quarterly expenditure in the
23006/07 financial year. The Committee also pointed out to the department
the need to re-examine their classification of under expenditure as savings
in certain line items.




5.    THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE VOTE 21


The Department of Defence made submissions to the Committee, but did not
have either the executive authority or accounting officer present, which is
one of the requirements when accounting to the Committee nevertheless the
Committee agreed to continue the process of submission and engagement, but
only after warning the department it would not do so again.  This is a
requirement to comply with the PFMA and also to respect and comply with the
constitutional oversight mandate of Parliament.



The Committee also noted that the department had a practice of not
attending the MTEF hearings. The Committee also cautioned the department to
focus on the strategic plans, objectives achieved and the corresponding
budget projections and expenditures associated to programme spending.




5.1   Financial management aspects


The Department of Defence has nine programmes. These include:
Administration, Landward Defence, Air Defence, Maritime Defence, Military
Health Support, Defence Intelligence, General Support, Force Employment and
Special Defence Account.



The Committee noted with concern the low spending performance for the two
project descriptions in the Programme Special Defence Account, falling
below the average spending of 33% for the entire programme.  The recorded
pattern of 21% has been spent on projects in excess of R15 million as part
of the first six months of the year. Likewise, only 16% spend on Special
Projects.



A comparison between the total estimated expenditure (2006/07) and the
available funds (include adjustments) reveal that an over expenditure is
expected in all programmes. The Government Finance System (GFS)
classification in terms of the New Economic Reporting Format reveals that
an over expenditure of almost R21 million is expected for Compensation of
Employees. A protracted procurement process has delayed expenditure in
Goods and Services for approximately R18 million.



The Committee noted that an expected over expenditure is anticipated for
which no funds are available despite the provision made for transfers to
foreign governments and international organisations, The department
explained that this over expenditure will be offset by a saving in the
transfers to public corporations and private enterprises for the same
amount. Under expenditure as shown through the cash flow report is due
mainly to the delayed payment of goods and service the integration of
logistics systems, and the industry’s capacity to deliver maintenance and
repair services for B-Vehicles.



In the previous financial year the department’s capital expenditure
programme of R72 million was spent on prioritised capital projects.  This
year department increased its expenditure to R74 million due to the nature
of the built environment in terms of cost escalations. At present, the
department has two projects administered by Public Works, which will result
in a slight rollover.



Facilities have been devolved from Public Works to the Department of
Defence however with regard to Municipal Services for which the department
receives R80 million the department hopes to receive an equitable return
but Public Works is not yet in a position to confirm the allocation of
funds. As the department is the custodian, it is liable for payment. The
department is in the process of working with Public Works to ensure that
its priorities are taken into consideration.



The Department of Defence has numerous strategic plans. One of the key
issues in the department is dealing with the complex costing nature of
defence-related budgets.  This is as a result of the challenge the
department faces due to its heavy reliance on technological developments in
the defence industry. This reliance on the defence industry developments
requires that the budget baseline figures should be amended so as to make
provision for new developments and to help facilitate the costly operation
of new defence systems.



The department stated that sale of goods and services refer to equipment of
S.A. armoury, Caspirs, normal vehicles, aircraft, spares from the navy, and
the SAS Outeniqua.



The disposal of assets by the department is a fairly standard process when
it relates to furniture and office equipment through auctions. However, in
relation to other military equipment, Armscor processes the disposal of
aircraft and military vehicles. When acquiring items from foreign countries
the department is contractually bound to do it through the National
Conventional Arms Control Committee (NCACC), which approves the sale and/or
disposal of assets. Due to the scale of activities the department had to
start a Directorate for the NCACC and assigned a manager responsible for
this.



Transfers from the department comply with legislation and is VAT compliant.
Armscor transfers funds to a government department; the government
department transfers out and the Department of Defence then charge VAT.



The department confirmed that its internal audit systems are in place,
reporting to the audit Committee on a quarterly basis.. Reporting to the
budget Committee happens monthly. The department’s logistics agency is
responsible for monitoring the internal systems. With inspectors to ensure
that the necessary structures and logistic training are in place. Internal
audits of systems are conducted.  The department has contracted a training
company at a cost of R70 000 to train internal staff on the new system.  It
also confirmed that an objective Committee is in place consisting of
internal and external personnel for the internal audit process.



The department has received qualified audits for the past five years and
cannot do much about it. In response to the Committee’s inquiry as when it
could expect an unqualified audit report the department stated it was not
expecting one in 2007. In explanation the department pointed out that the
new expenditure and systems implementation challenges associated with arms
procurement, specifically naval vessels, posed problems with other costs,
such as the need for more navigation time, increased training time, and
increased fuel consumption.



National Treasury had informed the department that the Integrated Financial
Management System (IFMS) will be provided to the department and that
therefore the department should not be spending funds on a new accounting
system.  The new system will only be implemented and ready for use by 2015.
The department concluded by stating that these equipment resource
constraints impeded progress towards achieving an unqualified audit. The
Committee did not accept that there was nothing the department could do to
overcome this challenge and advised the department that it would be
engaging them and also National Treasury further.



The department stated that it performs an agency function when it comes to
the UN payments. The Department of Defence receives these payments but the
funds are paid over to the National Revenue Fund.  The Committee intends
seeking further clarification on how this system works within the PFMA.



The department stated that the budget allocation for the Sudan Peace
Support Operation was R95 million. All Peace Support Operations’ budget
allocations totalled R836 million. The Sudan Peace Support Force budget
projections were inaccurate due to the practical problems encountered in
the field. The department projects a shortfall at the end of the financial
year, given experiences of unaccounted for allocations previously when
conducting field operations. The shortfall encountered by the department
was finally sourced from its internal budget.



The department projects some losses due to differences in the accounting
doctrines of the UN and South Africa, but the department is attempting to
control losses.  Future Peace Support Operations will hopefully be linked
to a computerised system.



The department explained that for a typical 10-year deployment they under
estimated by 40%. A factor contributing to under estimating their budget
was the nature of Peace Support Operations, which needed to be, met
immediately the political directive was issued.



The Committee recognised the challenges posed by peace keeping operations
and advised the department to develop a risk model that could be used for
such spending priorities, to be scrutinised by the department. It intends
engaging the department on this issue during the Fourth Quarterly Report
deliberations.



The department has a proactive programme focussed on preventative
maintenance, and new facilities development. The department has identified
mission critical areas relating to the upgrading of military hospitals and
large projects such as the upgrading of Waterkloof Airbase. The final phase
of completing the Thaba Tshwana Hospital is scoped within an 18-month
period. An amount of R50 million has been allocated for the upgrading of
Military Hospitals 1, 2, and 3. The Committee stated that it would follow
these commitments in the next Quarterly Report.



The department said it faced capacity issues on the technology provision
side, which were mainly due to contractors diverting their attention to
high-profile projects such as Gautrain.



The department is liaising with the Department of Foreign Affairs for the
timely, rather than annual, submission of invoices for payment of the
Foreign Affairs Military Officers’ VIP protection programme.  This will
improve cash flow.




5.2   Human resources and capacity aspects


The department has embarked on a programme to acquire scarce technical
skills. The department has programmes in place to build scarce technical
expertise skills, which has implications on the budget. A proactive measure
is making bursaries available in the areas of scarce technical skill.



The human resource challenges that the department experiences are no
different from those faced by other departments when it comes to staff
mobility. The department acknowledges that it is unable to compete with the
larger salaries of the private sector. Despite the public official
contractually bound for contract period, firms do not find it difficult to
buy the official out of the contract with the department.



There are various incentive schemes in place to retain scarce skills for
placement in rural areas, especially for Navy officials. The Department
realises that incentive schemes are not enough. The environment officials
work in, plays a huge role in retention strategies. The department pays the
tertiary studies of staff, expressing interest in enhancing skills of its
existing employees. The department is currently conducting research with
international institutions to find out how these institutions succeed in
retaining staff. The inflexibility in the budget was regarded as a problem
that impacts on the department’s ability to retain staff. The department is
developing the internship programmes to enhance the acquisition of new
skills.



The department is in the process of capacity development by aligning
capabilities from defensive to supportive. One aspect is the alignment of
the accounting systems, which were manually operated before. In general,
the defence capabilities were not ready for supportive operations abroad
through its internally computerised system. Other practical problems, such
as little or no electricity supply in the Burundi mission, further
highlighted the department’s capability challenges.



The department has not addressed investments in information and
communication technology (ICT) fully or running the PERSAL system. In the
area of logistics management, the department is running separate systems of
the different segments, such as the Army and Navy. These systems are based
on cash accounting, while other government entities have progressively
moved towards accrual accounting systems. The department intends to pilot a
new system for logistics, and lessons learned here would serve the
implementation of systems in other areas. There are projects underway to
integrate electronic maintenance and cooperation of all systems.


The department stated that the situation with the protracted procurement
process is a difficult one as the department shares it logistically with
other departments. The approval needed at various levels poses a constraint
to the department.   The department is busy recording suppliers on its
supplier database to facilitate the procurement system, which is still
being developed. The department’s asset register is a major challenge and
deals with the reconciling of the 10 or more systems used by the various
segments of the department. The department is in the process of ensuring a
more accurate register.  Part of the reason for the inaccurate asset
register was the size of the department when the transformation process
started.






5.3   General Comments


The Committee noted that further follow-up on this will have to be
conducted with regards to the payments for UN and other peace support
operations as accounted for in the MTEF.



The Committee noted that although the department has correctly identified
its spending priorities, the department struggles to effectively strategise
in terms of allocations to these priorities.



The Committee also noted that the department seems to fail to plan properly
for the implementation of some of its programmes and that there are no
apparent plans or procedures in place to remediate this lack of planning.



In its closing remarks, the Committee noted that clarity must be provided
on issues the department is not clear on. The Committee assured the
department that they will keep an eye on the budget and that the line is
closed if they were to ask for more funds.



The Committee referred to the graphical representation by the department to
explain the 2006/07 cash flow in detail. The Committee noted that it is
always best to show information against a baseline measurement.


  6. CONCLUSION


The mandate of the Committee is to scrutinise the budgetary implications of
service delivery .  It would be in the interest of departments to gain a
better understanding of this mandate to enable them to be better prepared
for future engagements with the Joint Budget Committee.



Financial Management problems proved to be an over-riding challenge in all
the departments that presented in this cluster. In performing its oversight
role, the Committee will continue to track the expenditure patterns of
departments in this cluster. This will be done thorough the relevant
monthly expenditure reports and the Section 32 reports on a quarterly
basis. The principle of accountability and transparency which is the
foundation of good fiscal governance, should inform expenditure management,
asset management and revenue management to ultimately achieve more robust
financial management and leading to improved service delivery.



Financial management problems proved to be an over-riding challenge in all
the departments that presented in this cluster. In its oversight the
Committee will continue to track the expenditure patterns of departments in
this cluster closely through the relevant Section 32 monthly expenditure
reports on a quarterly basis. The principle of accountability and
transparency which is the foundation of fiscal good governance in
departments should inform the management of allocations and expenditure to
achieve more robust financial management leading to improved service
delivery.



The Joint Budget Committee studied the relevant Sector Committee reports on
this cluster to achieve better oversight over the cluster and it believes
its own report would be of value to the same Sector Committees.



The Committee appreciates the presence of the Head of Departments that
attended the hearings on the Security Cluster and urged all departments to
send their highest level of delegations in future; preferably the executive
authority and/or the accounting officer as prescribed by the PFMA.
Departments can anticipate further constructive engagements with the
Committee. Furthermore, departments should strive towards conforming to the
reporting requirements of the PFMA and the Committee. The Committee thanked
all departments for its sincerity in reporting to the JBC during these
hearings.



  7. RECOMMENDATIONS
  1. Robust implementation of Financial Management and compliance with  the
     PFMA to achieve more effective outputs leading to  efficient  delivery
     and services should receive greater focus particularly  in  the  areas
     of:
      ▪ Internal controls
      ▪ Cash flows
      ▪ Tracking of expenditure commitments
      ▪ Supply chain management checks and balances
      ▪ Asset registers
      ▪  Allocation  and  monitoring  of  all  resources  including   human
        capital, buildings and equipment ensuring quality assurance
      ▪  Development  of  financial  management  systems,  procedures   and
        processes


  2. The Human Resource capacity challenges relating to departments in  the
     Security Cluster requires the urgent development of measures to retain
     skilled staff, and to capacitate if necessary re-skill existing  staff
     to overcome current constraints to service delivery.


  3.  Inter-departmental  and  inter-governmental  co-ordination  and   co-
     operation should be strengthened.


  4. Measurable objectives should be developed within the strategic plan to
     support more effective and  efficient  expenditures.   A  more  robust
     monitoring system should  be  developed  that  tracks  achievement  of
     outputs against expenditure Departments that have not already done  so
     should develop a risk management model that can assist it in  managing
     its cost drivers in dealing with other expenditure challenges


Report to be considered.


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Convention
      on International Interests in Mobile Equipment Bill [B1 – 2007]
      (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 28 March 2007:

         The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
         subject of the Convention on International Interests in Mobile
         Equipment Bill [B1 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred
         to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T070330E – insert 2 – PAGES 619-641

                           THURSDAY, 12 APRIL 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister of Defence


         Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill [B
         7 - 2007] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
         summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
         Government Gazette No 29636 of 23 February 2007.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Defence of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


2.    Translation of Bill submitted

     (1)    The Minister of Transport


         (a)      Wetsontwerp op die Konvensie oor Internasionale Belange in
             Mobiele Toerusting [W 1 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Convention
         on International Interests in Mobile Equipment Bill [B 1 – 2007]
         (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of
             misconduct regarding Mr K Suliman from Durban, in terms of
             section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (b)      Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of
             misconduct regarding Mr M K Chauke from Pretoria, in terms of
             section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (c)      Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of
             misconduct regarding Mr M S Makamu from Benoni, in terms of
             section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).
        (d)      Progress report on the inquiry into allegations of
             misconduct regarding Mr M F Mathe from Johannesburg, in terms
             of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).


        (e)      Report on withholding of remuneration of Magistrate K
             Suliman, in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act,
             1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


        (f)      Strategic Business Plan for the Department of Defence for
             the financial years 2007-2008 and 2009-2010 [RP 25-2007].


    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:

        (a)      Medium Term Strategic Plan for 2006-2010 and the Revised
             Operational Plan of the Department of Education for 2006-07.

    (4)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Film and
             Publication Board for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


    (5)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:
        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Ingonyama Trust Board for 2007-2008.

        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for 2007
             to 2008.

    (6)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs and the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration for consideration:
        (a)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Rand Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (b)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Namakwa Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (c)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Botshelo Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


        (d)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Lepelle Northern Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of
             the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003
             (Act No 56 of 2003).


        (e)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Bloem Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (f)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Umgeni Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (g)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Magalies Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


        (h)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Sedibeng Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


        (i)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Pelladrift Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


        (j)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Mhlatuze Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


        (k)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Bushbuckridge Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


        (l)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Amatola Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (m)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Albany Coast Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


        (n)      Increase in water tariffs for 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
             by Overberg Water, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).

    (7)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the
             year ended June 2006, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
             2006.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for
             the year ended June 2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
             ended June 2006.


    (8)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration:

        (a)      Amendment to Eskom’s pricing structure, tabled in terms of
             section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
             Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), and supporting
             documents required in terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.
        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Media Development and Diversity
             Agency (MDDA) for 2007 to 2010.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council
             (IMC) for 2007 to 2009.


        (d)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for
             2007 to 2010.


    (9)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2005.


        (b)      Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2005.
    (10)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs:

        (a)      Performance audit report of the Auditor-General on
             consultants at the Department of Trade and Industry – January
             2007 [RP 9-2007].

    (11)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2007 to
             2010.


        (b)      Memorandum by the Minister of Public Works setting out
             particulars of the Building Programme for 2007-2008 [RP 25-
             2007].


    (12)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:

        (a)      Government Notice No R186 published in Government Gazette
             No 29681 dated 1 March 2007: Amendment of Regulations in terms
             of the Long-term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 52 of 1998).


        (b)      Government Notice No R 194 published in Government Gazette
             No 29670 dated 9 March 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1331), made in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (c)      Government Notice No R 195 published in Government Gazette
             No 29670 dated 9 March 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1332), made in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (d)      Government Notice No R 196 published in Government Gazette
             No 29670 dated 9 March 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/283), made in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No 212 published in Government Gazette
             No 29658 dated 23 March 2007: Draft Municipal Regulations on
             Minimum Competency Levels made in terms of section 168(1) of
             the Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).
        (f)      Government Notice No 189 published in Government Gazette
             No 29683 dated 1 March 2007: Determination of interest rates
             for purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official
             Rate of Interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the
             Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

        (g)      Government Notice No 187 published in Government Gazette
             No 29669 dated 9 March 2007: Listing and delisting of Public
             Entities, made in terms of section 47 and 48 of the Public
             Finance Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

    (13)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

        (a)      Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
             January 2006 to June 2006, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the
             Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).


    (14)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Proclamation No R.24 published in Government Gazette No
             28885 dated 29 May 2006: Notification by President in respect
             of entities identified by the United Nations Security Council
             in terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004
             (Act No 33 of 2004).

        (b)      Proclamation No R.38 published in Government Gazette No
             29222 dated 19 September 2006: Notification by President in
             respect of entities identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

        (c)      Proclamation No R.44 published in Government Gazette No
             29284 dated 11 October 2006: Notification by President in
             respect of entities identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


        (d)      Proclamation No R.51 published in Government Gazette No
             29500 dated 22 December 2006: Notification by President in
             respect of entities identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

        (e)      Proclamation No R.2 published in Government Gazette No
             29598 dated 7 February 2007: Notification by President in
             respect of entities identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No 674-0329 between the
        United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
        Increased Use of HIV/AIDS and Other Primary Health Care Services,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

   (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Strategic Objective Grant
        Agreement No 674-0329 between the United States of America and the
        Republic of South Africa for Increased Use of HIV/AIDS and Other
        Primary Health Care Services.

   (c)      Addendum to the South Africa-European Community Country Strategy
        Paper and Multi-Annual Indicative Programme for the Period 2003-
        2005, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

   (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Addendum to the South Africa-
        European Community Country Strategy Paper and Multi-Annual
        Indicative Programme for the Period 2003-2005.

   (e)      Government Notice No 305 published in Government Gazette No
        29781 dated 5 April 2007: Exemption from certain Specific
        Provisions of the Act to facilitate electricity industry
        restructuring, in terms of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
        Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


2.    The Minister of Transport

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
        Corporation for 2003-2004, 2004-2005 and 2005-2006, including the
        Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
        2004, 2004-2005 and 2005-2006.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

   (a)      General Notice No 224 published in Government Gazette No 29674
        dated 2 March 2007: Invitation to members of the public to submit
        written comments on the national norms and standards for the
        management of elephants in South Africa, tabled in terms of section
        100 of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,
        2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

                          WEDNESDAY, 18 APRIL 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs


          a) Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8 – 2007] (National
             Council of Provinces – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary
             of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 29264 of 6 October 2006.]


              Introduction and referral to the Select Committee on Security
              and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
              Provinces, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
              (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.
              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within
              three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Government Notice No 210 published in Government Gazette No
         29698 dated 12 March 2007: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of the year 2007 Natura pure gold coin series, in terms
         of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (b)    Government Notice No 211 published in Government Gazette No
         29698 dated 12 March 2007: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of the year 2007 Protea coin series, in terms of the
         South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (c)    Government Notice No 212 published in Government Gazette No
         29698 dated 12 March 2007: The dimension of, design for and
         compilation of the year 2007 R1 and R2 pure gold coin series, in
         terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
         1989).


    (d)    Government Notice No 213 published in Government Gazette No
         29698 dated 12 March 2007: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of the year 2007 Crown size and 2½c Sterling silver
         coin series, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989
         (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (e)    Government Notice No 214 published in Government Gazette No
         29698 dated 12 March 2007: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of the year 2007 Sterling silver coin series, in terms
         of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (f)    Government Notice No 215 published in Government Gazette No
         29698 dated 12 March 2007: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of the year 2007 “FIFA 2010 Coin Series”, in terms of
         the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (g)    Government Notice No R.251 published in Government Gazette No
         29707 dated 23 March 2007: Amendment of Schedule No. 2 (No. 2/284),
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (h)    Government Notice No 271 published in Government Gazette No
         29742 dated 28 March 2007: Fixing Amount of Tax in Dispute for
         purposes of Appeal to Tax Board, in terms of the Income Tax Act,
         1962 (Act No 58 of 1962) and Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89
         of 1991).
    (i)    Government Notice No R.270 published in Government Gazette No
         29741 dated 28 March 2007: Transitional arrangements for
         municipalities following the deletion of paragraph (c) of the
         definition of “enterprise” in section 1 of the Act, the zero rating
         of municipal rates and other consequential amendments, in terms of
         the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of 1991).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


   (a)      The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 23 March 2007 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of the
        South African National Defence Force in Nepal:


           EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN NEPAL,
           FOR SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE  INTERNATIONAL  OBLIGATIONS  OF
           THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS, AS PART
           OF THE UNITED NATIONS POLITICAL MISSION IN NEPAL


           This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces  that  I
           have authorised the employment of  the  South  African  National
           Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to Nepal, in fulfilment  of  the
           international  obligations  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa
           towards the  United  Nations  as  part  of  the  United  Nations
           political mission in Nepal.
           This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
           of section 201(2)(c) of the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of
           South Africa, 1996, read with section 93  of  the  Defence  Act,
           2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).


           For a total of five (5) SANDF members are employed  as  military
           observers and staff officers of United Nations Political Mission
           in Nepal for a period of 12 Months. The deployment will commence
           as soon as  the  Presidential  Minute  is  approved.  The  total
           estimated cost to be borne by Defence will be R 1, 598 Million.


           I will communicate  this  report  to  members  of  the  National
           Assembly and wish to request that you bring the contents  hereof
           to the attention of the National Council of Provinces.


           Regards


           signed


           T M MBEKI

                          WEDNESDAY, 25 APRIL 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

   (1)      Corporate Laws Amendment Bill [B 6D – 2006] – Act No 24 of 2006
        (assented to and signed by President on 11 April 2007)

   (2)      Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill [B 34B – 2005] –
        Act No 23 of 2006 (assented to and signed by President on 11 April
        2007)


   (3)      South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill [B 7B
        – 2006] – Act No 25 of 2006 (assented to and signed by President on
        11 April 2007)

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

   (1)      Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
        Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. Referred to
        the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
        and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.


   (2)      Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill,
        2007, submitted by the Minister of Minerals and Energy. Referred to
        the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select
        Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.


TABLINGS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

   (a)      Quarterly report of the Auditor-General on the submission of
        financial statements by municipalities and the status of audit
        reports as at 31 December 2006 for the financial year ended 30 June
        2006 [RP 30-2007].

2.    The President of the Republic

   (a)      Report of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of
        Public Office Bearers for the year ended 31 December 2006.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Service
        Commission for the year ended 30 June 2006.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

   (a)      The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following
        letter dated 28 March 2007 to the Chairperson of the National
        Council of Provinces informing Members of the Council of the
        employment of the South African National Defence Force in the West
        Indies:
           EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE  IN  WEST
           INDIES,  FOR  SERVICE  IN  FULFILMENT   OF   THE   INTERNATIONAL
           OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH  AFRICA  TOWARDS  THE  WEST
           INDIES, TO ASSIST THE WEST INDIES IN SAFEGUARDING THE 2007 WORLD
           CUP CRICKET ON THE ISLANDS OF ST LUCIA, GRENADA AND BARBADOS


           This  serves  to  inform  the  National  Assembly  that  I  have
           authorised the employment of the South African National  Defence
           Force (SANDF) personnel to West Indies,  in  fulfilment  of  the
           international  obligations  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa
           towards the West Indies  in  safeguarding  the  2007  World  Cup
           tournament on the islands of St Lucia, Grenada and Barbados.


           This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
           of section 201(2)(c) of the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of
           South Africa, 1996, read with section 93  of  the  Defence  Act,
           2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).


           A total of thirteen (13) SANDF members will be employed, as from
           08 April to  30  April  2007,  to  assist  the  West  Indies  in
           safeguarding the World Cup  tournament  on  the  islands  of  St
           Lucia, Grenada and Barbados. The cost of the deployment will  be
           borne by the Department of Safety and Security.


           I will communicate  this  report  to  members  of  the  National
           Assembly and wish to request that you bring the contents  hereof
           to the attention of the National Council of Provinces.
           Regards


           signed


           P MLAMBO-NGCUKA
           ACTING PRESIDENT


   (b)      The Acting President of the Republic submitted the following
        letter dated 28 March 2007 to the Chairperson of the National
        Council of Provinces informing Members of the Council of the
        employment of the South African National Defence Force in the
        Republic of Mozambique:


           EMPLOYMENT OF THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE  FORCE  FOR
           SERVICE, IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE
           REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE GOVERNMENT OF THE  REPUBLIC
           OF MOZAMBIQUE FOR HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE


           This  serves  to  inform  the  National  Assembly  that  I  have
           authorised the employment of the South African National  Defence
           Force (SANDF)  personnel  to  the  Republic  of  Mozambique,  in
           fulfilment of the international obligations of the  Republic  of
           South  Africa  towards   the   Republic   of   Mozambique,   for
           humanitarian assistance in the preservation of life, health  and
           property resulting from the explosion of the ammunition  storage
           facility in the northern part of Maputo.


           This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions
           of section 201(2)(c) of the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of
           South Africa, 1996, read with section 93  of  the  Defence  Act,
           2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).


           A total of seventy (70) SANDF members are employed  as  from  26
           March  until  the  end  of  May  2007  to  provide  humanitarian
           assistance in the preservation  of  life,  health  and  property
           resulting from the explosion of the ammunition storage  facility
           in the northern part of Maputo. The total estimated cost  to  be
           borne by the Government of the Republic of South Africa is RM 5,
           887.


           I will communicate  this  report  to  members  of  the  National
           Assembly and wish to request that you bring the contents  hereof
           to the attention of the National Council of Provinces.


           Regards


           signed
           P MLAMBO-NGCUKA
           ACTING PRESIDENT

                            THURSDAY, 3 MAY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Finance

         (a)     Municipal Fiscal Powers and Functions Bill [B 9 – 2007]
              (National Assembly– proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
              Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 29775 of 13 April 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

     (2)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


         (a)     Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill
              [B 10 – 2007] (National Assembly– proposed sec 75)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 29822 of 19
              April 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as
              referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Government Notice No 317 published in Government Gazette No
         29797 dated 14 April 2007: Allocations per municipality for each
         schedule 3, 4, 6 and 7 allocation to local governments, and the
         framework for each schedule 4, 5 and 7 allocation, made under the
         Division of Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No 1 of 2007).

     (b)    Government Notice No 316 published in Government Gazette No
         29788 dated 13 April 2007: Regulations issued under section 91A
         prescribing the circumstances under which the Commissioner may
         write off or compromise any amount of tax, duty, levy, charge,
         interest, penalty or other amount, in terms of the Income Tax Act,
         1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

2.    The Minister of Labour
     (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2007 to 2010 [RP
         43-2007].

3.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     (a)    Strategic Plan for the South African Police Service for 2007-
         2008 [RP 34-2007].

                             FRIDAY, 4 MAY 2007

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Preliminary Annual Report of the Department of Labour for 2006-
         2007 [RP 44-2007].

     (b)    Strategic Plan of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund for 2007 to 2008.


2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Forestry

     (a)    General Notice No 329 published in Government Gazette No 29711
         dated 16 March 2007: Draft regulations on bio-prospecting, access
         and benefit-sharing: published for public comment, tabled in terms
         of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004
         (Act No 10 of 2004).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     (a)    Strategic Plan for the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
         for 2007/08 to 2009/10.

                             MONDAY, 7 MAY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Finance

         (a)     Pension Funds Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2007] (National
              Assembly– proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 29632 of 16 February 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

     (2)    The Minister of Finance


         (a)     Banks Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2007] (National Assembly–
              proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
              of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 29632
              of 16 February 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.
              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.


                            WEDNESDAY, 9 MAY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 30 April 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons
              Bill [B 7 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     (a)    South African Express Enabling Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister for Public Enterprises. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour
         and Public Enterprises.


     (b)    Broadband Infraco Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister for
         Public Enterprises. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

     (a)    Report of the Joint Standing Committee  on  Intelligence  (JSCI)
         for 2004-2005, in  terms  of  section  6(1)  of  the  Intelligence
         Oversight Act, 2002 (Act No 66 of 2002).




CREDA PLEASE SCAN DOCUMENT – PAGES 689-711


2. The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Government Notice No R.354 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         29813  dated  20  April  2007:  Correction  Notice:  Amendment  of
         Schedule No. 1 (No. 1/1/1334), made in terms of  the  Customs  and
         Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

          b) Government Notice No R.361 published in Government Gazette  No
             29824  dated  20  April  2007:  Regulations  prescribing   the
             circumstances under  which  the  Commissioner  may  waive  any
             amount of additional  tax,  penalty  or  interest  payable  by
             specific persons, in terms of the Small Business  Tax  Amnesty
             and Amendment of Taxation Laws Act, 2006 (Act No 9 of 2006).


3. The Minister of Correctional Services

     (a)    Strategic Plan for the Department of Correctional  Services  for
         2007/08 to 2011/12.

4. The Minister of Science and Technology

     (a)    Strategic Plan for the Department of Science and Technology  for
         2007 to 2008.

5. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr I X Masimini, an
         additional magistrate at Queenstown, in terms of section 13(4A)(b)
         of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).
COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Government
    Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1B - 2006] (National Assembly – sec
    75), dated 09 May 2007:

         The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
         subject of the Government Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1B -
         2006] (National Assembly-sec 75), referred to it, reports that it
         has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Protocol on Finance
    and    Investment of the Southern African Development Community, dated
    8 May 2007:
         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the Protocol on
         Finance and Investment of the Southern African Development
         Community, referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Protocol.

    Report to be considered.

                             FRIDAY, 11 MAY 2007

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      (a)   Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
         immigration process at the Department of Home Affairs – February
         2007 [RP 29-2007].

2.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

      (a)   Strategic Plan for the Department of Sport and Recreation for
         2007 to 2011.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Proclamation No R.5 published in Government Gazette No 29756
         dated 30 March 2007: Amendment of Proclamation in terms of the
         Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act
         No 74 of 1996).

4.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

      (a)   Government Notice No 355 published in Government Gazette No
         29814 dated 20 April 2007: Withdrawal of declaration of land under
         the authority of a resolution of the National Assembly: Vaalbos
         National Park, in terms of the National Environmental  Management:
         Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

      (b)   Government Notice No 392 published in Government Gazette No
         29862 dated 4 May: National Environmental Management Second
         Amendment Bill, 2007: For further regulation of environmental
         impact assessments, environmental authorisations and incidental
         matters for comment.

      (c)   Government Notice No 393 published in Government Gazette No
         29862 dated 4 May 2007: National Environmental Management Impact
         Assessment Regulations, 2006: For written comments.

      (d)   Government Notice No 394 published in Government Gazette No
         29862 dated 4 May: Amendment to the list of activities and
         competent authorities identified in terms of section 24(2) and
         24D, made in terms of the National Environmental Management Act,
         1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

      e) Government Notice No 395 published in Government Gazette No 29862
         dated 4 May: Amendment to the list of activities and competent
         authorities identified in terms of section 24(2) and 24D, made in
         terms of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No
         107 of 1998).

                             MONDAY, 14 MAY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     (a)    Human Sciences Research Council Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Science and Technology. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Science and Technology and the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation.


    (b)    Science and Technology Laws Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by
        the Minister of Science and Technology. Referred to the Portfolio
        Committee on Science and Technology and the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Strategic Plan for the South African Revenue Service for 2007/08
         to 2009/10.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     (a)    Report of the Strategic Industrial Projects for April 2002 to
         March 2006.


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     (a)    The following statement has been submitted to the National
         Council of Provinces by the MEC for Housing and Local Government
         in the Northern Cape under section 106(3) of the Local Government:
         Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000):

        Section 106 investigation: Renosterberg Local Municipality

        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration.


     (b)    Notice received from the Premier of the Western Cape Province
         regarding the intervention in the Oudtshoorn Municipality in terms
         of section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
         Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration for consideration and report.

        Copies of the statement and the notice are available from the
        office of the Clerk of Papers.

                            TUESDAY, 15 MAY 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     (a)    Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Safety and Security

     (a)    Strategic Plan for the Independent Complaints Directorate  (ICD)
         for 2007 to 2010.
2. The Minister of Education

      a) Strategic Plan for the Department of Education 2007 to 2011.



                           WEDNESDAY, 16 MAY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson


1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed and transmitted
    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 16 May 2007 and transmitted
         for concurrence:


         (a)     National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17B –
              2006] (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Education
         and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report oF the JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE On BUDGET ANALYSIS WORKSHOP

   1. Introduction

   Parliamentary oversight over the executive has reached a point where  the
   Legislature and its committees need to build capacity  to  keep  up  with
   reforms in the public sector. Such reforms have included new requirements
   for planning, budgeting, financial management and reporting. As a  result
   the Legislature has had to refine and develop its oversight processes  to
   ensure  that  information  from  the  executive  can  be  comprehensively
   interrogated to ensure better service delivery. More specifically it  has
   impacted on the manner in which parliamentary  committees  perform  their
   functions.


   The Joint Budget Committee (henceforth the JBC) has, over the past years,
   held several  workshops  to  develop  aspects  of  its  functioning.   In
   accordance with  this  approach,  the  JBC  held  a  workshop  on  budget
   analysis, practices and techniques on Monday the  19th  and  Tuesday  the
   20th of February 2007. Although the workshop focused on  these  subjects,
   discussions also touched on other issues relevant to the  Committee.  The
   workshop was facilitated by The Applied Fiscal  Research  Centre  (AFReC)
   and took place at Lagoon Beach Hotel, Milnerton.  Proceedings included:


        • A discussion on the JBCs’ Terms of Reference;
        • A presentation by AFReC on budget analysis techniques;
        •  A  presentation  by  National  Treasury  on  In-Year  Monitoring
          instruments and;
        • A presentation by the Auditor General on auditing techniques  and
          the Financial Management Capability Model.

   This Report serves both as  a  recap  of  the  event  and  a  summary  of
   challenges and action points for the JBC on how to be more  effective  in
   its oversight role.


   2. Joint Budget Committee’s Terms of Reference


   Parliament has, for the  past  several  years,  been  occupied  with  the
   process of reviewing and strengthening its oversight  function.  Part  of
   this involves developing oversight practices over budgetary matters. As a
   result,  Parliament  decided  to,  amongst  other  things,  establish   a
   committee, the Joint  Budget  Committee,  with  the  following  Terms  of
   Reference (TOR):

         1) Consider proposed allocations  in  the  Medium-Term  Expenditure
            Framework  and  the  Appropriation  Bill   and   whether   these
            allocations are broadly in keeping with the policy directions of
            the Government;

         2) Make proposals regarding the processes Parliament should  follow
            with regard  to  its  role  in  the  developing  of  budgets  in
            accordance with constitutional requirements;


      (3)   On a regular basis monitor monthly published actual revenue  and
          expenditure per department, and to ascertain whether they are  in
          line with budget projections;

       3) consider, when tabled, the Medium-Term Budget  Policy  Statement,
          with the exception of those  sections  dealing  with  the  macro-
          economic situation and revenue;
       4) conduct hearings on the  Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework  and
          Budget Policy  Review  Document,  with  the  exception  of  those
          sections dealing with the macro-economic situation and revenue;

   During the Workshop, the need to operationalise the JBC’s TOR  was  noted
   as fundamental. In the process of operationalising its TOR, the Committee
   identified various ongoing concerns, which needed to be addressed.  These
   include consolidating its mandate, especially its role  and  relationship
   vis-à-vis other Parliamentary structures and  other  state  institutions,
   addressing issues of capacity  and  programming  and  reviewing  its  own
   progress.


   2.1. The  Joint  Budget  Committee’s  TOR  and  Relationship  with  other
   Committees


   In terms of its general mandate, the JBC identified the  need  to  ensure
   that  budget  oversight  was  practiced   in   conjunction   with   other
   parliamentary committees, for example those engaged in  overseeing  state
   finances.


   To prevent overlap and improve operations, the JBC  recognized  that  the
   roles and responsibilities of each required clarification. The  Committee
   discussed, for  example,  to  what  extent  it  could  assess  issues  of
   institutional performance, such as value for money - which  falls  within
   the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA’s) remit. The  issue  of
   the JBCs engagement with the  provincial  and  local  spheres  and  other
   organs of state,  such  as  the  institutions  supporting  constitutional
   democracy – the Chapter Nine Institutions – were also raised.


   Once clarified, each committee could  then  design  analytical  tools  to
   engage the executive in its respective focus area effectively. Generally,
   the JBC felt it would be appropriate  for  the  Committee  to  be  making
   recommendations to Parliament. Related to this, the JBC  also  felt  that
   2007 was  a  suitable  juncture  to  revisit  and  update  its  2005-2009
   Strategic Plan.


   In relation to the role of JBC in influencing Money Bills, the  Committee
   stated that clarity was required in  terms  of  the  JBC’s  role  in  the
   Appropriation  Bill,  currently  formally  referred  to   the   Portfolio
   Committee on Finance and the Division of Revenue Bill, which  the  Select
   Committee on Finance engages with.


   The JBC further recognized that it should be  informed  of  progress  and
   make inputs into the work of the Task Team established by the Joint Rules
   Committee with the aim  of  developing  legislation  in  accordance  with
   Section 77 of the Constitution to allow Parliament to amend Money Bills.


   In addition, the  JBC  recognized  that,  in  conducting  oversight,  the
   imperative of  facilitating  public  participation  from  both  organized
   interest groups and from disadvantaged stakeholders, such as those active
   in the second economy, was an ongoing challenge. The Committee felt that,
   to supplement informational inputs of this kind, it could also engage  in
   more direct oversight through, for instance, visiting  sites  of  service
   delivery.


   Lastly, the JBC highlighted that due to Members busy  schedules  and  the
   programming arrangements for the National Assembly and  National  Council
   of Provinces, the ability of the Committee to fulfill its  mandate  in  a
   timely manner was considered to be serious challenge.


   2.2 Oversight over Parliament’s Budget


   A further specific oversight issue identified was  the  question  of  the
   JBCs  role  in  monitoring  and   assessing   Parliament’s   budget   and
   expenditure. The Committee felt that, until  the  legislation  regulating
   Parliament’s financial management has been adopted – the  development  of
   which the JBC  should  track  –  the  Committee  should  hold  Parliament
   accountable for budgetary matters.


   3. Capacity and Training Needs


   In terms of workload and capacity, the JBC highlighted a  lack  of  human
   resources and other support as an ongoing concern. To better  manage  its
   workload,  the  Committee  discussed  the  option  of  restructuring  the
   Committee and utilising a sub-committee system, similar to that  used  by
   SCOPA. In this regard, it was emphasised that the mandates of these  sub-
   committees  should  be  very  clear.  The  Committee  also  examined  the
   possibility of  developing  relations,  perhaps  through  memorandums  of
   understanding, with service providers and non-executive organs  of  state
   such as the Auditor-General and the Financial and Fiscal Commission.


   Training for Members on budget analysis was also raised as a focus  area.
   Specifically the JBC,  with  the  assistance  of  AFReC,  identified  the
   following training requirements or topics:


        •  Topic  1:  Information  and  training  on   in-year   monitoring
          activities  and  instruments,  specifically  how  to  effectively
          utilise departments’ Strategic Plans and  monthly  and  quarterly
          expenditure reports.
        • Topic 2:  Training on public finance terminology and instruments:
          the JBC highlighted the need for more clarity on  public  finance
          terms such as inputs, outputs, activities,  outcomes,  allocative
          efficiency, operational efficiency, etc.  These should be clearly
          demonstrated in terms of departmental examples.
        • Topic 3:  Budget formats – best practices that departments should
          use when budgeting.
        • Topic 4: The role and nature of adjustment  budgets  and  whether
          such adjustments were used for under or over expenditure.
        • Topic 5:  Training on performance budgeting, which would  aid  in
          determining the impact  of  changes  in  output  and  quality  of
          services when resource envelopes are adjusted.   The  example  of
          the rehabilitation of specific prisons in the country was used to
          illustrate  the  need  to  clearly  understand  the  relationship
          between costs (resources, inputs) and outputs.
        • Topic 6:  Fiscal dumping - how to interpret early warning signals
          and act on instances of fiscal dumping.  In this regard  the  JBC
          noted examples of  extraordinary  fiscal  dumping  exercises  and
          highlighted the need  for  the  appropriate  timing  of  national
          budget payments to other spheres of government.
        • Topic 7:   Transfers  and  subsidies.   Although  linked  to  the
          concern about fiscal dumping, the JBC highlighted  the  need  for
          clarity and proper understanding of the prerequisites of  grants,
          transfers and subsidies to entities as  well  as  information  on
          expenditure and quality of outputs delivered.
        • Topic 8: Public participation in budgetary processes: the JBC and
          other committees may need to explore how to link  up  with  civil
          society initiatives on the budget. The Institute for a Democratic
          South Africa (IDASA), for example, has a programme  dedicated  to
          budgetary  analysis  and  the  Committee  could   enquire   about
          possibilities for support.
        •  Topic  9:  Vacancies  in  the  public  sector–   the   need   to
          contextualise the practical problems and current remedies.


   As an initial  step,  the  JBC  stated  that  guidelines  on  the  annual
   programme of the Committee as well as a manual on best practice to inform
   topical and technical questions to  departments  would  be  of  practical
   assistance and be useful for developing institutional memory.


   4. Presentation by the National Treasury and JBC Discussions


   The National Treasury (NT) presented on various  subjects  including  the
   implementation of financial management legislation,  expenditure  reports
   and monitoring, infrastructure projects and under expenditure.


   4.1 The Implementation of Financial Management Legislation


   Concerning the implementation of financial management legislation such as
   the  PFMA,  Treasury  stated  that  the  lack  of  project  planning  and
   management capacity was a serious problem evident throughout  government.
   Although enthusiasm  was  present,  information  and  skills  were  often
   lacking at under-performing departments and entities.   Examples of  this
   were the recurring requests by some departments for monthly disbursements
   of one twelfth of the total annual funding envelope – this often does not
   coincide with the practical expenditure needs.


   The JBC noted the lack of financial management skills within  government.
   The Committee further stressed the need for departments  to  comply  with
   legislative requirements and,  in  this  context,  made  the  example  of
   departments not paying suppliers within the 30  day  time  period.  Small
   suppliers in particular needed to be protected from  extended  delays  in
   payments.  Treasury stated  that  the  necessary  funds  for  payment  of
   suppliers were normally adequate although, due to internal inefficiencies
   and poor cash management in departments, these payments  were  often  not
   made within the prescribed time periods.


   4.2 Monitoring Expenditure and Infrastructure


   Treasury highlighted the importance of monitoring budgeted versus  actual
   revenue and expenditure figures as well as audited outcomes  of  previous
   budgets.  Treasury agreed that PFMA Section 32 reports  -  whose  purpose
   was to report on the implementation of the Appropriation Act,  and  after
   October of each year, the Adjustments Appropriation Act – were  important
   but limited oversight instruments: they could not,  for  example,  assist
   the JBC and other oversight bodies in picking up on fiscal dumping in the
   last quarter of each financial year. Apart from Section  32  Reports,  NT
   also  produces  an  internal  report,  which  monitors  departments   and
   entities’ expenditure patterns and service delivery.  These  reports  are
   not published.


   Treasury also presented on the financing, expenditure and  monitoring  of
   infrastructure projects. Some of the problems in infrastructure  roll-out
   were highlighted, such as the  lengthy  delays  in  environmental  impact
   assessments  and  delays  associated  with  litigation.   Treasury   also
   explained its national infrastructure project register, which tracks  the
   progress of governmental infrastructure projects from the  identification
   phase through to the design, construction and completion phases.  Similar
   registers  were  also  being  established   for   provincial   government
   infrastructure  programmes.  Notably,  the  register  was  not  currently
   reflected in Section 32 reports. Treasury stated that it was  reliant  on
   accurate and  timeous  input  from  departments  and  provinces  for  the
   updating of this register. Treasury added that it would be  difficult  to
   utilise the register for oversight purposes as it was complex system.


   Treasury also  indicated  that  there  were  separate  teams  to  monitor
   individual infrastructure projects although their ability in this  regard
   varied: large construction projects, such as dam construction, were  easy
   to monitor whilst smaller projects, such as the Department of  Trade  and
   Industry (DTI)’s small enterprises development agency outlets  in  towns,
   were more difficult. The NT stated that the monitoring of these  projects
   should also be a bottom-up  participative  process  in  that  communities
   should assist with the verification of completion and quality  standards.
   The NT could only effectively focus on the financial reporting aspect  of
   departments’ service delivery programmes  and  outputs.  Some  monitoring
   functions are delegated to Provincial Treasuries.


   Treasury added that the monitoring of infrastructure  projects  at  local
   level was particularly problematic.  The  example  of  the  multi-purpose
   community centres (MPCCs) was  used  –  with  NT  indicating  that  local
   authorities often did not want to maintain and operate these centres. The
   tracking of Housing was also noted as a challenge  –  Treasury  explained
   that the nature of the Department of Housing’s database as  well  as  its
   internal tracking systems made it difficult to count finalized units. The
   example of the slow pace of the  N2  Gateway  project  was  given.   This
   project generated unique delivery  problems  and  delays,  compounded  by
   community preferences for the location of houses and the relative cost of
   temporary relocation.


   The JBC noted the lack  of  proper  asset  registers  and  the  need  for
   departments, provinces and municipalities to properly value  and  account
   for their assets was emphasized. In addition, the Committee  referred  to
   the importance of parliamentary oversight over the  Gautrain  rapid  rail
   project and the issue of monitoring the transfers of funds from  national
   to provincial government for this  purpose.  Treasury  indicated  it  was
   currently piloting a project monitoring tool to ease financial accounting
   of transfers and subsidies.


   Concerning the question of monitoring and enforcing  conditional  grants,
   Treasury explained that, in cases where government departments failed  to
   meet conditions for grants, it had yet to use the  legislated  mechanisms
   to  enforce  compliance.  Instead,  the  practice  had  been  for  NT  to
   facilitate quarterly meetings with the relevant departments and entities.
   The NT added  that  it  would  welcome  the  assistance  of  the  JBC  in
   formulating and overseeing the implementation of criteria for grants.


   4.3 Under-Expenditure


   Treasury reported that under-expenditure was still a concern,  especially
   in some essential services such as Health – the  Hospital  Revitalization
   Programme was used as an example. Funds were, however, still allocated to
   these services due  to  their  importance.  In  other  cases  funds  were
   redirected to other departments. Generally reasons for  under-expenditure
   varied but, as  was  the  case  of  Health,  dysfunctional  supply  chain
   management and a lack of management skills were often cited as causes.  A
   further example related  to  the  construction  of  certain  correctional
   centres, where the lack of proper feasibility studies  severely  hampered
   roll out. Even though the NT proposed that Public  Private  Partnership’s
   (PPP) arrangements should be followed with the building of these centres,
   the relevant Department resisted.  The issue of the correctional  centres
   was of great concern to the JBC as the centres were supposed to  be  near
   completion.


   Finally, Treasury asserted not all instances  of  under-expenditure  were
   due to poor financial management: in the case of the Department  of  Land
   Affairs, for instance, money destined for land restitution  projects  was
   taken away due to  external  difficulties  in  the  restitution  process.
   Generally, however, most cases  of  under-  expenditure  could  often  be
   traced to inadequate strategic planning.


   4.4 Vacancies


   On the subject of vacancies in the public sector, Treasury revealed  that
   employee appointment procedures in government were  complex  and  lengthy
   and should  perhaps  be  streamlined.  In  addition,  NT  indicated  that
   vacancies in departments were sometimes inflated to that they could  vire
   from these budget line items at the end of financial year to cover  other
   expenditure.


   The JBC stated its concern  about  the  skills  mismatch  in  the  public
   service as well as the payment of bonuses despite the failures  and  lack
   of performance contracts. The  Committee  further  raised  the  issue  of
   unrealistic bonuses when Key Performance Indicators have  not  been  met.
   Key Performance Indicators (KPI’s) should be  thoroughly  researched  and
   require focused scrutiny.


   5. Presentation by the Auditor General and JBC Discussions


   The Auditor General, Mr Terence Nombembe, in his first  interaction  with
   the  JBC,  presented  on  the  Financial  Capability  Model.   Prior   to
   discussing the  model,  the  AG  explained  the  three  types  of  audits
   undertaken by his office:

   a) audits on the  reliability  of  financial  information  presented  in
      annual reports, which look for adequate evidence  for  the  financial
      info presented  in  annual  report.   The  AG  noted  the  increasing
      intensity of doubt about evidence in some entities’ annual reports.
   b) audits of service delivery information – officially known as  “audits
      of predetermined objectives”.  Underlying information should  support
      objectives set out in strategic plan.   The AG reported that  the  NT
      and the Dept. of Public Services and meet to define what  information
      should be included in annual reports.
   c) performance  audits,  which  take  a  closer  look  at  the  delivery
      competence  of  entities.   Performance  audits   cover   issues   of
      efficiency, effectiveness, and economy (the  three  “Es”)  of  public
      expenditure  management.   For  example,  such  audits  examine   the
      input/output ratios of entities service delivery programmes.

   The Auditor General conceded that it is a common mistake to  confuse  the
   last two types of audits.  It is the intention of the AG to  reverse  the
   level of concentration in the first type of audit towards a focus on  the
   last two types of audits.  A balance between the three  types  of  audits
   would bring  the  operations  of  the  AG  closer  to  similar  benchmark
   institutions in the  world.  The  AG  informed  the  Committee  that  for
   purposes of performance  audits  his  office  would  work  together  with
   stakeholders such as the JBC.


   The Financial Management Capability Model


   The Auditor General  of  Canada  has  developed  a  Financial  Management
   Capability Model that can be used by regularity auditors to determine the
   financial management capabilities of government departments.  This  model
   formed the basis for the model currently under development by  the  South
   African Office of the AG.  The object of this  model  was  to  provide  a
   framework to enable the reader of Annual Reports to assess  the  adequacy
   of financial management, to monitor progress and to make comparisons.


   The AG explained the various levels of analysis contained in the model:


       • Level 1:  Start-up level. No  proper  control  framework  exists  -
         basic planning and  control  taking  place  on  an  ad  hoc  basis.
         Financial accounting and  internal  control  systems  not  properly
         developed.  No  internal   audit   systems   or   audit   committee
         established.
       • Level 2: Development level. This level involves the development  of
         proper  internal  control  frameworks  and   financial   accounting
         processes.  Internal  audit  systems  and  audit   committees   are
         established. Both Level 1 and 2  are  considered  unacceptable  for
         departments and the AG typically  requires  progress  reports  from
         relevant departments on how they plan to improve.
       • Level 3: Control level.  The focus at level  3  is  on  the  proper
         implementation and functioning and  the  performance  of  financial
         accounting and internal control systems, including compliance  with
         financial  management  legislation.  The  AG  noted  that  not  all
         departments and entities in South Africa had reached this level and
         added that performance audits would gradually  increase  in  volume
         once financial management requirements (Level 3) are met.
       • Level 4:  Information level. The focus on Level 4 was on  measuring
         how resources are  used  with  reliable  and  sufficient  financial
         information.   This  level  of  capability  typically  resulted  in
         unqualified audit reports.
       • Level 5: Managed level.  The focus is on  balancing  efficient  and
         economical use of resources with quality  and/or  effectiveness  of
         results achieved.
       • Level 6: Optimising level.  The focus is on continuous  improvement
         and learning.

   The AG indicated that the model provided a benchmark for improvement  and
   assists by  asking  the  most  relevant  questions,  and  in  simplifying
   conclusions  over  the  capacities  of  entities.  The  AG  stated   that
   explanations and assessments based on the Financial Management Capability
   Model would be included in the next General Report of the AG.


   6. Recommendations


   In  line  with  its  Terms  of  Reference,  the  Joint  Budget  Committee
   recommends the following:


   6.1 For the JBC to fulfill its oversight and monitoring responsibilities,
   the Committees TOR must be further clarified and developed.   It  follows
   that an operational system for  the  Committee  should  be  designed  and
   implemented. An operational system should address, amongst other  issues,
   the overlapping functional areas between the JBC  and  other  committees,
   for example SCOPA and the Portfolio and Select Committees on Finance,  as
   well as the Committee’s reporting functions. Such a  plan  would  empower
   the  JBC  to  alert  the  relevant  sector  committees   to   interrogate
   departments  on  expenditure  management  issues  as  they   arise.   One
   additional option may be for the JBC to include a matrix of key questions
   as an annexure to every quarterly report.


   6.2 In addition, the Committee should undertake a formal  training  needs
   assessment. As an initial step, guidelines on the annual programme of the
   Committee as well as a manual detailing topical and  technical  questions
   to departments could be developed.


   6.3 Related to the above, the capacity needs of the Committee  should  to
   be addressed. This would necessitate, amongst  other  things,  addressing
   the  issue  of  institutional  memory  and  ensuring  continuity  in  the
   Committee’s human resources and technical support.




   6.4 The JBC should confer with other committees on  strategic  plans  and
   budget votes in order to track input/output ratios and later  assess  the
   outcomes achieved. The Committee also  indicated  that  PFMA  Section  32
   reports provide little information that could be used  by  committees  to
   detect early warning signs on spending and service delivery. The JBC will
   further engage with National Treasury on this matter.


   6.5 That the JBC should consult with the AG in  future,  specifically  on
   the Financial Management Capability Model and  whether  departments  have
   reflected on this model.

Report to be considered.

                            THURSDAY, 17 MAY 2007


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
        Government Association (SALGA) for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
        [RP 24-2007].

                             FRIDAY, 18 MAY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 18 May 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6), classified the following Bills as section 76 Bills:


         (a)     Housing Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill [B 6 –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


         (b)     Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8 – 2007]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 18 May 2007 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6), classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:


          a) Municipal Fiscal Powers and Functions Bill [B 9 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b)  Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill [B
             10 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


         (c)     Pension Funds Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


         (d)     Banks Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

2.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


    (a)     Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted
         by the Minister of Transport. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
         on Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      a) Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the Division
         of Revenue Bill for 2008-2009, tabled on 16 May 2007 in terms of
         section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997
         (Act No 97 of 1997).

                             MONDAY, 21 MAY 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General to the Trustees on the financial
        statements of the 23rd Africa Cup of Nations in Mali Trust for the
        period 21 December 2001 to 31 December 2003 [RP 41-2007].

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

      a) Strategic Plan for the Department of Minerals and Energy for
         2006/07 to 2011/12.

                            TUESDAY, 22 MAY 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces
The Chairperson


1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 22 May 2007 and transmitted
         for concurrence:


         (a)     Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters)
              Amendment Bill [B 50B – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Strategic Plan for the Department of Home Affairs for 2007-2008
        to 2009-2010.

    (b)     Annual Performance Plan for the Department of Home Affairs for
        2007-2008.

2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

    (a)     Strategic Plan for the Department of Public Service and
        Administration for 2007-2010.


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Strategic Plan for the Department of Trade and Industry for
        2007-2010.



