---
title: 'National Assembly - 22 November 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-11-22
---

THURSDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at  least  three  working  days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled,  be  suspended  for
   the purposes of  conducting  the  Second  Reading  debate  today  on  the
   following Bills:


     1) Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21B– 2007]
        (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)); and


     2) Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] (National
        Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).

Agreed to.

          REMUNERATION OF PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby move the
motion as printed in my name on the Order Paper:

   That the House resolves that -


   (1)      in terms of section 2(1) of the Remuneration of Public Office
        Bearers Act, 1998 (Act No 20 of 1998), and having due regard to the
        criteria listed in that subsection, the salary payable to the
        President of the Republic of South Africa be determined at one
        million two hundred and seventy thousand and forty five rand (R1
        270 045,00) per annum, with effect from 1 April 2007; and


   (2)      in terms of section 2(2) of the said Act, the amount of forty
        thousand rand (R40 000,00) per annum be determined as that portion
        of the remuneration of the President to which section 8(1)(d) of
        the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962), shall apply.

Agreed to.

                       LAUNCH OF SILINDIWE CONSORTIUM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs Z A KOTA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC believes that housing is a
right. We, therefore, endorse the principle that all South Africans have
the right to a secure place in which to live in peace and dignity.

Housing is a human right. The ANC congratulates the SA Women in
Construction for the successful launch of the Silindiwe Consortium. This is
a consortium of unemployed women who volunteered their services during the
month of August by building houses in New Rest. These courageous women
continue to work hand-in-hand with Thubelisha. As we speak, they are part
of the Women’s Build in New Rest, aimed at marking the 16 Days of Activism
of No Violence Against Women and Children.

The ANC welcomes this bold initiative, and thanks them for their
participation in this joint venture, along with the Department of Housing
and the private sector. We thank the Minister, in particular, for the
support given to these 300 unemployed women, who from today will be active
participants in the housing industry. We call upon all women from all walks
of life to emulate this example. Forward to the caring ANC government!
Thank you. [Applause.]

          SUITABILITY OF KHAYA NGQULA FOR SAA CHIEF EXECUTIVE POST

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Madam Speaker, despite celebrating the three-year
anniversary of his position, SA Airways chief executive emperor, Khaya
Ngqula, has roundly failed to prove his suitability for his job.

SAA’s momentary return to profitability after the hedging disaster of 2004
was due to operational gains achieved by Ngqula’s disgraced predecessor and
Transnet’s financial engineering, and not because of Ngqula’s skills. His
numerous run-ins with staff and his personal extravagance aside, Ngqula has
also fallen into the habit of spoon-feeding Parliament bad news in bite-
sized pieces, only when he has pie-in-the-sky profit projections to sugar-
coat it with.

Presumably to escape scrutiny, Ngqula announced that SAA is facing a R3
billion loss at the end of 2007-08, only on 8 November at a public press
conference, instead of in Parliament. SAA has already received in excess of
R2 billion of the R3 billion in recapitalisation funds that it was promised
by government. In the light of this situation, the R1,7 billion in profit
targeted for the end of the 2008-09 financial year is not credible at all.
Ngqula is clearly engaging in a massive game of smoke-and-mirrors to ensure
that his tenure at SAA is extended for as long as possible. If Minister
Erwin allows it to continue, the joke will be on him. Thank you.

             THEFT OF DETONATORS FROM DENEL FACTORY IN PHILLIPI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP has learned with great concern
about the theft of more than 3 000 detonators from a Denel munitions
factory in Philippi.

The theft was apparently discovered last Friday, but it is not yet clear
when it actually took place. Detonators are harmless on their own, but are
a critical element for triggering explosives. When these detonators are
combined with commercial or military-grade explosives, it becomes a lethal
combination. We know that hundreds of ATMs around the country have been
blown up using stolen explosives, usually of a commercial nature. If these
stolen detonators were to find their way to criminal syndicates with access
to stolen explosives, one of their biggest problems of getting detonators
would have been solved, and we can expect an increase in the use of
explosives to carry out crimes.

What is even more worrying is that this is the second theft in a couple of
weeks from this Denel factory. Previously, smoke grenades were stolen, and
two employees were arrested. Clearly security at this factory is
inadequate, and serious questions have to be raised whether employees are
subject to security clearance and vetting procedures. In addition, we have
to wonder about access control procedures, and whether random searches of
personnel are carried out.

This is a matter of national concern, and drastic steps are needed before
more lethal ammunition is stolen from this facility. Thank you.

                       ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENT INJURIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B M NTULI (ANC): Madam Speaker, road traffic accident injuries are a
global problem affecting all sectors of society. Due to the number of road
traffic accident injuries worldwide, there is a need to focus increased
attention on searching for ways to reduce injuries, including
multidisciplinary collaboration.

The ANC believes that the response to road accidents should be
interdisciplinary and intersectorally scientific. It should involve
collective action, emphasise primary prevention and provide maximum benefit
to the largest number of people. The Sifundzekhaya Primary School in
Driekoppies is the site of a junior traffic training centre, complete with
a miniature road network that includes pedestrian crossings, traffic lights
and stop streets. Children are taught about, among other things, the rules
of the road and other road safety measures.

The ANC commends the efforts made by the school to raise awareness about
the rules that govern road usage. Thank you.

                           NATION’S LOSS OF VALUES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Madam Speaker, one of the most important values
this nation has lost is respect for life, authority and property. Many
children have lost respect for their parents, teachers and the elderly in
general. When one sees how old pensioners are treated by officials, the
long queues they have to stand in and the long hours they have to wait
before receiving their grants, one can only conclude that government has
also lost respect for the elderly. We wonder why our elderly people are not
treated with the dignity they deserve as they are our parents.

It was sad to read about pensioners who had to flee from robbers yesterday
morning in Umlazi. Reports said that some of the elderly people sustained
injuries when the robbers attacked. One of them, who was pistol-whipped,
sustained serious injuries. A police spokesperson said that the robbers
entered the hall and held up people at gunpoint. This incident happened
just a week after three elderly women escaped a hail of bullets at the
Hibberdene pension paypoint.

The ACDP wants to know why government is not providing sufficient security
for these elderly people at paypoints. Why are we seeing
government guaranteeing the safety of international guests, but not
concerned enough about ensuring the safety of our most vulnerable people,
especially the elderly? If government cannot protect us all, the least they
can do is to protect our elderly, and that is my appeal.

                          SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Speaker, the ID calls on all South African
leaders to move quickly to eradicate the sexual abuse of our children by
their elders and other children. I was shocked to read the Sunday Times
story that showed that some of our children are continuing the cycle of
sexual violence of older generations. This is an emergency that threatens
to become a permanent stain on our national conscience.

As leaders, we have a constitutional mandate to ensure that our children
are protected from all forms of abuse. Section 28(1)(d) of the Constitution
states that every child has a right “To be protected from maltreatment,
neglect, abuse or degradation”.

Children are the only sector of the population that are entitled to second-
generation human rights. This is not just a responsibility of government,
but every single public representative who must teach their constituency to
protect the most vulnerable in our society. Our communities must break the
silence and report perpetrators, so that we can convincingly restore our
dignity as a nation.

Minister Zola Skweyiya must be supported in his struggle to deliver on the
constitutional rights of our children. We hope that he will be successful
in his quest to extend the child grant to children up to 18 years, and we
hope that Minster Manuel will agree to this. Thank you.

                 MATTERS CONCERNING AWAITING-TRIAL DETAINEES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D V BLOEM (ANC): Madam Speaker, as the ANC we acknowledge the collective
downward management of offenders which demonstrates that we are on the
right track with a small, but significant and sustained impact on, for
example, the numbers of those awaiting trial that were reduced during the
reporting period by 1,53%.

We further commend and appreciate the initiatives by Minister Balfour and
further note his recent visits to the correctional centres in the Eastern
Cape, namely Middledrift and Fort Beaufort. The ANC condemns the inhumane
conditions in our prisons caused by overcrowding. The visit by the Minister
has urged the magistrates in Alice, Middledrift and Fort Beaufort to help
cut down overcrowding, especially with the expected increase in arrests
over the festive season.

These interventions are informed by our commitment to prioritise the human
conditions of our correctional centres in order to curb any systemic
failures that could destabilise the entire prison population.

We support the Minister in his efforts and further urge the state not to
oppose bail for nonserious offences unless there is a danger of them
influencing the investigation. The officials should make an extra effort to
assist the awaiting-trial detainees still in prison because they cannot
afford to pay their bail. Over 10 000 awaiting-trial detainees cannot
afford bail of R1 000 and less and yet keeping them in prison costs the
taxpayer R2,34 million per day. That is a lot of money. Thank you very
much.

                     COMPLETION OF GRADE 12 EXAMINATIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Madam Speaker, it has been a long slog for the
Grade 12 learners who were sitting for an examination that also put paid to
the old curriculum. Notwithstanding what we said in the early days of the
examination, a fair share of hiccups reared its head as a very small number
of cases occurred – or rather, a number of wrong papers were opened - for
which wrongdoers have been taken to the cleaners already.

A plus in this case is that backup papers are always at hand so that when
the need arises there is no crisis. This may cause some discomfort, as has
been the case with learners in the Western Cape who feel hard done by
because of having to finish their examination tomorrow, 23 November 2007.

The UCDP calls on teachers to teach and take pride in what they do to avoid
encouraging young people to indulge in acts of dishonesty by allowing them
to copy from textbooks and notes during examinations. Such a practice
destroys the future of the children as more often they will strive to
obtain whatever they have to by such underhand methods. We also commend the
authorities for acting promptly by bringing in prefabricated structures to
assist after school roofs were blown off by heavy storms.

A big test awaits the Department of Education, however, as Grade 12
learners, who do not make the grade, will not be allowed to repeat because
of curriculum changes. It remains to be seen what will happen to these
unfortunate learners. Will they be allowed to swell the numbers of the
partly schooled and unemployed people roaming the streets? Let us hope the
department props them up. I thank you.

                 FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO ERADICATE POVERTY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Speaker, die skokkende verslag van die Suid-
Afrikaanse Instituut vir Rasseverhoudinge, dat armoede in Suid-Afrika oor
’n tydperk van 10 jaar verdubbel het, plaas groot vraagtekens oor die
regering se verklaarde vermoë “to drive back the frontiers of poverty”.

Volgens die verslag het armoede in al die provinsies persentasie gewys
toegeneem. Dit is duidelik dat die sogenaamde swart ekonomiese bemagtiging,
SEB, net ‘n cliché is wat gebruik word om goed gekonnekteerde kamerade
multimiljoenêrs in multibiljoenêrs te maak, wat weer op hulle beurt die
primêre donateurs van die regerende party word.

Die Uitgebreide Openbare Werke Program intervensie met sy polities-gedrewe
verwagtinge bereik glad nie sy doel nie. Miljoene rande wat deur die
Departement van Sosiale Ontwikkeling vir hulpbehoewendes bestem is, beland
in die sake van duisende amptenare wat nog knussies in hul posisies sit met
slegs ’n “slap on the wrist”. Dan spandeer moedswillige en hartelose
staatsamptenare nog miljoene aan hofonkostes teen mense soos Me Jonghi van
die Oos-Kaap om haar te
ontneem van toelaes wat sy verloor het omdat daar chaos in die
administratiewe prosesse van die Departement van Sosiale Ontwikkeling is.

Dit is duidelik dat die 2014 Millennium-ontwikkelingsdoelwitte om armoede
te halveer net ’n droom sal bly. Dat ons te midde van hierdie see van
armoede en verbreekte beloftes van “a better life for all” nog miljoene wil
spandeer aan die bou van ’n nuwe parlementêre gebou beteken ‘of iemand is
die kluts heeltemal kwyt’ of daar word weer geleentheid geskep, soos met
die wapenaankope, vir die skuim om die room van ons land te steel. Ek dank
u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)
[Mr S E OPPERMAN: Speaker, the shocking report of the South African
Institute for Race Relations, that poverty in South Africa will double over
a period of 10 years, raises questions about the government’s declared
ability “to drive back the frontiers of poverty”.

According to the report, poverty has increased proportionally in all
provinces. It is clear that the so called black economic empowerment, BEE,
is simply a cliché used to make well-connected comrades millionaires into
billionaires, who in their turn again are the primary donors of the
governing party.

The Extended Public Works Programme intervention with its politically
driven expectations is not achieving its goal at all. Millions of rands
earmarked by the Department of Social Development for the vulnerable, land
in the pockets of thousands of officials who are still sitting cosily in
their positions with only a “slap on the wrist”. Then wilful and heartless
public servants spend more millions on legal costs against people like Ms
Jonghi of the Eastern Cape to deprive her of grants she lost because there
is chaos in the administrative processes of the Department of Social
Development.

It is clear that the 2014 Millennium Development Goals to halve poverty
will remain a dream. Since we intend, in the midst of this sea of poverty
and broken promises of “a better life for all”, to spend millions more
building a new parliamentary building, it means that either someone has
completely lost the plot, or another opportunity is being created, as with
the arms deal, for the scum to steal the cream of our country. I thank
you.]

                               OPERATION VALA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N B FIHLA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the people of South Africa laid down
their lives to live in peace and in a secure environment. The festive
season again poses a serious challenge to the Department of Correctional
Services in terms of the perceived escalation in attempts by offenders to
escape and the security risk this brings to the safety and security of the
public.

One escape by an offender places an enormous and extra burden on the
resources of other security partners, namely the SA Police Service and this
further diverts attention in terms of human and material resources from
more critical crime prevention operations to the tracing and tracking of
the offenders.

The festive season safety plan under the banner of Operation Vala should
also find resonance within the context of diverting and channelling
offenders’ activism towards sports and recreational activities as a means
of promoting rehabilitation through sports during this period. The launch
will take place in Kokstad during the beginning of December and as the ANC
we commend the Department of Correctional Services on its efforts to
involve itself in crime prevention and awareness measures that aim to
complement government security measures and plans during the festive
season. I thank you.

                        CONTAMINATED WATER IN GAUTENG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkul M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Manana Xipikara, IFP yi hlamarisiwa yi tlhela yi
thukisiwa ngopfu hi leswi tsariweke eka phepha hungu ra Star ra 24 Ndzati
2007, hikokwalaho ka mati ya le Gauteng lawa lava sayense va kumeke leswaku
ya na switsongwa-tsongwana leswi nga na matimba yo hlamarisa matimba lawa
ya nga kotaka ku hundzuluxa rimbweu ra vanhu.

Hi kombela leswaku mhaka leyi yi langutisisiwa hikuva exikarhi ka hina a
nga kona loyi a nga tsakelaka leswaku loko a ri wanuna siku rin’wana a
tikuma a ri wansati. Loko a ri wansati a tikuma a ri wanuna. Inkomu.
(Translation of Xitsonga member’s statement follows.)

[Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP is baffled by what has been
reported in The Star newspaper of 24 September 2007 about the water
contamination in Gauteng. Scientists have found that the water is so
contaminated that it can even change a person’s sex.
We request that the matter be investigated. There is no man amongst us who
would like to wake up one day and be a woman, or a woman who would want to
be a man. Thank you.]

                          NEW ANC WEBSITE LAUNCHED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J J MAAKE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC launches its website today. We
congratulate the caucus on this important development. The development of
the caucus site is informed by the need for the ANC to reinforce its
communication machinery and to ensure efficient and effective dissemination
of information.

The website will provide visitors with an introduction to the ANC
parliamentary caucus, its role and its objectives and further provide
insight into the day-to-day parliamentary activities of the parliamentary
ANC Members of Parliament. Through this site member of the public will get
an opportunity to interact with the ANC representatives by visiting them on
their pages, which contain their parliamentary and constituency contact
details.

We encourage everyone to make use of this website and turn this institution
into a truly e-Parliament. Let us all narrow the digital divide and create
a prosperous society. I thank you.

                     PROGRESS IN N2 GATEWAY DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Madam Speaker, last week the Minister of Housing hon
Lindiwe Sisulu made a presentation to the portfolio committee regarding the
progress, or lack thereof, of the N2 Gateway development. During her
presentation Minister Sisulu said that, “Five parcels of land earmarked for
the project was retracted by the city”.

Minister Sisulu must stop trying to blame the N2 Gateway project failures
on others and take responsibility. If she wants to criticise the city she
must do so on the basis of the facts. The facts are as follows: The city
withdrew no offers of land; city officials conducted extensive research
into identifying suitable land, which was presented to the N2 Gateway
Steering Committee for consideration.

The land in Epping is on the Nigeria Way road reserve, which has a number
of buried bulk services. It was considered only for temporary housing after
the Langa fire in January 2005. The required rezoning environmental process
was initiated and was shelved when approximately 1 800 written objections
were received and negotiations between the then Executive Director for
Development and Infrastructure and the Epping Chamber of Industries failed
to reach consensus.

The land in Gugulethu is privately owned and a price was negotiated for the
land. However, use of the land for the N2 Gateway project was rejected
outright by the local community. Driftsands is owned by the province and is
a declared biodiversity reserve, except for a relatively small portion
which is being developed to consolidate two informal settlements on the
land. This process is being driven by the province with support from the
city.

A piece of land, 40 ha in extent, in Ottery was considered. However, the
land requires major earthworks and drainage work to render it suitable for
any form of development. In consultation with the provincial housing
department regarding funds available for remediation works, it was agreed
that the unit cost would be far too high to consider this piece of land
further. [Time expired.]

                            FOOD PRICE INFLATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N N SIBHIDLA (ANC): Madam Speaker, food inflation almost reached a year-
on-year increase of above 90% in July this year. The consumer price index
of all items, excluding food items, followed a slower increase, reaching 5%
by the end of 2006. The result is that some millions of our people in the
country remain vulnerable to food security and 43% of households suffer
from food poverty.

Much of this poverty is associated with rural areas, particularly the
former homelands. The price of super maize meal, for instance, has
increased by 36% from December 2005 to December 2006. Yet, more than
2 million ha of arable land lie unused in communal areas.

The ANC calls on the Department of Agriculture to implement policies and
programmes that will have a positive impact on household food security,
food prices and environmental sustainability. Thank you.

                    REDUCTION OF UNEMPLOYMENT AMONG YOUTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M MORKEL (ANC): Madam Speaker, unemployment can indeed be drastically
reduced. We, together with the young people in particular, must act
together in our communities to create work and fight poverty. Dirang mmogo
Business Enterprise is one of the top and outstanding youth initiatives
operating in the Mathlosane Local Municipality to reduce the level of
unemployment amongst young people.

Although there are many mines in the municipality that are renowned for
their abundance of rich minerals such as gold, unemployment amongst young
people remains a serious challenge. To curb young people’s dependence on
mines for employment opportunities, innovative young people in the
municipality have come up with a good idea which is now proving successful.

Three young people saw an opportunity for creating work through the
efficient means of garbage disposal. This led to the establishment of DMBE
in 2003. It is a company which renders different services, ranging from
cleaning the streets and cemeteries to the maintenance of parks. The
enterprise currently employs more than 400 young people, 60% of whom are
young women.

As a result of the dedication of the employees and their willingness to
render high quality services, DMBE is now in charge of most outdoor
cleaning projects in the municipality. The ANC commends the work done by
DMBE, as well as Kagiso Matswenere, who brought this and the good work done
by these young people to the attention of the public. I thank you.
[Applause.] [Interjections.]

                          SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN
                 FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO ERADICATE POVERTY
                            FOOD PRICE INFLATION

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The SPEAKER: Hon Manuel, please leave me to preside.
The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I shall certainly do so, Madam Speaker.
Firstly, I would like to respond to the three statements. The first one is
from the hon De Lille. It is rather confusing because she starts with a
confusing story in the Sunday Times and it looks like the Daily Voice or
Die Son or something like that. It is a serious reduction in the quality.
She then ends up with the child support grant and I don’t see what the link
is. I don’t see what the link is, because these two issues are quite
unrelated.

As far as the child support grant issue is concerned, I thought that I have
adequately responded to the hon Greyling, two weeks ago, and the hon De
Lille was in the House. You can rake this thing up all the time, but we
can’t go any further with it.

In respect of the hon Opperman, if he has left the House I suppose I should
just ignore what he has said. [Interjections.]

No, Madam Speaker, I stand to be advised. If somebody makes a statement and
doesn’t want it to be responded to ...

The SPEAKER: Proceed and give an answer, hon Minister. It is of interest to
the House.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Indeed, it is of interest to the House. If he had
read today’s newspapers, which I’m sure he might get to do next week, he
would have seen that the president of the South African Institute of Race
Relations, Mr John Kane-Berman, confirms the results of the community
survey. He confirms that there have been very significant improvements in
the quality of life of the people of South Africa; confirms that services
have reached people where previously nothing had existed; and says that
there are still people who are left outside of the system.

It does not accord with the basis from which the hon Opperman, who now has
found his way back to the coffee room, has argued this point. So I think he
is so fundamentally wrong on the issue, because he doesn’t have any facts
that accord with what he is saying. We must invite him to read Kane-Berman
this morning on this issue.

The hon Thompson had spoken to the issue of food price inflation. Indeed,
it’s an exceedingly difficult problem. As we pointed out yesterday, rising
from the G20 meeting, across the world without exception food price
inflation is a huge problem and the largest increase is seen in grains,
maize and wheat. In respect of maize prices we’ve seen people in Mexico,
where maize is a staple as it is here, take to the streets because we’ve
had these very rapid increases.

The Department of Agriculture is engaged in programmes that involve food
gardens and local support systems, but the challenge of significantly
increased food prices is a global phenomenon, and like oil prices, it is
something we have to face for a while. We must then ensure that the maximum
amount of land will be utilised for the planting of maize and that we won’t
divert the use of maize away from its consumption, as primary foodstuff,
into other uses that may impact on supply and demand preferences. Thank
you.

                       ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENT INJURIES
                     COMPLETION OF GRADE 12 EXAMINATIONS
                           NATION’S LOSS OF VALUES

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We would join the hon
Zoliswa Kota in congratulating and thanking those women who have come
forward as volunteers to assist communities in the building of houses and
the provision of shelter to the people of our country.

I also want to respond on the matter of road safety that has been raised by
the hon Ntuli, to just indicate that we welcome the statements members have
made calling on the people of our country to ensure that we arrive alive
and do as much as we can to reduce speed and ensure safety on our roads.

I am pleased to be able to thank the hon Ntuli for drawing attention to the
work that is being done by schools. We have a life skills programme that is
fundamental within the curriculum that includes road safety for all our
children who study life orientation.

We also have a 365 days programme on Road Traffic Safety which is run in
our schools and our MECs have been asked to play a clear role in this
regard.

Finally, we would want to say as we call on drivers let us also call on
pedestrians because they are the ones most affected in terms of collisions
and accidents and fatalities that occur during the festive season.
Therefore, let us pay more attention to those who are walking on our roads.

Lastly, if I could just say that we wish to express our thanks to all the
teachers of our country, particularly those who have exerted maximum effort
in supporting our children to recover following the public sector strike.
We would also want to indicate to the hon Mfundisi that we thank him for
his words to the Grade 12s and the teachers.

Furthermore, we would also say that we will be running a national tutorial
programme next year to create awareness that this is the final year of the
old matric. We will be running tutorial programmes through hundreds of
centres throughout the country for those children who would not have
succeeded in passing their matric this year in order to assist them to work
toward concluding by 2011,
which is the cut-off date for young persons who might write as part-time
writers. We have made it our responsibility as government to provide
support in 2008 to children who would not have fully succeeded in the 2007
examinations.

I would also say to the Rev Meshoe with respect to the elderly that more
must be done. Government has so far done a great deal. But why don’t we go
into Umlazi and ask members of the community to form a phalanx around the
elderly as they go to the pension paypoints, and that we as communities
should provide support and protection to the citizens who are aged in our
country to ensure that everybody understands that as communities we will
take on the mantle of ensuring that every person is safe and able to
exercise their rights to pension and other forms of grants, and that no
criminal will be tolerated in our communities, by us, the members of the
community working hand in hand with the Police Service in our society.
Thank you.

                    REDUCTION OF UNEMPLOYMENT AMONG YOUTH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Ek is baie dankbaar teenoor agb lid Morkel. As ons
mense saamwerk, sal ons slaag. [I am very grateful to hon Member Morkel. If
all our people co-operate we will succeed.]

Intle le nqwelo, Mnu Morkel. Ewe, sinakho ukukulwa ukungaqeshwa koluntu,
ukuba sisebenza kunye. Singayilwa indlala, ukuba simanyene kwaye
siyasebenzisana. Ngoko ke, ... [It’s true indeed, hon Morkel. Yes, we can
fight unemployment in our society, if we work together. We can alleviate
poverty, if we unite and co-operate. Therefore, ...]

... all I want to say is, Halala Dirang Mogo Business Enterprise,
Vuk’uzenzele!

We have been saying with regard to creating work through garbage, who has
ever managed to think that you can create jobs by collecting garbage?
Indeed, together we can push back the frontiers of poverty only if we work
together. What one needs are ideas. Ideas will make a good business case
and ideas will make a good business plan. It is ideas, a good business case
and a good business plan that will create jobs, not shouting here in
Parliament as the hon Louw is doing at the moment. Thank you.

                          NEW ANC WEBSITE LAUNCHED

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Deputy Speaker, I welcome the statement and
give support to the hon Gabanakgosi for bringing to our attention the fact
that an ANC caucus website has been launched. This is long overdue and we
think it is very good that we have it now. I hope other parties that do not
have such websites will also come on board and have such websites.

During this forthcoming break we hope that all MPs will check whether in
their constituency areas there are institutions like post offices,
multipurpose centres or schools where people could in fact go and use them
to contact their parliamentary offices through the caucus website.

It is really true that with this launch it will indeed make e-Parliament
begin to work and increase the usage and the uptake of ICTs among our
communities. This would indeed begin to narrow the digital divide because
we hope that this will allow voiceless indigenous language speakers in
particular to have their voices heard in Parliament, so we thank you for
bringing this to our attention and thank the ANC for taking such a step.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

   CONGRATULATIONS TO BAFANA BAFANA ON BEATING THEIR CANADIAN COUNTERPARTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker,  with  leave,  I
hereby move without notice:
  That the House –


    1) notes that on Tuesday, 20 November 2007, the South African national
       soccer team, Bafana Bafana, beat their Canadian counterparts by 2
       goals to nil, in Durban;


    2) congratulates Bafana Bafana, the coach and the entire team management
       on this splendid victory; and

    3) wishes the team well as they prepare for the African Cup of Nations
       and the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

Agreed to.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means that the House joins you in this celebratory
mood. The Secretary will read the first Order of the Day.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now recognise the Chief Whip of the Majority Party.

              CHOICE ON TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY AMENDMENT BILL

     (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Health thereon)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I hereby move:
  That the Report be adopted.


Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

              CHOICE ON TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Declarations of vote:

Mr M WATERS (DA): Deputy Speaker, it is an absolute disgrace that we are
here today debating a Bill that was debated three years ago, simply because
the NCOP refused to hold public hearings. What a waste of time and money! I
am sure the Minister agrees.

The Constitutional Court was right in forcing Parliament to hold public
hearings on this very important piece of legislation. It is in the public
interest to do so.

Deputy Speaker, these amendments intend to allow nurses to perform first
trimester abortions up to twelve weeks after going on a prescribed course
which is within the World Health Organisation’s recommendations. Since 1994
when 425 deaths occurred due to unsafe abortions, there has been a 90%
reduction in early maternal deaths.
Many of the public submissions raised several concerns which relate to
people’s moral and religious beliefs and in fact mainly related to the
principal Act.  I certainly believe that there was an opportunity missed by
the ANC by not addressing some of them. The right to conscientious
objection is a fundamental right which the ANC, for some unknown reasons,
refuses to insert in the Act.

Currently there is no provision in the Act which allows medical staff the
right to refuse to perform or assist in abortion. During deliberations in
the principal Act of 1996 and this week’s discussions, the ANC and even pro-
choice groups felt that medical staff were adequately protected under the
Constitution of Chapter 2 (9)(3) of the Bill of Rights, where a person
cannot be discriminated against for amongst other reasons religion,
conscience or beliefs.

However, 11 years down the line, some medical staff are claiming that this
provision is simply not good enough and that they are being pressurised to
perform abortions. In addition, in order to enforce their rights, they have
to go to the Constitutional Court which is costly and time-consuming.

Since the adoption of the Civil Union Act, where a conscience clause was
inserted, giving marriage officers the right to refuse to marry same-sex
couples, the government has through its actions accepted the principle of
conscientious objection and that it should be spelt out in law, clearly
indicating on what basis this can be done.
An inclusion of such a clause would not have had any negative impact on
this piece of legislation.

The fact that the department is still formulating draft regulations
pertaining to when a medical staff member can refuse to conduct an
abortion, 11 years after the adoption of the Act, is an absolute disgrace
and shows the contempt this government holds for people wanting to express
their conscience. [Applause.]

Another issue of contention was that of mandatory counselling as opposed to
nonmandatory counselling. Every person going for HIV-testing has to have
counselling for obvious reasons, so why should the same not apply to those
wanting abortions?

Having an abortion cannot be downplayed as a simple procedure that has no
or little impact on the person concerned. Counselling is essential in order
to inform the women or a girl of her options so she can make an informed
decision - an empowered woman will make the right decision that is
appropriate for her.

Equally important is postcounselling, not only to ensure that the woman or
girl is coping emotionally, but also for promotion of family planning and
birth control to prevent repeat abortions.

I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.] [Time expired.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the termination of pregnancy
issue essentially boils down to one’s approach to life: when does it begin,
what is a soul, how do we differentiate between the sacred and the profane?

True, life is a continuum. There is no one moment when a foetus becomes
pain-sensitive or viable and science pushes back the limit daily. Some
contraception causes fertilized eggs to be bled away. How is this different
from termination of pregnancy in the first twelve weeks?

The procedure is simple. Misoprostil is given; it softens the cervix and
begins contractions or bleeding. The practitioner dilates the cervix and
inserts a sterile syringe to suck out the foetus and scrape the womb. It’s
so easy, we were assured time and again, and who wants a 12-year-old girl
to be saddled with a baby?

In choosing between saving unborn babies from the pain of chemical or
mechanical death, or women from the pain of backstreet abortions the choice
between right and wrong is impossible to make. But it is the job of
legislators to make difficult choices and to steer society in certain
directions. So, the IFP will not sit on the fence and give our members a
choice in this vote.

The IFP’s core principles are to strengthen the family, recognise and
promote the sacredness of life and to protect people from harm. We do not
support the move in South Africa to talk about morality to let people do
what they like, to protect the lives of heinous criminals or to let our
children treat each other like sex toys.

This legislation entitles a girl who menstruates, from whatever age, to
access abortion on demand, enacted by nurses with short training courses
and facilities only with access to emergency or hospital facilities. We
support termination of pregnancy under qualified circumstances; with
parental input for minors; with mandatory counselling, in facilities with
emergency equipment and managed responsibly in a decentralised fashion.
This legislation does not cater to all of these.

Life is a wondrous gift and we are the custodians who must spread that
message. Therefore, we oppose this legislation which moves to trivialise
life.

But I must say that we did not come easily to this decision and we did
benefit, in making it, from the hearings. Our chairperson, Mr Ngculu and
the committee conducted them in a thorough, fair and respectful fashion,
for which we congratulate them. No person or group can now claim that they
have not been heard on this issue of termination of pregnancy. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, most presenters at the public
hearings expressed grave concerns about the implications of this Bill,
which aims to increase access to abortion. The negative impact of the Bill
on health workers and health services was a common concern. The overriding
issue was, however, the increased risk to woman’s emotional and physical
well-being and the blatant further violation of the unborn child’s right to
life. The committee yet again simply ignored the inputs and proceeded
unabated on a mission to steamroll the Bill through Parliament.

The ACDP proposed various amendments aimed not only at protecting women and
children considering termination, but also providing protection for health
care workers and professionals who choose not to participate in termination
of pregnancy due to religious, ethical or moral beliefs. Court cases, as we
are aware, are ongoing where medical staff has been discriminated against
for refusing to carry out termination procedures.

The ACDP’s amendments also provide for mandatory counselling to ensure that
mothers are well informed about the risks of abortion and the alternatives
available. Many women are suffering from physical, emotional and
psychological consequences of abortions as they did not have enough
information to make an informed choice. We need to reach out with
compassion to such women, particularly those suffering from postabortion
syndrome.

The ACDP believes that by ignoring calls for explicit and mandatory
counselling, government is setting itself up to be sued in the future for
suppressing information and the findings of medical research. The Uniting
Presbyterian Church in South Africa, for example, has cautioned that unless
such amendments are adopted, women for whom we are seeking protection will
soon be seeking justice and compensation just as in the case of tobacco
companies and mines who have had to pay for the consequences of their
neglect in failing to fully inform smokers and the users of short-fibre
asbestos about the inherent risks.

This is a timely wake-up call which should be heeded - and we would as the
ACDP fully support and in fact encourage women to embark upon this
litigation. Women who have had abortions require every form of assistance
due to physical, emotional and psychological effects.

The ACDP, in addressing these issues, does not waiver in its conviction
that the value of innocent human life is priceless and is in full agreement
with the views of the Uniting Presbyterian Church of South Africa that
human life must be respected and protected absolutely from the moment of
conception.

The great antislavery campaigner, William Wilberforce, understood that
while people may ignore the truth, they still recognise it when they see
it. So, he looked for ways to remind people of what they already knew in
their hearts, that slavery was wrong. Similarly, we are winning the hearts
and minds of our people that abortion is wrong. Independent polls showed
the 1996 abortion law to be South Africa’s most unpopular law. The ACDP
will oppose this Bill. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Agb Mev die Adjunkspeaker, ek is bevrees die ANC sal nie
luister na wat die argumente van vandag is nie, net so min as wat hulle
geluister het 11 jaar gelede toe die hoofwet deur die Huis gedebateer is.

Die argumente is reeds gestel rondom die beginsel van aborsie en hierdie
wysigingswetsontwerp verander niks aan daardie beginsel nie. Inteendeel,
aborsies word makliker gemaak as wat die hoofwet aanvanklik toegelaat het.
Dit word tegnies afgewentel na die provinsies toe om die besluite te neem,
provinsiale LURe kan die besluite neem om sulke inrigtings in te rig, maar
die onstellendste daarvan is dat ’n kind – nie ‘n vrou nie, ‘n kind – van
12-jaar-oud, op haar eie ‘n besluit kan neem om ’n aborsie te ondergaan.

Ek wil vir u sê dat daar geen manier is dat ‘n kind van 12 jaar die
implikasies besef wat sy die res van haar lewe met haar gaan saamdra
wanneer sy volwasse is, nadat sy ‘n aborsie ondergaan het nie. Dit is
prakties wat hierdie wet gaan moontlik maak.

Ek is bevrees, soos ek gesê het, dat die ANC nie daarna sal luister nie.
Miskien moet ons eendag ‘n debat daaroor voer, oor wat die werklike rede is
waarom die ANC, en veral die dames in die ANC, so sterk voel oor aborsie.
Ek is van mening dis om ‘n verkeerde, misplaaste rede, maar miskien moet
ons daardie gesprek eendag voer. Die VF Plus sal teen hierdie wetgewing
stem. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am afraid that the ANC will not
listen to today’s arguments, just as they did not listen when the Principal
Act was debated in this House 11 years ago.

We have argued on the principle of abortion, and this amending Bill doesn’t
change anything regarding that principle. As a matter of fact, to have an
abortion becomes easier than the Principal Act initially allowed.
Technically, the power to make decisions on allowing abortion clinics is
being devolved down to the provinces and provincial MECs can make these
decisions.

What is even more upsetting is the fact that a child – not a woman, but a
12-year-old child - can make an independent decision to undergo an
abortion. I want to emphasise that a 12-year-old child cannot grasp the
implications that she will have to carry throughout her adult life after
undergoing an abortion. This is what this Bill will make possible in
practice.

I am afraid, as I have said, that the ANC will not listen to this. Maybe we
should, one day, debate the actual reason why the ANC, and especially the
ladies of the ANC, feel so strongly about abortion. I believe that it is
for a wrong, misplaced reason, but maybe we should have that discussion
someday. The FF Plus will vote against this piece of legislation. Thank
you.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Deputy Speaker, the sad part in what we are dealing with
here today is that the parties that have contributed to the debate thus far
have not addressed its substance.

This piece of legislation was brought to the House because there was not
sufficient public participation. That is the crux of the matter. As a
result, we, as the portfolio committee, entertained over 60 submissions
which, collectively, cost us 1 265 minutes.

What was most gratifying about the entire process of participation was, of
course, the conduct of members of the different political parties, in
particular that of Mike Waters from the DA and Ruth Rabinowitz ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are both hon members!

Mr L V J NGCULU: I want to congratulate them very much on their conduct and
for the manner in which they participated in this process.

The sad part was the spoonfeeding by hon Cheryl Dudley. Every time she
asked a question, she actually told the participants what to say, which is
quite sad. I’m sure that, as a leader of a party, she should, at some
point, do some introspection with regard to her conduct around these
particular issues.

Therefore, the substance here is about the amendments that were there. One
of the things that must be commended about this Bill is the fact that it
has opened access for women. It has dramatically reduced maternal deaths
since its introduction.

Equally, it has allowed women their right to reproductive health, and that
is the crux of the issue. All your philosophical, ideological and religious
beliefs should be subservient to the rights of women in terms of their
access to reproductive health. As I have indicated earlier, that is the
crux of the matter. Let’s not introduce things that are actually ancillary
to specific interests of this particular piece of legislation.

In particular, we would like to thank the people who took the time to make
their submissions. There are a lot of people who we, as the ANC, would like
to congratulate on the manner in which they made their submissions. We are
satisfied that the process was thorough, efficient, and, from our side, I
think the diligence and patience on the part of the Members of Parliament
was something salutary.

Any other issue outside of this piece of legislation should remain there,
because the question of conscientious objection, counselling and all those
things are covered by a number of pieces of legislation. If you look at
your National Health Act, it covers them.

If you look into the question of counselling, you’ll see that it is covered
in the Principal Act: “There shall be nonmandatory, nondirective
counselling.” It’s there. Why do people want to include things that are
actually their own philosophical, subjective interests in the piece of
legislation in order to drive the point home that there must be
counselling?

At some point some of us here who hold some of these quasi-religious
beliefs must begin to look at ourselves and ask the question: What is the
interest of women in all of this? Thank you. [Time expired.]

An HON MEMBER: He is out of order, Madam Chair!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! You should have raised a point of order whilst
he was at the podium, instead of screaming at me after he has completed his
speech. I want to go on with my work. Will you please allow me to do so?
Thank you. Are there any objections to the Bill being read for the second
time? Since there are objections, I now put the question. Those in favour
will say “Aye” and those against, “No”.  The “ayes” have it.
There was no debate.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.
Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 148: Asiya, S E; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-
   Zulu, H I; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chohan, F I; Cronin,
   J P; Daniels, P; Davies, R H; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M;
   Doidge, G Q M; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gcwabaza, N E; Gerber, P A;
   Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M;
   Gxowa, N B; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D;
   Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kohler-Barnard, D; Kondlo, N C;
   Kotwal, Z; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lowe, C M; Ludwabe, C I;
   Madella, A F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M
   W; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Martins, B A D; Masango, S J; Maserumule, F
   T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Matsemela,
   M L; Matsomela, M J J; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M
   M S; Meruti, M V; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A;
   Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogase, I D;
   Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morgan, G R;
   Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Mpahlwa, M B ; Mthembu,
   B; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C;
   Nene, M J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B
   T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngcobo, N W; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L;
   Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M;
   Ntuli, R S; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A;
   Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Phala, M J; Pieterse, R D;
   Rabie, P J; Rwexana, S P; Schippers, J; Schmidt, H C; Schneemann, G D;
   Schoeman, E A; Seadimo, M D; Sefularo, M; Selau, J G; Semple, J A;
   September, C C; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S; Sikakane, M R; Skhosana, W M;
   Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Steyn, A C; Surty, M E; Swanson-Jacobs, J;
   Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-
   Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Twala, N M; Van den Heever, R P
   Z; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Yengeni, L E; Zulu, B Z.

   NOES - 41: Blanché, J P I; Botha, A; Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M; Chang, E
   S; Cupido, H B; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M;
   Ellis, M J; Green, L M; Jenner, I E; King, R J; Labuschagne, L B;
   Likotsi, M T; Marais, S J F; Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Mulder, C P;
   Nel, A H; Opperman, S E; Pule, B E; Rabinowitz, R; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
   Seaton, S A; Selfe, J; Seremane, W J; Sibuyana, M W; Skosana, M B; Smuts,
   M; Swart, M; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Der Walt,
   D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zikalala, C N Z.

   ABSTAIN - 4: Bici, J; De Lille, P; Mdlalose, M M; Sigcau, S N.

As the result of the division showed that there was not a majority of the
members of the Assembly present for a vote to be taken on the Bill as
required by Rule 25(2)(a), decision of question postponed.

                    TRADITIONAL HEALTH PRACTITIONERS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, please take your seats or leave the House
quietly. Hon members!

Bill read a second time.

                       ROAD SAFETY OVER FESTIVE SEASON

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, with leave, I
hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that the next few  weeks  will  mark  the  beginning  of  the
        festive season, when people will spend quality time  with  families
        and friends;


     2) further notes that it is  the  same  period  that  brings  joy  and
        happiness to some of our people, whilst  it  also  brings  pain  to
        other families;


     3) observes that pain is caused in some instances by driver negligence
        and disregard for road regulations, resulting  in  road  fatalities
        and that abuse of alcohol contributes significantly  to  accidents;
        and


     4) calls on our road users to observe speed limits, not to  drink  and
        drive,  to  take  regular  rests  along  the  road  and  calls   on
        pedestrians to wear visible clothing.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

 CONSIDERATION OF INTERIM REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON MATTERS RELATING TO
                          THE EX-MINEWORKERS UNION

Mr M R SONTO: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please take your seat at the podium
whilst we try to get an audience from hon members.

Those that are leaving must have a Merry Christmas, but please leave us in
peace. Don’t make this noise. We don’t need that. Hon Mlangeni, will you
please take your seat or leave the Chamber. That is the best way now – I
have to call you by name. I also just want to remind you that everything I
am saying is captured in Hansard, and your grandchildren will read about
this one day. Hon Sam Louw, take your seat or leave the Chamber; followed
by Mr Bloem. We now have a little bit of order. Mrs Morobi, will you please
find your seat, madam; and Dr Rabinowitz and hon Smuts. That is it. Now we
have an audience. Hon chairperson, please address us.

Mr M R SONTO: Madam Deputy Speaker, Ministers and Deputy Ministers present,
hon members, on behalf of the Ad Hoc Committee on Matters Relating to the
Ex-Mineworkers Union, I submit to the House a preliminary report and the
necessary recommendation thereon. This ad hoc committee came about as a
result of a resolution by this House following interaction with a group of
people representing ex-mineworkers. The mandate given to the committee was
to investigate complaints made by the group on 31 October 2007 at the
People’s Assembly in Bizana.

In the process of investigating complaints, the ad hoc committee received,
in the form of presentations and briefing sessions, contributions of high
quality from a number of stakeholders were received. The context in which
the contributions were made by involved parties assisted the investigation
as complaints started to translate into pensions, death benefits,
occupational injuries and diseases contracted in service.

In pursuit of these labour rights, ex-mineworkers sent representatives to
various government departments, offices, labour organisations and high
profile people to present their case. There were strange instances where
the complainants would employ approaches like sit-ins, protest marches,
disruptions of government events and even withdrawals from processes that
sought to resolve the matter.

Despite all these, parties involved, the ad hoc committee included, hold a
view that if more could be done, the resolution of this matter is possible.
Inputs made to the committee suggested that there remain stakeholders out
there with crucial information that can further assist in resolving the
matter. Because of that, the ad hoc committee recommends that whilst it
understands the gravity and urgency of the concerns and complaints raised,
the House considers the following: ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! We are requested to consider some
things here. We need to be in a position to hear what we are supposed to be
doing. Hon member, please continue.
Mr M R SONTO: Deputy Speaker, the ad hoc committee asks the House to
consider extending the deadline for the committee to report to 31 March
2008. I must emphasise the fact that the committee has not at this stage
formed any opinion regarding the process and the matter.

As the chairperson of the ad hoc committee, I must thank all members,
professionals and staff, who made this preliminary report possible. I hope
you will have a happy festive season with your families and come back next
year so that we can finalise what we have started. I thank you.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House refers the Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Matters
  Relating to the Ex-Mineworkers Union back to the Committee for further
  consideration and that the Committee be granted an extension of the
  deadline to allow them to report before the end of the first term of
  2008.

Motion agreed to.

                         SOUTH AFRICAN EXPRESS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

    That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                           BROADBAND INFRACO BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

    That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

               TRANSPORT AGENCIES GENERAL LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                      (Consideration of Report on Bill)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

    That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                        EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                      (Consideration of Report on Bill)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

    That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

      CRIMINAL LAW (SEXUAL OFFENCES AND RELATED MATTERS) AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

CHIEF WHIP OF MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

    That the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment
    Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                  CRIMINAL LAW (SENTENCING) AMENDMENT BILL
                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF OF MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:

    That the Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                          CHILDREN’S AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Report Mediation Committee)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:

    That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                          CHILDREN’S AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon Chief Whip would you please advise us. Does he
want to address us from his seat? You are free to do that hon member, if
you wanted to. But would you please come over.

Mr J B SIBANYONI:  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. As the co-chairperson of
the Mediation Committee, I would like to report that the mediation
committee was established after it was discovered that between the period
that the Children’s Amendment Bill was passed by the National Assembly and
when it appeared before the National Council of Provinces, there were what
people believe to be serious discrepancies. The Mediation Committee met on
the 21 November 2007 and went through those discrepancies with a fine comb.


What was discovered was that, in actual fact, the discrepancies related to
grammatical mistakes; the changing of a comma from one place to another or
changing a full stop and putting in a comma. There were no substantial
issues which came about. It shall be recalled that when the Bill was passed
in the National Assembly, it was passed on the understanding that
consequential changes should be made.

The committee came up with what you see before you today, that is the Bill
19 (F) of 2006, reprint. But at this stage, I would like to inform the
House that there are only two issues. The document has been circulated.
Each and every member has this document. It relates to clause 6, ie, that
there is a change on Page 25 line 24 after the word “child” to omit a full
stop and put in a comma. Then in clause 11 there is a change, in the sense
that after “investigation”, there should have been inserted the words “to
be conducted”. Also on page 51 line 14 after the word “child”, to omit
those words “to be conducted”.

It is the submission of the mediation committee that as the Bill stands
now, today, with those two issues I’ve referred to, it is in order. As
such, we as the mediation committee submit that the Report should be
adopted.

I would like just to mention that the mediation committee consists of
members of the National Assembly, as well as members of the National
Council of Provinces. It was a multiparty mediation committee. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank everyone who participated in it. I would
also raise one issue and that is to say that what happened is something
that we, as Parliament, would say we do not wish to see happening again.
Thank you.

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

    That the Children’s Amendment Bill, with the textual amendments, be
    passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, with textual amendments, accordingly passed.

    1) On page 25, in line 24, after “child” to omit “.” And to substitute
       “;”.
    2) On page 51, in line 13, after “investigation” to insert “to be
       conducted”.
    3) On page 51, in line 14, after “child” to omit “to be conducted”.


      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE –
               IMPROVEMENT AND WELLBEING OF MILITARY VETERANS

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Speaker, as the Joint Standing Committee on
Defence, we wish to present these proposals to Parliament. I wish to thank
members of the joint standing committee for the tireless efforts to ensure
that we are able to put these proposals together.

These proposals took time to put together because we had to call on public
hearings to get veterans to come and speak for themselves. We also had to
get other stakeholders to make presentations in order to bring about an
improvement in the lives of military veterans. These are the sets of
proposals that the committee puts before the House for adoption.

Most importantly we are also grateful to the Minister of Housing who,
during her speech, indicated that she is prepared to make housing available
for unemployed military veterans.

Again, some of the proposals here deal with the Non-Statutory Forces, NSF,
Pension Fund. This particular fund should be reviewed because you find a
situation where membership of this fund is applied for by those who are not
employed. Those who are employed as Members of Parliament and those who are
even employed in departments, for instance, cannot access the NSF pension.
Those who have tried to have access, even within the military itself, find
it very difficult to pay it back because there are debits in their bank
accounts.

With this, we wish to thank the Minister for the role he played in being
supportive to the committee and in also ensuring that these measures
reached the stage they are at now. Fortunately these measures have been
adopted at the policy conference of the ANC. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

    That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

   DRAFT NOTICE ON REMUNERATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGES AND JUDGES
                 DRAFT NOTICE ON REMUNERATION OF MAGISTRATES

                         (Consideration of Reports)

There was no debate.

Draft Notice on Remuneration of Constitutional Court Judges and Judges
approved.
Draft Notice on Remuneration of Magistrates approved.

     CONVENTION BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF
    MOZAMBIQUE FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND THE PREVENTION OF
               FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME
   PROTOCOL ON FINANCE AND INVESTMENT OF THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
                                  COMMUNITY

           (Consideration of Requests for approved by Parliament)
               in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution

Mr M N NENE: Deputy Speaker and hon members, in terms of section 231(2) of
the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, international agreements
are only binding to the Republic after they have been approved by a
resolution of both the NA and the NCOP. It is in compliance with this
provision that we table this protocol to this House today after the
Portfolio Committee on Finance has satisfied itself, as was referred to it
by this House, that it is in keeping with the spirit of our country’s
participation in the international family.

This protocol on the Southern African Development Community, SADC, gives
effect to Article 22 of the SADC Treaty by seeking to foster harmonisation
of the financial and investment policies of the state parties in order to
make them consistent with the objectives of SADC and to ensure that changes
to the financial investment policies in
one state party do not necessitate undesirable adjustments in other state
parties.

The vehicle for achieving this objective will be the facilitation of
regional integration, co-operation and co-ordination within finance and
investment sectors, with the aim of expanding the productive sectors of the
economy and enhancing trade in the region to achieve sustainable economic
development and eradication of poverty.

In terms of this SADC protocol, 15 practical interventions are identified,
ranging from creating a favourable investment within SADC; maintaining
macro-economic sustainability and convergence of fiscal and monetary
policies; to co-operation in all strategic areas including IT and financial
institutions.

The protocol also proposes the establishment of the SADC Project
Preparation and Development Fund as a stand-alone institution that is to be
housed within a reputable regional development financial institution. This
is envisaged to be the only structure that would have financial
implications for member states, including South Africa, which is estimated
to be around US$300 000 dollars.
On behalf of the committee, I present this protocol for adoption.

On the convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of
Mozambique, it is also in terms of the same provision of the Constitution
that I present the above-mentioned convention to the House for adoption
after the committee has considered it in terms of our mandate.

I thank you. Have a Merry Christmas and a prosperous new season all. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you and the same to you.

There was no debate.

Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of
Mozambique for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income approved.

Protocol on Finance and Investment of the Southern African Development
Community approved.

  CONVENTION ON THE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF FISHERY RESOURCES IN THE
                      SOUTH EAST ATLANTIC OCEAN (SEAFO)

  (Consideration of Request for Approval by Parliament in terms of section
                           231(2) of Constitution)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any objections to the approval of the
Convention on the Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources in the
South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO)? Any objections? No objections.

There was no debate.
Convention on the Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources in the
South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO) approved.

 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE POSSIBLE BREACH OF PARLIAMENTARY
                        PRIVILEGE BY MS GLORIA SEROBE

                             (Draft resolution)

Ms S C VOS: I hereby give notice that I shall move:

  That the House—


  (1) noting that -

       (a)  Ms Gloria Serobe was one of the 12 candidates recommended by
            the House on Thursday, 13 September 2007, for appointment by
            the President to the SABC Board;


       (b)  when interviewed by the Portfolio Committee on Communications
            and asked whether she knew the person who had nominated her for
            appointment, a Mr Louis du Plooy, who gave his address as P O
            Box 2012, Groenkloof 0027, she replied that she did not know
            him but it was "nice" of him to have done so;


       (c)  according to  a report in the Sunday Times of 16 September 2007
            Mr du Plooy "... revealed yesterday that he had discussed
            Serobe's nomination with her (emphasis added) 'as I had to get
            a CV from her to submit with the nomination form'"; and


       (d)  Mr du Plooy is the Chief Director for Ministerial Services in
            the Ministry in the Presidency but did not reveal this
            important information in nominating Ms Serobe;


  (2) resolves -

        (a) to appoint a committee to conduct a preliminary investigation
            into whether Ms Serobe, in informing the Portfolio Committee
            that she did not know Mr du Plooy, wilfully furnished the
            Portfolio Committee with false or misleading information and
            thereby committed the offence  of breach of parliamentary
            privilege in terms of section 17(2)(e) of the Powers,
            Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and Provincial
            Legislatures Act 4 of 2004 (possibly in an attempt to conceal
            from the Portfolio Committee Mr du Plooy's direct link with the
            Minister in the Presidency, Dr Essop Pahad), the investigation
            to be conducted with a view to establishing whether the matter
            warrants formal referral to the National Director of Public
            Prosecutions for prosecution under the Act;
        (b) that the committee may exercise those powers in Rule 138 that
            may assist it in carrying out its task;


        (c) that the committee reports to the House within 15 working days;
            and


        (d) that the President be informed immediately of the decision of
            the House to investigate whether Ms Serobe may have committed a
            breach of parliamentary privilege.

Madam Deputy Speaker, the issue with regard to Ms Gloria Serobe’s interview
with the Portfolio Committee on Communications for the position on the SABC
Board is quite clear.

It is more than obvious when one examines the verbatim transcript of her
interview and her letter to Madam Speaker about this matter; that Ms Serobe
apparently tried to hide the fact that the person who nominated her, Mr
Louis du Plooy, works for Dr Essop Pahad in the Ministry in the Presidency.
He is in fact the Chief Director in the Ministry of the Presidency.

The same Mr Du Plooy has a P O Box number in Groenkloof and it was this box
number that he used for his letter to Parliament nominating Ms Serobe.

In her words, Ms Serobe appears to have chosen to be devious and purported
to the committee when asked that she did not know Mr Du Plooy at all. She
now says that she knows Mr Du Plooy who works in the Presidency, but she
doesn’t know the same Mr Du Plooy who has a Groenkloof P O Box number.

This is obviously complete and utter nonsense. It is quite simply
contemptuous of the intelligence of the hon members of this House. If this
is so then quite frankly this is patently wrong. I submit that we cannot
sanction the appointment of a person to the SABC Board who believes that
she can treat Parliament in this manner.

I am therefore respectfully requesting that this House proceeds with
appointing a committee to conduct an investigation into whether Ms Serobe
wilfully furnished the committee with false or misleading information and
in so doing committed a breach of parliamentary privilege.

There was nothing wrong in law with Mr Du Plooy nominating her. So, why did
she try to hide it? Mr Du Plooy is a citizen of the Republic and could have
nominated Ms Serobe and openly stated his title and his work address;
Ministry in the Presidency. He chose, instead, to give a somewhat anonymous
P O Box number.

Conclusions can, of course, be drawn about this; but this is not the nub of
the matter today. Whether an official and an appointing authority of the
Presidency should use subterfuge to insert a candidate or candidates into a
parliamentary process can be the subject of an entirely different debate,
but not today.

At the time of her interview, the Chairperson of the Communication’s
Committee asked Ms Serobe directly in these exact words, I quote: “Who
nominated you? Mr Du Plooy? Is he any organisation or is he just an
independent person?” Ms Serobe answered, I quote: “I actually don’t know
and I never found out who that is and finally it was very sweet of him. I
must call him or her.”

It is my contention which I would like the committee to investigate that by
saying this, Ms Serobe wilfully furnished the portfolio committee with
false or misleading information. She knew Mr Du Plooy; she’d spoken to him.
She knew exactly who he was!

Ms Serobe is now trying to say in her letter to the Speaker that the
chairperson referred to Mr Du Plooy of Groenkloof and that she doesn’t know
a Mr Du Plooy of Groenkloof. This is sheer sophistry.

It is clear in the verbatim transcript of her interview that the
Chairperson did not refer to a Mr du Plooy of Groenkloof, but merely asked
about Mr du Plooy. Ms Serobe is, therefore, blatantly continuing her
misleading conduct by adding the words “Groenkloof” in her letter to the
Speaker.

She is now admitting that she was telephoned by Mr du Plooy of the Office
of the Presidency asking whether she would agree to a nomination to the
SABC Board. So, why didn’t she tell us that she knew precisely who this
particular Mr Du Plooy is? Because hon members, that would appear that she
recklessly chose to mislead the Committee.

This is why the IFP believes that there is serious doubt as to her
integrity. Surely given the facts to hand, she cannot be honoured by a
statutory appointment to the SABC Board - approved by the President of the
Republic - until this hon House appoints the committees as requested and
investigate her conduct. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you not expecting to speak? If you want to take
the slot now, please do so. No. I have the right to rearrange the order.
Ms M SMUTS: I recognise your rights, hon Deputy Speaker. I had hoped to
hear the ANC on the subject because I think the central subject or point
that we wish to make here is that this entire episode has demonstrated that
there is in fact a need for a mechanism to follow up incidents such as the
one that has just occurred.

When Ms Vos’s motion was tabled on September 20th the points available by
way of background evidence were: Her interview during which she said she
did not know who Mr Du Plooy was; and secondly, the sterling work of the
Sunday Times who spotted Mr Louis Du Plooy of the Office of the Ministry in
the Presidency, traced the fax number of the nomination and spoke to Mr Du
Plooy who confirmed he had nominated her.

The evidence now available includes the letter that Ms Serobe wrote to the
Speaker and which was very properly published in the ATCs of 15th November.
We now have the reported words of Mr Du Plooy but we also have now the
verbatim signed words of Ms Serobe, that, to use her own her own words:

   I was contacted telephonically by Mr Louis Du Plooy of the Office of the
   Presidency and so forth, as you have heard. According to the transcript
   of our interview and our proceedings the Chairperson asked her whether Mr
   Du Plooy was in any organisation or was just an independent person, and
   Ms Serobe said as you have heard “I actually don’t know. I never found
   out who that is”.
However, in her letter she says:

   Had the chairman asked me if I know Mr Louis Du Plooy of the Office of
   the Presidency, I would have confirmed yes as I had no need to conceal
   the fact.

Madam, what we need to convey is that persons who appear before
parliamentary committees must understand that we act in good faith here and
that they may not mislead us. And they may certainly not to lie to us. You
do not come here to play games.

It is ironic that it is the concern of myself and the hon Mr Khumalo in
particular, and one of the reasons I look forward to hearing him now. Our
concern was to explore conflicts of interest and to warn her that the SABC
is contested terrain. I asked her considering her, part-ownership of Telkom
together with Mr Smuts Ngonyama and the Elephant Consortium, about her
possible conflict of media which is entering the same terrain.

Mr Khumalo in particular, prophetically as it turns out, described how, I
quote: “... respectable, dignified people sometimes they leave the Board of
the SABC in tatters, their images in shambles”.

Now, we have in fact the mother of all conflicts of interests on our hands
because the Ministry in the Presidency is part of the body that must
appoint independent institutions like the SABC, which are supposed to be
selected strictly by Parliament under our law. Parliament is given the
power of selection and the public has the right to nominate so that the
executive from which the SABC must be statutorily independent is precisely
not empowered to select the board.

That is why it constitutes subversion of the selection process when the
Presidency – the very formal appointing body that signs our choice into
office at the end of the process – intrudes on the nomination process in
the first place.

What were Mr Du Plooy and Prof Anver Salojee, by the way, doing, having
sight of the nominations, when the MPs did not even seen them, and faxing
the nominations from the Union Buildings? Just in case hon members, you
thought Mr Du Plooy was an unguided missile, we also received a nomination
for another prominent Wiphold lady, Louisa Mojela, from Prof Anver Salojee
of 114 Graskop Road, Waterkloof Heights, from the ubiquitious fax number
012 300 5779. If any one does not know to whom Prof Salojee advises and
reports, try the fax number. It belongs to the Union Buildings.

Can we please dispense now with the pretence that the public servants are
exercising their constitutional rights in acting as purported private
citizens when they try to buy the Sunday Times or to influence the
composition of the SABC Board? Hon members any Minister or any President
can then do what is clearly outside his powers by telling his public
servants to act and then defending their personal private right to do what
he cannot. It is self-evident.

In our system the political head is the accountable person and his
departmental staff act on his or her instruction or with his or her
approval only. Mr du Plooy is not under fire here, he is a public servant.
I would have preferred not to have to deal with a matter like this with Ms
Serobe who is the civilian, but she has I regret misled us and I think we
lack a proper mechanism to deal with situations like this. Thank you.

Mr R D PIETERSE: Deputy Speaker, hon members, this debate and this motion
are completely unnecessary because they do not seem to ask the right
questions.

Mrs S M CAMERER: [Inaudible.]

Mr R D PIETERSE: Just be quiet! I will come back to you now.

Meneer, as ek nou omdraai en vir jou antwoord, dan sal jy spyt wees en ons
is op die laaste dag, voor die Kersfees reses. [Sir, should I now turn
around and respond, then you will regret it, and this on the last day
before the Christmas recess.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, go back to your debate.
Mr R D PIETERSE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. This is an unnecessary debate
because Ms Smuts and Ms Vos did not ask the right question.

They asked about Mr Du Plooy from Groenkloof, which a person answered.
Nobody bothered to ask: “Do you know somebody in the Presidency or somebody
working for a particular Minister? If you have not done that, how do you
blame anybody else? People did not ask that question. By the way, the law
allows any South African to nominate a person of their choice. It is up to
us as a committee to consider that nomination.

Members, if I did not know Ms Smuts and Ms Vos better I would have called
them closet racists because this is not the first time that when particular
people are nominated they have a problem with it. [Interjections.] It is
nothing like that. It is because an African woman has been nominated that
they have a problem. [Interjections.]

I do not know what the point of order is. Maybe I am too close to the truth
when I call them closet racists. Maybe it is about time that they must come
out and say: “Yes, I am a racist. I have a problem with the African woman.”
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member. Will you please take your seat.

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I wanted to ask
whether I might ask the hon member a question – but I am now going to ask
for more – drawn exactly from the transcript which contradicts what he has
just said. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let’s ask him whether he would like to take a question
first.

Ms M SMUTS: I would now like to take a point of order. I have just been
called a racist.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, if that is what you have said, you must
withdraw. [Interjections.] Will you please allow me just even a moment to
take a ruling on this matter? Mr Waters, Mr Van der Merwe, will you please
take your seats. We are not yet on holiday. We take our proper seats and we
do not sit on the side of the seats.

Mr Pieterse, withdraw please – unconditionally!

Mr R D PIETERSE: Even if I call them closet racists? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unconditionally!

Mr R D PIETERSE: Withdrawn, Deputy Speaker. Withdrawn!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

Mr R D PIETERSE: But the fact still stands that they have a problem that an
African woman has been nominated. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you please take your seat.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Deputy Speaker, the speaker also referred to Ms Vos
as being a racist.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: He referred to whom as what?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: He referred to
the hon Ms Suzanne Vos as being a racist. He should withdraw that. Madam
Deputy Speaker, he knows that the word should not be used. You should ask
him to apologise.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. You are raising a point of order and I am trying to
get the attention of the member at the podium. If that is what you said,
hon member, we need an unconditional withdrawal.

Mr R D PIETERSE: Deputy Speaker, I referred to both of them and I want to
repeat myself. I said that if I did not know them better, I would say that
they were closet racists. Those were my words. If you say that I need to
withdraw that, then I am more than happy to withdraw. Mr Van der Merwe, you
... [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Pieterse, take your seat, please. Mr Pieterse!

Mr R D PIETERSE: Ma’am!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you please withdraw?

Mr R D PIETERSE: Withdrawn, Ma’am.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

Mr R D PIETERSE: Mr Van der Merwe, you know you are not supposed to bring a
cake into the House, but you still did. That is how stupid you are. Thank
you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! Mr Pieterse, please take you seat. I think you want
us to remember you during the recess period, but let us remember you for
very good behaviour. There is nothing wrong with a member being
unintelligent, but it is not good manners to say to hon members they are
stupid. I would like you to withdraw that as well.

Mr R D PIETERSE: I withdraw, Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Take your seat. Mr Oliphant has another point of order.
[Interjections.] Okay! Now go back to your speaking notes, sir.
Mr K M KHUMALO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, comrades and friends,
ladies and gentlemen, I am not going to ``gooi hulle” [fight with them]. I
must say that I am in a festive mood, so I am not prepared to leave here
and go on my Christmas holiday fighting with anybody, but the truth shall
prevail. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t start with the festive mood too early.
[Laughter.] We are still working here and the festive mood is for after
adjournment.

Mr K M KHUMALO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the matter that we are dealing with
is the process that the portfolio committee usually engages with every
after four years of the SABC Board term of office. What has happened is
that the Portfolio Committee on Communications issued out an advertisement
to invite people to apply to become members of the Board of the SABC.
Everybody applied and the criteria was quite clear: You must be a South
African; have no criminal record; possess particular qualifications, skills
or expertise on which then all those who qualify had applied and sent their
application forms that we short-listed.

Out of the shortlist that we did, Madam Deputy Speaker, we then short-
listed the 12th we had submitted. Once we had done that the important thing
was not even about the warm bodies that were there but actually what were
the challenges facing the SABC. It is quite clear that the public
broadcaster has got only three main mandates, namely to educate, inform and
to entertain. It is those mandates that inform how we constitute the team
that we want to lead us. But fundamental to that I would have to respond to
... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, please continue. The House is listening to
you.

Mr K M KHUMALO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I nearly said to the member that he
needs vitamins A and C because it is quite clear that the hon member is
sick and vitamins A and C would help him. Vitamins A and C are black, green
and gold, he wouldn’t miss them. They are found in all the branches.
[Applause.]

The process that we followed was quite fair, transparent, clear and honest.
It is unfortunate that very often the DA ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr K M KHUMALO: The DA would often want us to put forward people that they
prefer and every time that we put forward credible South Africans,
especially educated, powerful, black African women or any other, they
sometimes have serious objections to that. [Interjections.] You see! They
have serious objection to that and that is how then this issue created this
particular problem.

However, what we then did is in fact that after the interviewing and
selection process, we had the best candidates. We had followed the process
to the letter and whoever nominated who is not the issue because the
guideline says every South African, black or white, does qualify to
nominate anybody to be in the Board of the SABC and that board must then
carry its mandate.

Fundamental to the challenges of the SABC is, firstly to provide
information that is credible, fair, balanced and that can then inform the
society as we move. Secondly, it is to even educate the population of the
country and entertain them through various programmes and the people that
we have selected are the best.

What the motion wants to do is to try and tarnish the images not only of
the candidates concerned, but also images of men and women who are
credible, powerful and good that we believe can actually achieve the
mandates as expected.

Most importantly, we believe that the broadcaster must do one of the
fundamentals contained in the African Union Commission on Human and
People’s Rights which talks about freedom of expression that is also
contained on the United Nations ... [Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it allowed
that the ANC is not addressing the issue before us, namely that the person
misled the committee? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, stick to the topic.

Mr K M KHUMALO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am sticking to the topic and I am
not going to be dictated to in terms of how I should proceed with my
discussion by Mr Van der Merwe. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member!

Mr K M KHUMALO: Yes, ma’am.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please stick to the topic and try to conclude your
speech.

Mr K M KHUMALO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the topic is around the fact that the
motion, tabled by the IFP and supported by the DA, is not informed. I said
that this motion that they are tabling is intended to tarnish the image of
the candidates that have applied and the SABC because they consider the
SABC as an area that has been taken or hijacked and therefore they just
want to point fingers at what they believe is wrong.

Therefore, the ANC utterly rejects this motion. We will not accept it and
we say that we have confidence in the current board and even in the
upcoming board to lead the SABC for the next few years. So this motion will
not be accepted. It is rejected and we say no to the motion. That is our
stand as the ANC, and I am prepared to take any other question. I am very
ready. [Laughter.]

Prof E S CHANG: Madam Deputy Speaker, I have a question.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he said he can take any question outside the House.
[Interjections.]
Prof E S CHANG: Protect the integrity of this House!

Ms S C VOS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank the hon members for their
contribution such as they were in part even though the ANC did not address
the real issue at all, and that was that Ms Serobe misled the committee. I
believe that all that needs to be said is that the crux of the issue is
whether or not this House intends to exercise its constitutional mandate of
independent, efficient and effective oversight. Clearly, the ANC does not
intend to do that and shame on you.

The matter relating to Ms Serobe should not be conflated to an emotional
issue and should not be seen as a personal issue. The law is clear and we
in this House have sworn to uphold the law. It is an offence when being
examined by Parliament, as Ms Serobe was indeed being examined during her
interview with the Portfolio Committee on Communications, to wilfully
furnish the House or committee with information or make a statement before
it which is false and misleading. That is what Ms Serobe did. She doesn’t
even know who Mr Du Plooy is and yet she wants to sit on the board. She
admits not even knowing the person who nominated her. How pathetic is that!

Now, we are therefore surely required - which the ANC does not intend to
do, but given the facts to hand - to establish a committee to investigate a
possible breach of parliamentary privilege. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the motion by Ms S C Vos be adopted.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 45: Blanché, J P I; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Botha, A; Botha, C-S;
   Chang, E S; Cupido, H B; Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M
   J; Green, L M; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lowe, C M;
   Madikiza, G T; Marais, S J F; Mdlalose, M M; Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J;
   Morgan, G R; Mpontshane, A M; Nel, A H; Opperman, S E; Pule, B E; Rabie,
   P J; Rabinowitz, R; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Semple, J A;
   Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, S N; Skosana, M B; Smuts, M; Swart, M; Swart, P S;
   Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S
   M; Vos, S C; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zikalala, C N Z.
   NOES - 159: Abram, S; Anthony, T G; Asiya, S E; Baloyi, M R; Beukman, F;
   Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B; Bloem, D V; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I
   M; Carrim, Y I; Chohan, F I; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Daniels, P; Davies,
   R H; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge, G Q M; Frolick, C T;
   Fubbs, J L; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N
   J; Gololo, C L; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Hendricks, L
   B; Holomisa, S P; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kasienyane, O
   R; Kekana, C D; Kgauwe, M K; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P;
   Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Likotsi,
   M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N;
   Mabena, D C; Madella, A F; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S;
   Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H
   P; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J;
   Masutha, T M; Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J;
   Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C;
   Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J;
   Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D;
   Mohlaloga, M R; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M;
   Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Mpahlwa, M B; Mthembu, B; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M
   J G; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
   Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J;
   Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L; Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C;
   Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M;
   Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Phala, M
   J; Pieterse, R D; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M;
   Rwexana, S P; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seadimo, M D;
   Sefularo, M; Selau, J G; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P;
   Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S; Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tolo, L J;
   Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Twala,
   N M; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van Wyk, A; Wang, Y; Yengeni, L E; Zulu, B Z.

Question not agreed to.

Motion accordingly negatived.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We seem not to be ready for the vote that I spoke about
just now. We will come back to it, because it has to be done some time
today still. The next item is a subject for discussion in the name of Mr M
Waters on 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children.

Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Speaker, I just want to raise a point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it related to this matter?

Mr D V BLOEM: No, to the previous matter.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are dealing with that matter.

Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Speaker, I just want to raise a point: I think that the
voters must take note of their representatives from the DA.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That’s not a point of order. Can you sit down?
[Interjections.] Hon members, what is going on? [Interjections.] I think
Christmas is coming too early for some of you. I just want to warn you that
I am not going to allow this kind of behaviour from both sides of the
House. We may ask some of you to take an early Christmas, so that we remain
with a collective that wants to go on with the business of the nation.

     SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM FOR NO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, South Africa has one of the highest
rape statistics in the world. It is common knowledge that only one in ten
rapes is reported to the police but some nongovernmental organisations
believe the figure to be as high as one in 15. On the basis of these
estimates, it is calculated that one rape occurs every 20 seconds.

So, even if one stands on a street corner for 20 minutes - as a former
Minister of Safety and Security infamously said - and no rape occurs, at
least 60 rapes have occurred around the corner or on the next street
somewhere in South Africa during that time. It is totally unacceptable that
women and girls, and in some cases even men, cannot walk the streets safely
without the fear of being raped. We must all work together to claim back
the streets for ourselves.

Since 1991, the 16-days campaign has helped to raise awareness about gender
violence and has highlighted its effects on women globally. Each year,
thousands of activists from all around the world utilise the campaign to
further their work to end violence against women.

It has challenged policies and practices that allow women to be targeted
for acts of violence. It has called for the protection of people who defend
women’s human rights and it has demanded accountability from states,
including a commitment to recognise and act upon all forms of violence
against women as human rights abuses.

The 2007 16-days campaign seeks to dismantle obstacles and overcome
challenges posed by social attitudes and policies that continue to condone
and perpetuate gender-based violence. These include: demanding and securing
adequate funding; calling for greater accountability and political
commitment from states to prevent and punish all forms of violence against
women in practice, and not just in words; increasing awareness of the
impact of violence against women; including engaging in measures to end it
by men and boys; evaluating the impact and effectiveness of work to prevent
violence against women; and securing the space for advocacy and defending
the defenders of women’s human rights in their work to end gender-based
violence.

Against this background it is quite extraordinary that South Africa refused
to support a UN General Assembly resolution condemning rape used as a
weapon of war. What makes it even more peculiar is that South African
women, including our present Foreign Minister, Nkosazana Zuma and Public
Service Minister Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, were instrumental in getting
rape declared as a war crime at the Beijing Conference in 1995.

It is important that we understand the impact this violent crime has on its
victims. When a woman is abused, the damage extends far beyond her. The
psychological effects of rape result in a pattern of reaction called Rape
Trauma Syndrome, which is suffered by many rape survivors. Rape is not just
about unwanted sex; it is a highly traumatic experience and, like other
serious traumas, it has negative effects on those who survive it.

Rape is usually experienced as life-threatening, and an extreme violation
of a person. It does not only have an effect on the victim but it is also
very traumatic for the family, friends and colleagues. The effects of rape
are long-term, maybe even lifelong, and although rape survivors never
forget being raped, they may eventually learn how to deal with the memory.
The negative effects of rape are not yet widely known or recognised in
South Africa. In fact, many of our courts are still operating under the
false impression that rape is merely unwanted sex, and therefore it does
not damage rape survivors in the long term. Rape Trauma Syndrome is only
now being introduced as evidence in South African courts.

Freda Adler says, and I quote, “Rape is the only crime in which the victim
becomes the accused”. Unfortunately, this is so true. With all the
emotional problems arising from the rape that women have to endure, during
the police investigation and the medical investigations a second round of
victimisation usually occurs in the process.

Our justice system does not have mercy for hundreds of rape victims. We
have a woman Minister of Justice. She must ensure that rape victims are
treated with dignity and respect, and that justice is swiftly and
effectively done.

Rape is about power and not sex. A rapist uses actual force or violence, or
the threat of it, to take control of another human being. Rape is a crime,
whether the person committing it is a stranger, a date, an acquaintance or
even - and shamefully - a family member. There is a well-known saying, “if
you strike a woman, you strike a rock”.

”Wathinta abafazi, wathinta imbokodo”. [... you strike a woman, you strike
a rock.]

We, the men and women of South Africa, must remember that these women of
rock, this backbone of our society, should never have to endure the
suffering and humiliation of rape.

This violent and hateful act will shatter any rock into a million pieces.
Can South Africa afford a million little pieces of rock? [Applause.]

Ms P TSHWETE: Chair, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members, our
guests in the gallery, I’d like to thank the chairperson of the women’s
caucus, Kiki Rwexana, for giving me the opportunity to take part in the
debate on the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and
Children. This campaign plays a significant role in the lives of women and
children in South Africa.

As parliamentarians, we want to make sure that we highlight and sensitise
society on the notion of restoring moral regeneration, which we need to
embrace together with the value of human dignity.

There is a primary element that we need to apply when combating violence
against women and children. It is that time of the year again, when we need
to pause and reflect on our moral values and examine the manner in which
the most vulnerable of our people, that is women and children, are treated
in society.

We are not referring to rural women only, but also to women who are well-
educated and holding senior positions at work. The latter are also victims
of abuse either at work or behind closed doors at home.

South Africa has joined the international community in making the statement
that violence against women and children is a crime and will not be
tolerated. You will agree with me that currently – and
contrary to expectations – the rate of abuse against women and children is
going up.

As society, we need to make the point that we are sick and tired of reading
in newspapers and watching on television stories about horrible incidents
of abuse of women and children. Recently, there has been a number of
reported cases of murder of women, with their bodies dumped at Shayamoya
sugar plantation in KwaZulu-Natal. The question is: Why women and girl-
children? We are by no means saying that boy-children are not victims,
because they are. However, in this instance women are clearly targets.

The South African government runs a parallel campaign that includes issues
relating to violence against children. This campaign focuses primarily on
generating an increased awareness of the negative impact of violence
against women and children.
The Department of Provincial and Local Government is working closely with
the Office on the Status of Women in the Presidency, the Office on the
Status of Disabled Persons, the Office of the Status of Children, as well
as other government departments. These offices report directly to the
Minister in the Presidency, Dr Essop Pahad, who spearheads the campaign.

We need to pay special attention to municipalities. We are not alone in
this battle; we also have our chapter 9 institutions, such as the
Commission on Gender Equity and the SA Human Rights Commission. These
institutions have primarily been mandated to protect and promote our
constitutional democracy and uphold the value of human dignity within
society at large.

The Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and
Status of Women in Parliament, led by hon Morotua, is working hand in hand
with the Office on the Status of Women and the Commission on Gender Equity
in trying to implement the national gender machinery at provincial, local
and municipal levels. The purpose is to bring about awareness, to review
policies and to monitor proper implementation of the machinery.

We further need to provide adequate training to people appointed at gender
focal points, be it at local or municipal levels. The implementation of
this machinery does not end with government; it extends to the private
sector and NGOs. Our excellent Constitution is praised worldwide and
globally is the only one that protects the provisions of the equality
clause.

As a result of this clause, we have the Equality Court and relevant
institutions in place. Once again, we have wonderful pieces of legislation
such as the Domestic Violence Act, which protects women against any kind of
abuse. We also have the sexual offences legislation that introduces a
number of new crimes that are regarded as sex-related crimes and makes it
an offence, for example, to compel one person to rape or sexually assault a
third person.

Ndinovuyo ngokuthetha ngomsebenzi owenziwe yiPalamente ukukhusela
amalungelo amakhosikazi. Ndikwavuyiswa nakukuqaphela umsebenzi owenziwa
ngoomasipala ukuncedisa ekulweni uxhaphazo lwamakhosikazi nabantwana.

Ndikwavuyiswa nakukuqaphela umsebenzi owenziwa ngusihlalo weKomiti
yeMicimbi yeSebe, uMaggie Sotyu, owenze ukuba amapolisa abe namhlanje
ayaqeqeshwa ukuze akwazi ukujongana nezimo zodlwengulo lwamakhosikazi.
Amapolisa asekwaqeqeshwa nasekubeni akwazi ukusebenzisana namaxhoba
odlwengulo kwanokuba azamkele kwaye angazenzi intlekisa iingxelo eziza
namakhosikazi kuwo.

Ndisekwavuyiswa nakukuba iinkundla ziyabagweba ngokuqatha abo
badlwengulayo. Udlwengulo yinto ekufanele siyithathe njengento exhomisa
amehlo, singayenzi into yokudlala. Xa udlwengule ungumntu ongutata,
akukhathaliseki nokuba ungubani na okanye ukweliphi na inqanaba lobomi,
okusalayo kukuba udlwengule. Ngaphezulu, asizi kuyihlekela into
yokudlwengulwa ngabantu esilindele ukuba basikhusele, simana sikrwecana
singamakhosikazi xa sibona loo mntu sisithi: Kanene wayedlwengule!

Siyacela ukuba igqugula lamakhosikazi liyiqaphele into yokuba ngekhe
silwamkele udlwengulo noxhaphazo lwabantwana.

Ndifuna ukubonisa indlela urhulumente awukhathalele ngayo uMzantsi Afrika
nabantu bawo. Phezolo bendibukele inkqubo kamabonakude kwijelo i-SABC 3,
ndanqwena ukuba abe kanti uMphathiswa uMdladlana abe naye ebebukele.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I am pleased to talk about Parliament’s efforts to protect women’s rights
and to note the work that is being done by the municipalities to help to
curb the abuse of women and children.

I acknowledge the work that is done by the chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee, hon Maggie Sotyu, who has made it possible for the police to be
trained so that they are sensitive when dealing with cases of women who
have been raped. They are also being trained to be sensitive when dealing
with victims of rape and not to take lightly the complaints that are
brought to them by women. I am also pleased that the courts are handing out
heavy sentences to rapists.

Rape is a crime that should be regarded as something alarming and not as
something trivial. When you have raped, as a man, regardless of who you are
or what your status in life is, you are still a rapist. Furthermore, we are
not going to condone being raped by people from whom we expect protection
and whisper among ourselves as women and say, By the way, he is a rapist!

We would like to plead with the women’s caucus to note that we are not
going to condone the rape and abuse of children.

I would like to demonstrate how the government cares for South Africa and
its citizens. Yesterday I was watching a programme on SABC 3 and how I
wished that the hon Minister Mdladlana was also watching.]

Sometimes I don’t go to sleep early; I watch TV until midnight. Don’t ask
me Why. [Interjections.] The programme was about sex workers, and it made
me feel very sad. As parliamentarians, we do not know what is happening in
South Africa.

The sex industry is in existence, even right here in Cape Town. Young
children of about thirteen or fourteen years of age were saying: “We are
unemployed; we want this industry to be legalised.”

We still have a big problem, and that problem faces us directly, as
parliamentarians. [Interjections.] We’ve just passed the Civil Union Act.
Today people are moaning about the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act.

Lo ngumba ocinezela amakhosikazi. Kwaye ukuba zange ube yinkosikazi emnyama
ezaziyo iingxaki zamakhosikazi, ... [This is an issue that affects women.
If you have never been a black woman, who understands the problems facing
the women, ...]

... you would ask: “Why this piece of legislation?”, as the opposition
parties are doing. We know that the government ...

... osikhathaleleyo eMzantsi Afrika nokhusela amakhosikazi, uyayazi into
yokuba kukho ingxaki yokhutsho lwezisu oluqhutywa kwiimeko
ezingakhuselekanga ngokungekho mthethweni mihla le. [... which cares about
us in South Africa and which protects the women. You know that there is the
issue of abortions that are conducted under unsafe conditions on a daily
basis.]

Government is saying: “Let us avoid that”. People must come forward and
say: “I have a problem”, so that they can get counselling. Choice of
termination of pregnancy does not happen on its own, it goes with
counselling.

Sifuna ukuqinisekisa, makhosikazi, ukuba uxhaphazo nodlwengulo siyajijisana
nazo. Enkosi. [We would like to make sure as women that we confront abuse
and rape. Thank you.] [Time expired.]
Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, every couple of seconds a woman is raped
and her rights are violated in South Africa. Every few seconds a child is
raped or molested in South Africa.

The Law Reform Commission estimated that there are as many as 1,7 million
rapes in our country every year, but only a small fraction of that number
is reported to the police. It is sickening to think that serial killers can
call on the best legal defence and that rapists often appear to have more
rights than the victims.

Where is this situation taking us as South Africans? We have to question
whether this is the democracy we fought for. Surely we did not fight
apartheid only to be brutally murdered and attacked by people who have no
respect for life in our democracy. Everyday innocent souls are being bought
and sold or tricked into slavery. Women and children are shipped off far
from the safety of their homes and end up exploited as slaves or worse.

My party’s message is simple: Men of South Africa, change your attitudes
and behaviour towards women and children now. Treat women and children with
respect and dignity. Value their lives and the contribution they make to
society!

Imagine if, for 16 days, there was no rape, no child abuse, no sexual
harassment, no emotional abuse and no human trafficking. South Africa would
be at peace and have harmony. However, even 16 days of such peace and
harmony is not enough. Now, we say let us have a campaign of 365 days of
activism against women and child abuse. Let us commit to a year-round
rolling campaign without end, to get rid of this scourge forever.

The IFP strongly believes that respect and concern for human rights,
including the rights of the child and equality between men and women, must
be at the foundation of a communal response to violence against women and
children. Hence this year’s 16 days of activism campaign must promote human
rights and fundamental freedoms in relation to violence against women and
children so that they can fully enjoy life and the rights guaranteed by our
Constitution.

As members of the IFP, we pledge solemnly to do everything we can to end
violence against women and children; and to work especially on the
attitudes of our men. Men must join us when we invite them to our meetings;
they must not run away. Thank you.

Mr J BICI: Chair, hon members, the UDM supports the idea of 16 Days of
Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children. What we need to do now
is to change the focus from the past preoccupation with how many women are
represented where; the key now must be to move beyond numbers.

In the UDM pledge to mark the 16-days campaign, we said, amongst other
things, that we recognise that violence against women and children is not
only widespread, but also under-reported, poorly policed and that only a
small percentage of it is ever successfully prosecuted. We recognise that
violence against women and children reflects the deep seated misogyny that
still pervades many areas of our society.

As individuals and as an organisation, we pledge to pursue the education
and awareness of gender equality amongst adults and the next generation. We
recognise that the biggest obstacle is the culture of silence that
surrounds the abuse of women and children. We, therefore, pledge, as
individuals and as an organisation, to speak out whenever and wherever we
encounter the scourge.

Lastly, I hope and wish that one of the ANC caucuses received from the UDM
caucus a manifesto of our preparedness to fight ruthlessly against violence
against women and children. I thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP is not convinced that the methodology
employed by the government for purposes of this 16 days of activism is
effective. The question as to whether or not the 16 days of activism is the
best government can do in response to the growing prevalence of abuse
amongst women and children is controversial.

As the ACDP has stated in the past, it is time for government to move
beyond trying to create awareness as it needs to begin solving the problem.
Government must stop making excuses, such as that it is very difficult to
police the crime of abuse against women and children as the majority of
these incidents occur in the home, especially at the hands of the people
that they love, admire, respect and trust.

This stance by government reminds me of the statement that goes: “A man who
hits his wife, is a man who has run out of ideas.” If government is truly
interested in combating this phenomenon of violence against women and
children, then we recommend that it applies the following: Impose heavier
sentences for convicted abusers; provide more courts and personnel to deal
specifically and swiftly with these issues; provide better training for
police, better forensic services, paedophile registers and care centres;
and amend destructive laws.

Additionally, government must also learn to adhere to a moral philosophy
that is based upon the word of God. The ACDP guarantees that if they do,
problems of this nature will decrease rather than increase.

Government must realise that anything that is a threat to the family, is a
threat to society. Therefore, the ACDP advocates that steps, and not just
the creation of awareness, be taken to maintain the family unit as the
strongest building block of society.
Furthermore, it makes no sense for government to squander taxpayers’ money
on rallying the public. It makes more sense for government to put resources
into finding solutions, and not into celebrations, under the guise of
activism. The public is fully aware of what is happening around them.

To conclude, to the nation out there, let me quote a message from the
Bible, in Second Book of the Chronicles, Chapter 7, verse 14:


  If my people, who are called by my name, will humble themselves and pray
  and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from
  heaven and will forgive their sin and will heal their land.

That is a promise from God. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, the FF Plus pledges its firm commitment to, and
support for, activism against violence and abuse against women and
children. The scourge of violence being perpetrated against the most
vulnerable sections of our society is eating away at the moral fibre of
South Africa and is destroying our society.

We therefore acknowledge that our efforts to protect and promote the status
of women and children have to be stepped up. We undertake to constructively
participate in the national campaign to combat violence against women and
children and, as public representatives of the FF Plus, we pledge to show
our solidarity with the victims of violence against women and children
through leading by example.

Voorsitter, ’n man wat aan ’n vrou slaan of wat kinders mishandel, is nie
’n man nie, maar ’n lafaard. ’n Man wat dit doen, hoort in die tronk. Dit
is wat hy is en waar hy behoort te wees.

Die feit van die saak is, dit hoef ook nie net altyd fisiese geweld te wees
nie. Ek wil vandag sê dat mans wat nie hulle onderhoudsplig nakom teenoor
hul eie kinders nie, is presies besig met dieselfde geweld en intimidering
van hul eie kinders en daar behoort ook teen hulle opgetree te word.

Die VF Plus voel baie sterk daaroor dat ons hierdie saak sal moet verder
voer, nie net vir 16 dae nie, maar dit behoort die norm te wees in Suid-
Afrika dat vrouens en kinders en hierdie gedeelte van ons gemeenskap
beskerm behoort en op die voorgrond gestel te word. ’n Man wat dit nie doen
nie, is ’n lafaard en hoort in die tronk. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, a man who hits a woman or abuses a child, is not a man, but a
coward. A man who does that, belongs in jail. That is where he is and
should be.

The fact of the matter is that it does not always need to be physical
violence. I want to say today that men who do not carry out their
maintenance responsibilities toward their own children, are busy with the
same violence and intimidation of their own children and action should be
taken against them.

The FF Plus feels very strongly that we will take this matter further, not
only for 16 days, but it should be the norm in South Africa that women and
children and this part of our community should be protected and put in the
foreground. A man who does not do that, is a coward and belongs in jail. I
thank you.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson, the 16 days of activism campaign has been
used to create a global movement, to raise awareness, to address policy and
legal issues, to campaign for the protection of survivors of violence and
to call for the elimination of all forms of gender violence. It has been
successful in creating nationwide awareness of women and child abuse.
However, the campaign should be more than just a series of marches, banners
and speeches.

Izwe noma selizwile, uhulumeni kanye nathi sonke kuyadingeka ukuthi sakhe
izinhlelo zokusiza labo abathintekile kanye nalezo zokusiza nalabo
abanesifo sokuhlupha nokuhlukumeza abantu. [Even when the nation has been
alerted, the government and all of us need to create programmes for helping
those who are affected as well as those who suffer from the malaise of
harassing and abusing people.]

Adequate funding and monitoring of this programme is required. Many
departments may have gender policies and gender unions, but the importance
and power assigned to these is minimal. The gender focal points often
experience budgetary constraints.

Statistics by Childline state that one in three girls and one in five boys
have been sexually molested. Tragically, most cases of abuse go unreported.
The full extent remains unrecorded. The Constitution recognises gender
equality as a cornerstone of South Africa’s democracy, and government needs
to use the 16 days of activism in conjunction with creating awareness about
gender equality.

We, as Nadeco, also believe that amongst the programmes the government
needs to create, emphasis has to be placed on issues of gender
mainstreaming. Each department needs to place importance on its gender
policies and programmes. This, as a result, will have a bearing in
assisting in changing the behaviour and thinking of some of the males who
have a problem, as well as those who have been brought up in families where
subordination of women was the norm. Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.]

Ms B T NGCOBO: Chairperson and hon members, since 1998, South Africa has
joined the world community by actively engaging in the campaign of 16 Days
of Activism Against Violence Against Women.

For South Africa, it became very important to also include children in this
campaign because we are a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Indeed, we have ongoing debates around this issue. To mention a few
examples -

Sithini uma ngabe indoda ihlupha inkosikazi yayo iminyaka yabo yonke
besemshadweni, kodwa kuthi mhla ishona ibeke izimbali ebhokisini layo?

Sithini ngengqungquthela eyayiseNyakatho Koloni eyayimayelana nodlame
olubhekiswe kwabesifazane, lapho kwavela khona ukuthi iphoyisa lashisa
inkosikazi yalo ngamanzi ngesikhathi kuqala lo mbhidlango?

Sithini ngentombazane engezwa eyadlwengulwa abantu abathathu okwathi uma
ifika enkantolo icela umuntu ozoyitolikela kwathiwa akekho, ngaleyo ndlela
yangaluthola usizo?

Sithini ngentombazane ekhubazekile enqondweni eyadlwengulwa umuntu emaziyo
kwathi uma sekufikwa enkantolo, kwabuzakala ukuthi ubani oyidlwengulile,
yakhomba umfana wakwaSimelane okwakuvele kukunguyena umfana wakwaSimelane?
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[What do we say when a man abuses his wife throughout their marital life,
and yet when he dies she places flowers on his coffin?

What do we say about the conference that was held in the Northern Cape in
which we heard about a policeman who had poured boiling water over his wife
during the early days of this campaign?

What do we say about the deaf girl who was raped by three men and when she
went to the police station to report the case, and she further asked for a
sign language interpreter she was told that there was no interpreter and
could therefore not receive any assistance?

What do we say about the mentally retarded girl who was raped by a man who
was known to her and, in court, when she was asked to identify the person
who had raped her, she pointed out the son of Simelane who turned out not
to be the son of Simelane?]

What do we say about the woman who was stripped naked by the hostel
dwellers, because she was wearing pants? This time it was not a short
dress, to which people always say, “You were raped because you were wearing
a short dress”.

Sithini ngendaba yase-Free State ngesikhathi ikhomishane ebhekelele ubulili
ebizwa nge-Gender Commission, lapho kwakunengqungquthela eyayimayelana
nodlame olubhekiswe kwabesifazane kwavela ukuthi ...
[What do we say about the Free State case, during the conference on
violence against women, organised by the Gender Commission, in which we
heard that ...]
A 64-year-old man raped an eight-year-old girl. On failing to penetrate, he
had to cut this little girl’s vagina to be able to penetrate her.

Sithini ngendaba yaseMpumalanga, KwaBhokweni, lapho inkosikazi yashonelwa
umkhwenyana wayo owayeyihlupha futhi engayinakile? Kwathi omama ababekhona
lapho bathi ukuze ikwazi ukukhalela umkhwenyana wayo, bazoyincinza
ngempintshisi lapha ezinhlangothini. Bayincinza-ke ... (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[What are we saying about an incident in Mpumalanga, KwaBhokweni, where a
woman who had lost her abusive and uncaring husband was hurt? The women who
were there at the funeral said that if she did not mourn the death of her
husband, they would pinch her with pliers on her sides so that she could be
seen to be mourning the death of husband. They pinched her ...]

... until she was black and blue.

Siyazi-ke ukuthi ... [We all know that -.] ...the provincial and local
governments are spearheading this programme.

In any case, the government is doing all it can through the laws and other
ways to fight this scourge. The Sexual Offences Bill broadens the
definition of sexual violence and helps ensure heavy sentences for
convicted offenders. The legislatures, the judiciary and the public have
got to ensure that this legislation has an impact.

South Africa has taken concrete steps in dealing with abuse through courts,
Parliament, Chapter 9 institutions and specialised training that is given
to the police in dealing sensitively with survivors of violence. The women
of South Africa, during the last decade, followed their sisters on other
continents, leaving behind the title of housewife and entering the labour
market.

However, these days, women in South Africa find themselves unemployed and
because of this there is an increased need for cash incomes to produce
economic empowerment, particularly in the rural areas. Young women, with
some education, are aware of the gap between urban and rural life, and
reject the drudgery of enforced domestic work as daughters in the family
and increasingly have access to information about the lack of opportunities
and how others live their lives.

The way these dimensions impact on one another is contextual, but they
ultimately contribute to the major migration of young women and girls, not
just men, as it used to be. Many of them are at high risk of being
trafficked and others killed, as was the case on the KwaZulu-Natal south
coast’s Shayamoya, where women were promised employment, only to be killed
and some of their body parts removed. These killings have raised serious
concerns throughout the country.
According to the report of the International Organisation for Migration,
trafficking of women and children for sexual exploitation is a significant
problem in Southern Africa. Trafficking of women is the fastest-growing
source of profit for organised crime worldwide, second only to guns and
drugs.

Unlike drugs, the advantage of human cargo is that it is recycled and
reused. It is clear that women and children are trafficked specifically to
work in forced prostitution; others are recruited to work in agricultural
and manufacturing sectors for next to nothing in appalling conditions.

In conclusion, it is the responsibility of all South Africans to strive for
nonviolence, particularly against women and children, and to conscienctise
their children on nonviolent behaviour. Further, men have a role in ending
violence and making a difference.

Let men be counted in the fight against violence and abuse. We are,
however, encouraged that some men are becoming advocates of no
violence against women and they are becoming part of the solution. We
further caution women who expose other women to violence, such as...

... kuyabekezelwa emendweni futhi libanjwa lishisa ... [... marriage is not
a walk in the park and that one must persevere ...] ... because that is
oppressing and that is violence against women. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mong B E PULE: Modulasetilo, tota go a gakgamatsa e bile go a swabisa, gore
morago ga dingwaga di le some le boraro tsa temokerasi re be re sa ntse re
bua ka ntwa kgatlhanong le tshotlako ya bomme le bana. Go bonala tota gore
go na le batho, bogolo borre, ba ba gaisiwang ke diphologolo. Ga go na
phologolo epe e tonanyana e e ka lwantshang e e namagadi kampo ngwana wa
yona. Ke rona borre fela re dirang jalo.

Ka na tota molao o sa le o tswa kwa Modimong ka osi fa o re: ``banna ratang
basadi ba lona, basadi tlotlang banna ba lona, bagolo ratang bana ba lona.
Kana go ne go sa tlhokege gore batho ba direlwe melao ya go tlhokomela
bomme le bana. Botho ke jona bo tshwanetseng go ba ruta. Fa botho bo leng
teng, re ne re tshwanelwa ke go bua ka malatsi a ngwaga otlhe, ke gore a le
365, gonne letsatsi le letsatsi mosadi le ngwana ba sotlwa ka mekgwa e e
farologaneng.

A le rona re le Ntlo e e tlotlegang e, re nne dikai, re seka ra tswa
batlhanka ba mafoko a rona ka go sotlaka malapa a rona. Tota batho kampo
banna ba ba ganang go utlwa ka ditsebe fa ba bolelelwa ba tshwanetse go
utlwa ka letlalo; ke gore ba bidiwe. A e re mo malatsing a a khunologo go
tswa mo ditirong tse di farologaneng, borre botlhe ba nne tshegofatso mo go
bomme le bana ba bona. Ke a leboga. (Translation of Sesotho speech
follows.)
[Mr B E PULE: Chairperson, really it is surprising and disappointing that
after thirteen years of democracy we are still talking about the fight
against woman and child abuse. It is clear that there are people,
especially men who are worse than animals.  There is no male animal which
abuses a female animal or its young. Only us; men are doing that!

Indeed, the law came from God: “husbands love your wives, wives respect
your husbands”. There was no need to enact laws for the people in order to
protect women and children. Humility should teach them. If there was
humility, we were supposed to talk each and every day of the year - 365
days, because women and children are abused daily in different forms.

As members of this House, let us be good examples. Let us not do the
opposite of what we preach by abusing our women and children. People or men
who do not listen, should feel the pinch by being given a hiding. During
our holidays free from our different work commitments, let all men be a
blessing to their wives and children. I thank you.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the 16 days of activism is a productive way of
addressing gender-based violence and liberating women, globally, from all
forms of abuse. We have been working in our constituencies to educate and
unite in the fight against violence against women and children, but it is
evident that abuses are still high. The news bulletins have, on a daily
basis, reports of violence and abuse against women and children. These
abuses stem from rape, violence and even economic abuses to human
trafficking.

There, however, appears to be a greater awareness on the dilemma, and more
victims have found the strength to speak out. We need victims to speak out
so that we may stamp out the crimes being committed.

The MF unites in the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and
Children. All spheres of government need to actively take part in reducing
crime and violence in South Africa. Local government needs to realise the
importance it has in this regard. Our SAPS remains incapacitated to assist
in this situation and it is high time that the promised funding be utilised
to train personnel and equip police stations with the means to assist
victims of violence.

Parents and guardians, remember you are not obligate to trust anyone, but
you are obligated to protect your children. Murderers and rapists do not
have one face but many faces, colour, or sex. Rather protect than to
regret. I thank you.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Modulasetulo le Matona a hlomphehileng a teng kwano, bomme
le bontate. [Chairperson, hon Ministers present here today, ladies and
gentlemen.]
The APC aligns itself with the campaign of 16 days of activism as initiated
by the UN and adopted by many countries in the world. We embrace the
International Day of No Violence Against Women and Children and the
International Human Rights Day.

Re le mokgatlo rere: Hoa hlokahala hore banna ba kgone ho itlhompha jwalo
ka banna, mme ba se ke ba ba le tlhekefetso baneng le ho bomme. Re le
mokgatlo re re bontate ba tlameha hore ba baballe bophelo ba bana le ba
bomme. [As an organisation we are saying that it is important for men to
respect themselves, they must stop children and women abuse and they are
supposed to look after women and children.]

Xa oomama nabantwana bengaxhatshazwa, eli lizwe lethu liya kukwazi ukuba
libe nekamva elihle kakhulu. Kaloku sithi abantwana bethu ngabo abaza kuba
ziinkokeli kwixesha elizayo. Side sitsho kwanokuba oomama ngabo abantu
abakwaziyo ukuba baqinise isizwe. [When women and children are not abused,
this country would have a very bright future. Indeed, we say that children
are the leaders of tomorrow. We also say that women are the pillars of the
nation.]

Hon members, let us bow our heads and remember the many women and children
who became victims of violence this year and in the past years.

APC e tshehetsa letsholo la ho thibela tlhekefetso ya bomme le bana
lefatsheng ka bophara. Re etsa boipiletso ho batho bohle, haholo bontate,
ho emisa ka tlhekefetso ya bomme le bana, mme re etsa boipiletso ho
dikereke le baruti hore le bona ba ke ba tiise haholo ka hore hobe le
tlhokomelo eno. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[The APC Women’s Network Support Programme supports the Stop Women and
Children Abuse Campaign worldwide. We are urging everyone, especially men,
to stop woman and child abuse and we also urge churches and its Ministers
to make sure that this surely does happen.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD believes that 16 days of activism is not
enough to rid our nation of the scourge of violence against women and
children. We must support the UN campaign for 16 days of activism, but this
obviously is not enough because it does not impact the rape statistics in
South Africa. If the fundamental reasons for violence against women and
children are not addressed we will not rid our society of the scourge.

Though we have managed to instil in our people the values of a nonracial
society, we still lag behind in instilling in them the value of respect for
women and children. The next leg of the challenge of human freedom in our
country is to work towards respect and appreciation for women and children.
The FD concurs with all the comments made by the speakers against the crime
of rape and sexual abuse. We need to reiterate the role of religious and
cultural entities in restoring the dignity and humanity of women and
children as well as to challenge traditions and conventions to review those
values which may diminish the status of women.

The FD will continue to strive for the wellbeing of family life where
women, men and children feel safe and secure at home and is supported by
political laws and institutions that guarantee the stability of a social
environment in which families can find the space for growth and
development. I thank you.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, there is no doubt that the national democratic
society that the ANC seems to bring about will be characterised by freedom
from fear and want. The fear and want we are fighting to change is partly a
bad heritage of the past. We must attack these two evils at their roots
with all the energies at our disposal.

Women and children are principal sufferers of this scourge. The campaign of
no violence against women and children helps us all in these Houses of
Parliament and elsewhere in the country, and the world, to focus on the
work that must be done to rid society, once and for all, of such violence.
It affects directly the poor and the rich, but clearly poverty exacerbates
vulnerability.
Whilst it is true that this matter has become a societal matter, profound
changes in the nature of society will bring about better results and we
can, at an individual level, bring about serious changes for the better
without waiting any longer. It is for this reason that this year’s call to
mobilise men is appropriate without slackening one bit of effort to
resocialise women and children to be their own liberators.

It is this pillar of the national democratic struggle to entrench a human
rights culture, and a belief by people that they are their own liberators,
that makes this campaign such a crucial one. Campaign work requires lots of
patience, painstaking persuasion, mobilisation and organisation of
communities, to have any significant impact. In fact, the resources
government is putting into this, is very appropriate. It requires constant
research work and gathering of knowledge, to understand better the root
causes of these scourges. By managing the stakeholders from all walks of
society behind this campaign, government has demonstrated the power of
working together across boundaries.

This war to reclaim our neighbourhoods, homes, schools and places of work,
must be reinvigorated, so that as we said, women, children and all of us,
must be free to walk about or run around without fear. Our liberation will
remain an unfinished business if we do not achieve this objective.

Setho se re: “Motho ke motho ka batho”. Haholoholo banna le bashemane ke
bona ba ka tlisang phaphang e kgolo ha ba ka kena letsholong la ho fedisa
tshebediso ya dikgoka le tlatlapo ho batho ba bomme, banana le ho bana. Ba
bileng teng pele ho rona ke ka hona ba neng ba re: “Pharela ha e hlole
banna”. E ka ba ntho e ntle ha re ka itshupa ka dipuo, ka diketso le ka
metsamao hore re utlwisisa ka botlalo tlhompho e tshwanetseng bomme, banana
le bana jwalo ka theho ya setjhaba se motlotlo.

Kgotso e keke ya rena ka hare ho metse ya rona ha feela ho ntse ho na le
batho bao re iphaphanyang bona le ha ba tsebahala ka dikgoka le tlatlapo.
Re tlameha ho bontsha ba ntseng ba hola hore di teng ditsela tsa ho amana
le batho tse sa hlokeng bokgopo bo sebediswang ka dikgoka. Dikolong le
mekgathlong e teng ka hare ho setjhaba re tshwanetse ho ruta ditsela tse
nepahetseng tsa ho kenya maikutlo taolong, hobane ha maikutlo a lahleha,
hona ho isa tshebedisong ya dikgoka. Ha re ka ntlafatsa thuto, kgudiso e
ntlafatsang kutlwisiso le taolo ya maikutlo, re tla be re jala peo ya
phediso ya tshebediso ya dikgoka le ditlatlapo.

Makgotla a Melao, tsamaiso ya ditjhankane, seponesa le ba ditshebeletso tsa
ntshetsopele ba tshwanela ho ba le tshebedisanommoho e tiileng. Ka tsela
ena ba leng molato ba tla tlalehwa hore molao o sebetsane le bona ka
potlako, ka ditsela tse tla tiisang hore ha ba kgutlele mekgweng ya bona e
mebe, hore ba tlalehileng le bona ba tshwarehe ka tsela e nang le tlhompho.

Phephetso e kgolo ke ya ho qeta bofuma, hobane le bona bo jala bora ho
babang ka hara metse. Tshebediso ya tahi le dithethefatsi le yona e na le
tshusumetso e kgolo tshebedisong ya dikgoka le tlatlapo. Batho ha ba se ba
tahilwe ha ba sa na kelello, seo ba se bonang ke tshebediso ya dikgoka le
tlatlapo feela.

Moruo-kgodumodumo le ona o jetse meharo e bakang hore batho ba sebedise
ditsela dife kapa dife ho fihlela maemo a phahameng, mme hona le hona ke
tshebediso ya dikgoka. Ka mantswe a mang re tshwanetse ho shebana le moruo-
kgodumodumo ona re bone hore na re ka etsa jwang hore re kgutlise botho ka
hara setjhaba sohle seo re phelang le sona le dinaheng tse ding.

Hara ditsela tsena tse teng tsa kutlwisiso le tshebedisano e ntle ka hara
setjhaba ke tsona feela tse tla thibelang tshebediso ya dikgoka le tlatlapo
ho batho ba bomme, banana le bana. Ka borona jwalo ka ha re dutse mona,
mosebetsi oo re nang le ona moo re sebetsang teng ke ona o moholo wa ho
thusa ho hlohleletsa bohle ba nang le boetapele le kutlwisiso ya mosebetsi
ona ho tiisa mosebetsi oo ba tshwanetseng ho o etsa.

Ha se mmuso o ka kgonang ho fedisa Bohloko bona bo teng ka hara setjhaba,
empa ke mmuso le babang ka hara setjhaba ba ipopileng jwalo ka mekgatlo ya
dipolotiki, basebetsi, baahi metseng moo ba dulang teng. Ke ka bona re ka
tiisang hore re tswela pele mme ebile re a atleha letsholong lena.
Ha hona ka mokgwa oo re ka reng re se re qetile re se re fihlile, mme
tokoloho e teng, empa ho ntse ho na le batho ba llang hobane malapeng a
bona ho sebediswa dikgoka mme ba dula ba lla ba lliswa ke tlatlapo ya
mofuta ona. Ntwa ya rona ya boitseko ba tokoloho e tla be e sa fella ha re
soka re qeta mosebetsi o moholo ha kana. Ke a leboha Modulasetulo.
(Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[In our culture we say, “No man is an island”, especially men and boys.
They are the ones who can bring about a lot of difference if they can be
part of the campaign to end the use of violence and abuse against women,
girls and children. Those who came before us used to say, “There is no
problem that cannot be solved”. It would be good if we could show through
our speech, actions and behavior that we fully understand the respect that
women, girls and children deserve as the basis of a proud nation.

There can never be peace in our communities as long as we are pretending
not to notice the people who are known for violence and abuse. We have to
show those who are still growing up that there are ways of interacting with
people that do not need cruelty in the form of violence. At schools and in
community organisations, we have to teach the right ways of controlling
emotions, because when control of emotions is lost, this leads to the use
of violence. If we can improve education, child-rearing that improves
understanding and emotional control, we will be planting a seed to curb the
use of violence and abuse.
The courts of law, correctional services, SAPS and social development have
to co-operate fully. In this way the suspects will be reported so that the
law can deal with them immediately in ways that will ensure that they do
not go back to their wayward ways, so that the victims should be treated
with dignity.

A major challenge is to eradicate poverty because it also causes extreme
animosity in communities. Alcohol and drug abuse are perceived to make a
major contribution to the use of violence and abuse. When people are drunk
they become senseless, the only solution that they see is the use of
violence and abuse.

The scourge of poverty has ploughed greed that causes people to resort to
any means to attain a high social status, therefore, this is also a use of
violence. In other words we have to deal with this scourge of poverty in
order to see what we can do to bring back humanity to the rest of the
communities that we live in as well as in other countries.

Among the available means, understanding and co-operation within the
community are the only ways that can prevent the use of violence and abuse
against women, girls and children. Even as we sit here, the duty that we
have in our constituencies is a huge one of influencing everyone who is in
a position of leadership and has an understanding of this duty to be
committed to the work that they are supposed to do.
It is not only the government that can eradicate this scourge that exists
within the communities, but it is the government together with others in
the community who have organised themselves into political organisations,
workers, members of the community in the areas where they live. It is
through them that we can ensure that we continue and succeed in this
campaign.

There is no way that we can say we have finished or we have arrived and
that freedom is here, and yet there are still people who are suffering
because there is violence in their homes and therefore they are always
crying as a result of this kind of abuse. Our struggle for freedom shall
have been incomplete if we have not done this enormous task. I thank you,
Chairperson. ]

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, I must say that this
year’s debate has been more productive than last year’s, and I am very
encouraged to see our Ministers in the House to share in this debate – I
really am. It shows an interest in the topic and the fight against woman
and child abuse. It is unfortunate though – I mean that sincerely - that
the Deputy Minister in charge of the campaign is not here, maybe there is a
good reason, I don’t know; but it’s a pity she is not here.

I would like to thank all the members that have participated in the debate,
the hon Ngcobo mentioned human trafficking and the fact that in Southern
Africa it’s rife and that amongst the crime affecting women it’s one of the
fastest growing crimes in southern Africa.

I think the hon Tshwete was off the mark a bit with the abortion Bill. The
thing is that the hon member was not there for all the proceedings but if
some compromises had been reached, for example, on mandatory counselling
and conscientious objections, you might have had a few more yes votes in
the House today and maybe got it through – anyway be that as it may.

Everybody agrees that the campaign should be 365 days, but how do we
sustain the campaign that has been developed for 16 into 365 days? I think
we should each year take a particular topic to deal with child
and woman abuse - and there are many – and focus on it and see what we can
do as Parliamentarians and as a nation to address that.
I would like to suggest that this year we look at human trafficking and I
want to focus particularly on children because I have a soft spot for
children, not that I don’t have a soft spot for women, but I think the
House knows my sentiments. I have done a lot of work in the campaigns
against child abuse.

Trafficking in humans and children in particular has to be one of the most
heinous crimes. There are no exact numbers of how many children are
trafficked around the world. However, one estimate is that 50% of
trafficking victims worldwide are actually children under the age of 18.
There are many reasons for the imprecise data on child trafficking.
Trafficking is obviously a criminal act, shrouded in secrecy, and victims
are afraid to come forward. This makes it difficult to get accurate
numbers.

Despite the absence of an exact count of the trafficking of children, the
numbers are enormous and the trends are on the rise around the world.

Children are trafficked for a range of exploitative practices that include
labour exploitation, where children may be used to work on plantations and
in mines; domestic work – and if anyone saw the Law and Order programme the
hon Tshwete likes watching on TV you would have seen a few weeks ago
children being trafficked from Nigeria into America for domestic work and
sexual exploitation.

Children, especially girls, are trafficked to work in brothels and massage
parlours. The IOL global child labour figures of 2000 indicate that 1,8
million children are exploited in the commercial sexual industry; military
conscription is another reason, some 30 ongoing or recent armed conflicts
in almost every region of the world are sustained by child soldiers. When
poverty is acute, a girl may be regarded as an economic burden on her
family and marriage to an older man may be seen as a family survival
strategy. Illicit adoption is also a reason, as is sport and I find this
very strange. This pertains to young boys who have been trafficked as camel
jockeys, which is big business I believe in certain parts of the world;
begging and body organs and of course child pornography which has become a
multimillion dollar industry in itself.

The factors that contribute to making children vulnerable are obviously
poverty, which many members have alluded to today. It makes children highly
vulnerable to traffickers and the inequality of women and girls in many
societies means they are often seen as objects and commodities. Low school
enrolment is also a cause, and I am glad to see the Minister of Education
here as she knows that uneducated children have few opportunities and that
the longer we keep them in school the better the chances are.

Children without care givers are also vulnerable. Parents provide a safety
net for their offspring. Those without parental protection, or those placed
in institutions, are targets for traffickers.

According to the government’s own report on the costing of the Children’s
Act 1,7 million children in South Africa are estimated to be maternal
orphans due to HIV and Aids. This makes them extremely vulnerable to
trafficking. The Unicef report clearly states that combating HIV and Aids
would have the additional effect of reducing child trafficking in the
world. The failure to register births is also another factor as are
traditions and cultural values.

So what can we do as Parliamentarians? Parliamentarians can be instrumental
in reversing this tragedy by taking action, through legislation and
allocating funds to combat this scourge.

It is critical that any legislation against trafficking not be restricted
to transnational trafficking. Many children are trafficked within
countries, particularly from rural to urban areas.

We currently have no legislation to combat trafficking in our country.
However, hon members, last year we passed the Children's Act, section 75 of
which contains a chapter on trafficking in children and it is a very good
chapter. It still has to be enacted and it lays dormant, gathering dust.

It was a lost opportunity when the Minister of Social Development fast-
tracked certain chapters of the Children's Act, but failed to fast-track
this particular chapter and maybe it can be brought to his attention that
he should fast-track this chapter. As parliamentarians we can put pressure
on him to do so.

We have also passed the Sexual Offences Bill, which some members also
mentioned. This Bill also includes a chapter on the trafficking of people
in relation to sexual crimes.

While it would be preferable to have one Act pertaining to all types of
trafficking of children, women and men, we cannot sit back and wait for
this Act to materialise. We as parliamentarians from all parties need to
place pressure on the two Ministers concerned to fast-track the
implementation of the two chapters I have mentioned.

We all need to work together irrespective of which party we may belong to.
Trafficking in children compels us to join hands and act as the first line
of defence against it. People who traffic in children don't care from which
community children come from, and we should not care from which party we
come. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we make the farewell speeches, as
we will be gone for a long time, I just want to announce that there are
outstanding orders that have to be completed today and I have been advised
that there is political consultation taking place. I, therefore, suspend
the business of the House ...

I will go back to that announcement that I have just started making. In
support of the debate, I now recognise the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party.

                             16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move the
Draft Resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House –


      1) notes that Sunday, 25 November, will mark the beginning of the 2007
         campaign of the 16 Days of Activism Against Violence Against  Women
         and Children;


      2) further notes that the 16 Days of Activism  Campaign  is  a  United
         Nations initiated campaign  which  takes  place  annually  from  25
         November, International Day of No Violence  against  Women,  to  10
         December, the International Human Rights Day; and


      3) calls on all South Africans to act  against  gender-based  violence
         and to ensure that the objectives  of  the  campaign  are  realised
         throughout the 365 days of the year.

Agreed to.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now go back to what I was just saying earlier
on, namely that at this stage we will suspend the business of the House for
about 10 minutes. The bells will be rung so that we can complete the other
Orders that are still outstanding.
Business suspended at 17:14 and resumed at 17:29.

                    HUMAN SCIENCES RESEARCH COUNCIL BILL

                     ASTRONOMY GEOGRAPHIC ADVANTAGE BILL

  (Consideration of Bills and of Reports of Portfolio Committee on Science
                           and Technology thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

    That the Human Sciences Research Council Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

THE DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move that the
Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

     DECISION OF QUESTION ON SECOND READING OF CHOICE ON TERMINATION OF
                          PREGNANCY AMENDMENT BILL


THE SPEAKER: I am informed that we are unable to master the necessary
quorum and therefore this matter will have to stand over. [Interjections.]

I am now informed that the Whips would like to attempt one more time.

There was no debate
Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The point of
order is that before we have a division, the bells should be rung. The
bells that have just rung were to reconvene the House. I refer you to Rule
85(1).

The SPEAKER: The bells will be rung for one minute.

The House divided:

   AYES - 152: Anthony, T G; Baloyi, M R; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P;
   Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I;
   Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chohan, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P;
   Cwele, S C; Daniels, P; Davies, R H; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge, G
   Q M; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gcwabaza, N E; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T;
   Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M;
   Hendricks, L B; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B;
   Kasienyane, O R; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Kondlo, N C;
   Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J
   T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Mabena, D C; Madella, A F;
   Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C;
   Makgate, M W; Maloney, L; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P
   R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M
   L; Matsomela, M J J; Maunye, M M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti,
   M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A;
   Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M;
   Mogase, I D; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
   Morgan, G R; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Mpahlwa, M
   B; Mthembu, B; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C;
   Nene, M J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B
   T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L; Njikelana, S
   J; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, R S; Nxumalo, M D;
   Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pandor, G N
   M; Phala, M J; Pieterse, R D; Rabie, P J; Ramodibe, D M; Rasmeni, S M;
   Rwexana, S P; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seadimo, M D;
   Sefularo, M; Semple, J A; September, C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B;
   Siboza, S; Sikakane, M R; Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
   Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J;
   Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Twala, N M; Van den Heever, R P
   Z; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Yengeni, L E.


   NOES - 9: Bhoola, R B; Cupido, H B; Doman, W P; Ellis, M J; Meshoe, K R
   J; Mtshali, E; Ramotsamai, C P M; Skosana, M B; Swart, S N.


   ABSTAIN - 2: Abram, S; Gaum, A H.


As the result of the division showed that there was not a majority of the
members of the Assembly present for a vote to be taken on the Bill as
required by Rule 25(2)(a), decision of question postponed.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES

Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you very much indeed, Madam Speaker. It is always good
at these end-of-year functions to reflect on the year that has passed, both
the good and the bad. There is always the good. We have passed legislation,
we have done our oversight work reasonably well, we have tried to hold the
executive to account and, generally, we have done the work that is expected
of us – not always well, but we certainly have done it.

But, of course, there is the bad too. Parliament itself is anything but
well run. As MPs, we are dictated to by the bureaucrats who clearly run
Parliament and, quite frankly, the bureaucrats themselves are not doing a
good job. It certainly is a challenge for 2008 for us as MPs to assume
control of our own institution again, and let the bureaucrats know that
Parliament exists because we as MPs, elected by the people, are here and
not because they are here. They are here to serve us, and not vice versa.
And I sincerely hope that we will take up this challenge in the new year.

I want to say that from the DA’s point of view, we as a party have had a
particularly good year. Apart from our good performance in this House and
in the NCOP, we have undergone a remarkably smooth transition from the
brilliance of the Leon years, as our leader, to the huge opportunities that
the Zille years present us with in the future.

Now this change of leadership could not have been smoother: a leader
retiring on his own terms amid a huge wave of popular sentiment in favour
of all that he has achieved and a new leader elected in a clean, hard-
fought election campaign and immediately endorsed by the whole party in an
equally huge wave of acclamation and support. [Applause.]
There can be no better way of doing things and South Africa, generally, has
acknowledged this. Now, of course, this year ends with the ANC facing their
own congress at which their leadership challenge will come to a head. It is
quite clear that it is unlikely to be anywhere near as clean and peaceful
as the DA’s was.

I have to add, watching the shambles in the House this afternoon, that I do
trust that their congress will be better run than the ANC have run their
party in this House this afternoon. [Interjections.] It has been a
shambles.

Now we acknowledge, of course, that the ANC congress will be a much bigger
event than ours was, because while we may have been electing a person who
may well become the President of South Africa in the future, the ANC will
most probably be electing a leader who will become the President of the
country in 2009.

So, it would be appropriate on this occasion, since it is the last time
that we will be with our ANC colleagues before their Polokwane congress, to
wish them all the best for their congress. I believe it is also appropriate
to remind them that they are not just electing a new leader for their
party.

They are, probably electing the next President of South Africa – a person
who will be the President of us all, not just of the ANC. So, to ANC
members I say: Please, for the sake of all South Africans, choose wisely,
choose carefully and choose someone who will truly represent all South
Africans. You owe that to all of us.

Now, with farewell speeches of this nature it is always appropriate in them
to say a number of thank yous. I was remarkably well informed yesterday
that Sound & Vision feel very left out because nobody ever thanks them for
anything. They tell me they get blamed for everything, but never thanked,
and they asked me to make this House aware in particular that they had
nothing to do with the Children’s Bill. [Laughter.]

So, let me begin by thanking Sound & Vision for their work this year. They
have a tough time, often having to work with obsolete equipment, but Sound
& Vision’s services are certainly appreciated. [Interjections.] Yes, John
Jeffery, I heard that and I’ll get you back.

To all the staff in Parliament, especially those who make a real effort,
thanks for all you do, whether it be cleaning or catering, whether you are
a service officer, or you work in the Finance Section and pay our salaries
- thank you to you all for your efforts during this year.

To the Table staff in the National Assembly, Mr Mansura and his gang,
thanks for a job well done. You are always most obliging in all you
undertake, and we are grateful to you. [Applause.] “Gang”: that’s exactly
what I said. I’m very glad that you are listening. It’s marvellous.

To my friends and colleagues in the Whippery, I have to say that apart from
the Moseneke Commission, I believe we won some important battles during the
course of the year on behalf of MPs. We have worked well together
generally, and it has been good. My own colleagues inform me that the
Moseneke Commission was the most important battle and, having failed on
that, we failed miserably. I would like to think that some of us know a
little bit better.

To the House Chairs, it has been a pleasure working with you – good,
efficient people who take their jobs very seriously and, I believe,
genuinely are there to serve MPs. To the presiding officers, the Deputy
Speaker and the Speaker, you have kept us in check. You have given us a
hard time, but I believe we have not all been paragons of virtue and have
made you earn your money in trying to keep order in this House. [Applause.]
Some of your rulings have been difficult to agree with but, generally, you
have been very fair and we appreciate this very much, indeed.

Finally, to all the MPs particularly those in my own party but to all of
you: Parliament exists because of us. We have, as a party, enjoyed
interacting with you, admittedly some more than others, but on behalf of
the DA, I wish you all and all members of the staff of Parliament as well –
everyone related and associated with Parliament – a truly enjoyable rest
and a happy and successful festive season. Thank you very much, indeed.
[Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I want to associate myself and my
party with all the thanks expressed here by Mr Ellis and in particular with
his comments on the election of the new President for South Africa. It
should be somebody that will represent us all.

An HON MEMBER: Thank you, cowboy!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: You are welcome, cow-girl! [Laughter.] We have come
to the end of yet another year and for me personally this is a very
historic moment, because I have come to the end of 30 years in Parliament.
Next Friday I will be celebrating my 30th year in Parliament. I have served
here under Mr Vorster, Mr P W Botha, Mr F W de Klerk, President Mandela and
President Mbeki. I have lived through all the dramatic changes that we had,
the bloody violence that we had, the negotiations and the birth of the New
South Africa up until where we are today. We have moved from a white
parliament to this Parliament. I have, therefore, seen the whole
transformation movie. What do I say now after these 30 years and the 14
years in this Parliament? [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: “Goodbye”! [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: No, Mike! Mr Ellis says that I should say goodbye,
but I also wanted to announce today that I was going to retire and also
when I would retire. I am going to retire on the day that I die.
[Laughter.] What am I saying?

I am reminded of the prophets of doom 14 years ago, in particular Mr Hennie
Smit of the then NP, who said that this Parliament wouldn’t work. It didn’t
have the experience and it was going to collapse. You were there and you
remember that. Yes, we were all inexperienced, or most of us were. The
President was inexperienced, the Ministers, the Speaker, the whips, all of
them, but we have adapted quickly.

Today I am convinced that we have a parliament that operates according to
international parliamentary standards. Today, we have highly experienced
presiding officers, Whips, Chairs, Members of Parliament and staff. We can
also say that we have progressed very far in respect of reconciliation.
Yes, we have done well here. We co-operate well, despite many differences
that we still have.

We have in fact, as we sit here, become a real parliamentary family. We
have developed our own set of values here. We have the Constitution that
binds us together. We co-operate with one another. We have co-operation and
camaraderie. We have built friendships over these 14 years. So yes, today I
say, after all these years, South Africa has a Parliament of which I am
particularly very proud. I am proud to be a member of this Parliament.

I wish to thank everybody and I wish to say to all of you, and in
particular to Gerhard Koornhof – we are so sorry your dad passed away,
Gerhard – a Merry Christmas, a prosperous New Year and may you all, no
matter which party you belong to, enjoy the festive season. Look after
yourself and make sure that you come back next year and let all of you try
again, but I don’t think you will succeed, to get the Children’s Bill
through. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon members, once more we find ourselves at
the end of the year, looking back upon the time we have spent together as
political opponents in one sense, but also in another sense as partners in
the project of democracy.

Significant legislative work has been balanced by intense policy debates,
as well as some committees demonstrating an admirable tenacity in their
oversight of the executive. On the downside, we cannot recall the past year
and bid each other farewell, without remembering that we have also bid
final farewells to a number of our late hon members, who passed on. May
their souls rest in peace.

The year was also blighted by floor crossing at national, provincial and
local levels. We can at least draw consolation from the growing consensus,
even among the Ruling Party members, that this is an unseemly spectacle.
Perhaps we will also in the near future be bidding a final farewell to this
law that mocks the expressed choices of the electorate.

As always, we need to acknowledge the parliamentary and party
administrative staff, who have contributed to all the successes that we
have attained in 2007.

The ruling party will no doubt be quick to point out that the opposition’s
opinion of their internal affairs is not welcome or relevant, but I hope
that you will at least allow me to wish you the best of luck with the
upcoming conference in December. It certainly seems like you will need it.

At the end of the year we are faced again with the dilemma of many South
Africans, ourselves included, travelling far and wide across this beautiful
country of ours. Most will do so by road. There is, understandably, a
certain rush and urgency to get to family or destinations where time can be
spent with family and friends. Yet, we appeal to each and every road user
to remember that getting there alive is far more important than getting
there quickly.

We wish everybody a peaceful holiday and a happy New Year, filled with joy
and achievement. To our many Christian brothers and sisters, we wish them a
Merry Christmas and express our hope that they will draw renewed faith from
celebrating this important religious day so that they may return in the
coming year with renewed commitment to help build a better future for all
South Africans. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, it is my pleasure to wish all hon members
of this House a refreshing time of rest after yet another long year of hard
work. May you and your families have a blessed Christmas and a prosperous
New Year.

As most people in this country are waiting with great anticipation for the
decisions that will be made at the ANC conference in Limpopo next month,
with the knowledge that the decisions made there will affect us all, I want
to give the ANC some advice and also pray for their conference.
[Interjections.] My advice to the voting delegates is that they choose as
their leader, a person of integrity who believes in and will pursue
righteousness and justice far all.

May I remind hon members of the words of a great king who in his time was
the wisest person alive, King Solomon, “Righteousness exalts a nation, but
sin is a disgrace to any people”.

I now want to pray for hon members and the ANC conference:

  Father, in the name of Jesus, I thank You for Your help and for Your grace
  throughout this year. As we will be going to our respective homes, I pray
  for travel mercies for every member of this House.


  I pray even for the ANC conference that is coming. My prayer, Father, in
  the name of Jesus, is that the decisions that will be made there will fit
  into Your plan and purpose for this nation.


  I thank You for Your guidance and for ensuring that everything is done
  according to your plan and your purpose. May Your kingdom come and may
  Your will be done. In Jesus’ name, be blessed. Amen.
[Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, the Chinese have a very well-known saying or
proverb to say as a wish, “May you live in interesting times”. If one looks
at what we’ve done in the past year, then, surely, this year we did live in
very interesting times and we are not at the end of these interesting
times. A number of colleagues have referred to the big conference of the
ruling party at the end of the year and obviously the whole of South Africa
will be watching what is going to happen there.

Let me start off by saying a word of sincere thank you to each and every
colleague of ours in this House. It has been a very exhausting year, but I
think in the end, despite all the political rumblings and all the
differences, we remain colleagues of one another. I think it is very
important that we send out a very constructive and positive message to the
public in South Africa that we can co-operate in the interest of our
country and we should continue to do so.

I also would like to say a word of sincere thanks to the parliamentary
staff, each and every member of the staff, the catering staff, the
messengers, everyone in protection services, each and every member of
Parliament and the staff that made it easier for us this year to do our
jobs. Thank you very much.

Ook ’n woord van hartlike dank aan die media, want sonder die media wat
rapporteer wat in die Parlement gebeur - die televisie, radio en koerante
wat skryf - sal die publiek nie noodwendig weet wat ons hier in die
Parlement doen nie. Ook ’n woord van dank aan elkeen van hulle.

Dit is my wens om namens die VF Plus vir elke lid en vir elke kollega van
elke party ’n voorspoedige 2008 toe te wens, maar ook ’n baie geseënde
Kersfees. Mag dit ’n Christusfees wees, mag u die vrede van Christus in u
hart ervaar en mag ons ’n toekoms ingaan wat in die belang van al ons mense
is. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Also a word of thanks to the media, because without the media reporting
what happens in Parliament - television, radio and news papers - the public
will not necessarily know what we are doing here in Parliament. A word of
thanks to each and everyone of them.

On behalf of the FF Plus I would like to wish every member and each
colleague from every party a prosperous 2008, as well as a blessed
Christmas. May it be a festival in Christ, may you experience the peace of
Christ in your hearts and may we enter a future that is in the interests of
all our people. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Madam Speaker:

   Don’t be dismayed at goodbyes. A farewell is necessary before you can
   meet again and again after moments or lifetimes is certain for those who
   are friends”

This is a quote from Richard Bach.

As we sit here in the House, looking forward to the break, it is important
for us to take a minute to reflect whether we did indeed add value to the
theme of this year.

Sijulile yini ngengxoxo? [Have we deepened the debate?]

Public deliberation in this House and in our infant democratic state is
crucial. In order for that public deliberation to take place we as
opposition parties need to be able to be part and parcel of that process.
That begins with us as the opposition not being gagged and by allowing us
to actively participate and contribute to a meaningful discussion. We can
only do that by being given the forum to talk and the contribution would be
the deepening of democracy. This means reviewing the practice of the one
minutes and the two minutes.

I would like to wish all the hon members, the parliamentary staff and the
entire parliamentary family a peaceful, relaxed and enjoyable holiday.

Izwe lonke libe nempilo enhle, ehlanzekile, enenqubekela phambili.
Siyabonga. [The entire country should have good quality of life that is
prosperous. Thank you.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, as we come to the end of
yet another year, it is important that we exchange greetings as we head for
the season of joy, peace and giving. We have to pat ourselves on the back
for having soldiered through even the trying period of floor-crossing
during which we witnessed the demise of some political parties. This period
has passed, though its skeletons still haunt us regarding seating in the
House and or administrative capacity.

We in the Chief Whips’ Forum heaved and puffed for a great chunk of the
year with hon Andries Nel acting as Chief Whip. I want to thank him very
much for the sterling work he did and still does to help hon Mogase settle
in as the Chief Whip.

Goroga Mokwena, re nelwe ke pula. [Let your presence be a blessing to us.]
This collective has steered this Parliament to greater heights as we have
always agreed to differ and thus bring stability to the proceedings in this
House. Thanks go the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the House Chairpersons
for the even-handedness with which they direct the proceeding of the House.
We take note that they, to some extent, have a thankless job, taking into
account what we sometimes say and do. We pray for their strength and wish
them well.

Thanks go also to the administration of Parliament, the Secretary, the
Secretary to the National Assembly, Mr Mansura, the entire Table staff and,
of course, to people like Andrew Mbanga, who never ceases to ask for
updates on the list of speakers for each debate and he constantly reminds
us about our business in this Parliament. We thank the affable service
officers for their delivery of documents and the upkeep of our offices.

Finally, let me, on behalf of the UCDP, invite you all to the mother of all
celebrations as we shall be thanking God for His blessings on 8 December
2007 in Mmabatho. Let us wish the ANC a successful conference and hope they
emerge from Polokwane with an acceptable future President for this country.
  God be with you till we meet again. When life’s perils thick confound
  you, put His arms unfailing around you. God be with you, till we meet
  again.


I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, it is unbelievable how fast this year has
passed, and that we have once again concluded our fourth term. The MF,
however, pays respect to 2007 as a constructive and progressive year for
Parliament and South Africa as a whole.

As Parliament, both Houses have productively embarked on task teams and
oversight visits that have served to give us a hawk’s-eye view of the
realities of South African living standards.

Great developments in legislation have been made, which is proof of the
commitment of the executive and Parliament to endorse laws that uphold the
values of the national Constitution and are instruments of transformatory
legislation for further development and growth as a democracy.

I take this opportunity to applaud the three spheres of government for
their great efforts to fulfil their mandates. We applaud both the NA and
the NCOP for a good year’s work. Applause is also rendered to the Chairs of
both Houses and the administration just below the Table for their
auspicious management of House affairs.
To our members - even though we have often been at loggerheads - it has
been a productive and progressive year that deserves a pat on the back. As
we return to our constituencies, let us not lose focus on our ultimate
commitment to serve the nation. May we return to this platform with the
determination and commitment to further deliver upon nation building,
transformation and democracy.

We have an impeccable team of staff and support staff in Parliament that
has been by our side, making every parliamentary function possible and
workable. For this we are abundantly grateful.

We thank all our supporters and members in our constituency for all their
support and trust in our leadership and ability to best represent their
interests.

To the Almighty God who has given us the health and strength to fulfil our
tasks, we thank you and pray that we shall be blessed in the new year.

Lastly, we pay respect to our hon state President, the Presidency and the
executive for the co-operative governance that they so highly institute.
Let me also take this opportunity in wishing our matric students great
success.

A beautiful life is built daily on honesty, integrity, friendship,
sacrifice, consensus and humility. May this beautiful life be yours. I wish
all of you a festive season with beautiful thoughts, wonderful wishes, an
abundance of prayer and a fantastic 2008. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Speaker, we have once more reached the day where
members must part ways and join their families. It has been a very long and
strenuous year that took the lives of some of our beloved members and
staff. It is a year where many untold truths happened because of the
evolution of politics – a year which many of us would love to forget as
challenges unfolded without solutions.

We must thank everyone in this Parliament - from members, the Presidency,
the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, the Secretary to Parliament, the
parliamentary administration, the protection unit, the police and all
ground staff members who made us feel at home here. Let me not forget the
staff and administration at our residences in Acacia Park and other parks,
who, under difficult circumstances, accommodated us in a reasonable manner.
To all of you, I want to say Happy Christmas and a very Prosperous New
Year. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, one of the undisputed highlights of 2007 has
been the surplus budget which indicates that our country is on an upward
curve towards a better life for all.

South Africans are beginning to show confidence in the way Parliament and
the state institutions are conducting their affairs as indicated by the
World Values Survey results earlier this year. As Parliamentarians we may
go into this holiday period with a semblance of ease that we have accounted
ourselves reasonably well in our duties.

The second highlight for us was the visit to Parliament by the Springboks
with the Rugby World Cup. We especially want to thank Madam Speaker and the
Deputy Speaker for the clever idea of the invitation.

We are entering a new phase of a united country, and the 2010 Soccer World
Cup preparations are another yardstick to show how we are growing in
stature as a nation.

There is, of course, still much to be done, such as getting the Child
Justice Bill approved. But we have done well in getting the Children’s
Amendment Bill passed this year.

Madam Speaker, in looking forward to the parliamentary programme for 2008,
we need to be mindful that 2008 will be a watershed year because it will be
the final year for the present government to make a lasting impact.

On behalf of the FD I wish to commend the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and
all the presiding officers for the manner in which the parliamentary
business was conducted. My thanks go to the Table staff and all the
parliamentary support staff for a job well done.

Finally, the FD wishes everyone a safe and pleasant holiday, and may the
Christmas of peace be the message we take to our constituencies and our
families. May we all continue to live with hope and happiness in the land
we love the most. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, before I get into my
farewell speech, I want to thank Ntate Mfundisi for the kind words he said
about the ANC. I want to tell you, I’ve been a member of the ANC for 51
years, happily, and the past government of apartheid tried to smash us. We
beat them, and that is why we took over here. [Interjections.]

So, all the speculation in the newspapers about the ANC conference is
unfounded. In fact, we are going to come out of it very strong and some
parties are going to disappear when we have elections in 2009.
[Interjections.] They are going to disappear!

Mr M J ELLIS: Time will tell!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Right!

Today, we bid farewell to one another as Members of Parliament. We bid
farewell in the knowledge that we have taken forward the task of deepening
and consolidating our democracy through creating a parliament which is
compassionate, accessible and reflective of the needs and interests of the
aspirations and hopes of the people of South Africa.

This is in line with the Freedom Charter that speaks of a South Africa that
belongs to all who live in it. You must enjoy it. All of you, you must go
under the Freedom Charter. You are ruled by the Freedom Charter.
[Interjections.]

In this Chamber, in committees and in constituencies we have worked hard
and tirelessly to make a real difference in the daily lives of the people
of South Africa. It is here that our society, through its public
representatives and political parties, has an opportunity to develop the
national policy.

We have continued with our task of passing transformative legislation. As
we prepare for the end-of-the-year break, I’m sure all of us will remember
the moments of excitement in this Parliament and the drama that has
characterised the parliamentary year, especially the birthday party cake
that was brought here. Some will look at it with scorn, but to some it was
the joke of the year in this Parliament.

I am sure that members are genuine in their beliefs and whilst I may not
agree with the views they express, I’ve never doubted the genuineness of
the manner in which they represented their constituencies. We should all be
proud of and maintain that record in this Parliament.

Madam Speaker and Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to extend my sincerest
thanks to you for your patience and thoughtfulness throughout the year.
Even though some of the more significant pieces of legislation have been
debated vigorously, robustly and uncompromisingly, you have exercised a
steady hand over our sometimes heated exchanges to ensure the smooth
running of this Parliament.

My appreciation also goes to the Secretary of Parliament and the legal
advisers behind me here. I further extend my sincere thanks to the security
staff and the police, who must feel they have the least pleasant task in
this place. To the staff of the parliamentary dining room, I thank you for
the good food and fine service. I sometimes see people going for some more!
[Interjections.]

Many people help us carry out our duties as members of this Parliament. An
important group is the staff of the various parties. They are often the
frontline troops and we all recognise their considerable efforts. I extend
my thanks to all of them.

It is with pleasure that I extend my Christmas wishes to members and staff
who have made all this possible. Surely I’m not the only person who is
looking forward to Christmas and a chance to return to my constituency, and
to spend some well-deserved time with my family and friends.

So, we say farewell! Go in peace now from this place to our regions and
constituencies, and prepare for the next chapter in our success story.
Spend your time well - spend it with your families and relatives, and we
say thank you. The ANC is coming back in 2008 stronger and stronger. Thank
you! [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I thank the hon members for the farewell speeches and I’d like
to take this opportunity to thank all the hon members for the work done for
our people in this year. It was a hectic year.

We started the year off looking forward to major changes in the biggest
parties in the country and it has happened with the DA, and we are now, as
hon members have pointed out, going on to the conference of the ANC, the
ruling party. We move towards that major event with no doubt that it will
be a success and therefore we will come back with a strong House,
strengthened by the fact that the two biggest parties have renewed
themselves in whatever way that they will have decided.

I would like to take the opportunity to thank the honourable staff, and
today the staff is called “honourable,” because I do believe they are very
honourable. [Applause.] Members of staff work very hard. I’d like to say
that to us as hon Members of Parliament. They work very hard and they do a
mostly thankless job, because nobody really gets to know just what they go
through and the amount of time and energy they put into what they do to
help us to do our job.
I thank the Secretary of the National Assembly and his team, because they
have carried the work in spite of the ongoing challenges, which we, of
course, will continue to try and improve on. [Applause.]

I wish to thank the Deputy Speaker and the House Chairpersons, who have
come into the Office of the Speaker to try and share the load of the work
that we have to carry. I’d like to thank the Deputy Speaker for launching
the gyms and in particular the attention and energy with which she looks
after the issues of our wellbeing. [Applause.]

May I also congratulate all hon members for finally being approached by an
additional cheque before their December cheque, because either in the next
two days or on Tuesday at the latest, hon members will receive an
additional cheque. [Interjections.]

Hon members, may I also add my voice to those who have wished you a Merry
Christmas and a Happy New Year, and indeed also emphasise what has been
said, that we should spend the time with our families, whom we neglect most
of the year. Be renewed and come back more charged and ready to tackle
2008, which is not going to be a relaxed year, because it’s virtually our
last year. So, as we part, I wish you well, hon members.

The House adjourned at 18:15.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and National Council of
         Provinces on 22 November 2007:


          a) Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19F – 2006] (National Council of
             Provinces – sec 76(2)).

    (2)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 22 November 2007:


         a) Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment
            Bill [B 50D – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75).


         b) South African Express Bill [B 14D – 2007] (National Assembly –
            sec 75).


         c) Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill [B 15B – 2007]
            (National Assembly – sec 75).
         d) Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16B – 2007] (National
            Assembly – sec 75).


         e) Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill [B 17D – 2007] (National
            Assembly – sec 75).


         f) Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] (National
            Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).


         g) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26D – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
            75).

         h) Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2007]
            (National Assembly – sec 75).


         i) Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 33D – 2007] (National Assembly
            – sec 76(1)).


    (3)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 22 November
         2007:


          a) Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 74).

          b) Cross-boundary Municipality Laws Repeal Amendment Bill [B 25 –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          c) Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38B – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).
          d) Adjustment Appropriation Bill [B 41 – 2007] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).


          e) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 42 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 77).


          f) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 43 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          g) Securities Transfer Tax Bill [B 44 – 2007] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).

          h) Securities Transfer Tax Administration Bill [B45– 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

    (a)     Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
        January 2007 to June 2007, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the
        Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Agreement establishing the Africa Institute for the
        Environmentally Sound Management of Hazardous and Other Wastes,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.




    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement establishing the Africa
        Institute for the Environmentally Sound Management of Hazardous and
        Other Wastes.



