---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-06-13
---

WEDNESDAY, 13 JUNE 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____


The House met at 14:05.





The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.


ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Resumption of Debate on Vote No 1 - The Presidency:

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker and Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy
President, hon members and guests, apart from the President, the Deputy
President and the Minister in the Presidency, 25 hon members participated
in yesterday’s debate on the budget of the Presidency. I would like to
thank all the members for the support they expressed for our budget and for
the constructive proposals they made to improve the functioning of
government.

Apart from anything else, this emphasises the need for the Presidency, and
the President in particular, to be conscious at all times of his or her
responsibility and accountability to all our people without discrimination
or partisan considerations, consistent with the prescripts contained in our
Constitution.

I would like to believe that in this context we all heard and agreed with
the appeal made by the hon Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi concerning the need for
all of us to respect the Office of the President. I presume that Parliament
will give itself time to consider whether the route he proposed to address
this matter is correct, and therefore examine his private member’s Bill.

However, whatever the outcome of that process, I do believe that he was
indeed correct, as he has been in the past, to put on our agenda once again
the vital issue of respect for the institutions of state as provided for in
our Constitution, including the Presidency of the Republic.

I must say that I was also very encouraged by what seemed to be a great
deal of consensus among the parties represented in this House about the
challenges we face and the need for all of us to respond to these
challenges in a manner intended to build the kind of South Africa
prescribed by our Constitution.

On many occasions in the past I have tried to communicate the message that
the most fundamental and historic problems facing our country and people
should be a matter of common concern, transcending the partisan boundaries
that separate us. Among these tasks are building a nonracial and nonsexist
society; promoting national reconciliation, social cohesion, a shared
national identity and inspiring our people with a feeling of hope; ensuring
that we develop our economy to end poverty and guarantee a more equitable
distribution of wealth; building a government machinery that responds
adequately to the challenge of service delivery; and placing South Africa
among those countries on our continent and in the rest of the world that
fight for peace, for democracy, for human rights, for tolerance, for
equality and for mutually beneficial co-operation among the nations.

During yesterday’s debate I gained the impression that by and large – and
if nothing else – we had indeed at least come to understand that all these
are common challenges, even if our responses to them may differ. However,
the mere fact of recognising that these are problems that we must all
address together lays the basis for us to engage one another in
constructive debate to see whether we can develop a national consensus
about what needs to be done to change our country for the better.

Once again, I’d like to thank the hon members for their interventions
yesterday, which may indeed take us some distance away from the endless
fractious debates to equally vigorous engagement in pursuit of common
national goals, but, of course, without losing our individual party
identities.

In this sense, the hon members did respond to the plea made by the hon
Craig Morkel when he suggested that we should replace the word “opposition”
with the words “nongoverning party”, citing the hon Dr Buthelezi when he
said, and I quote:

  The word “opposition” itself is loaded with gladiatorial connotations.
  Confrontation is inferred. Seizing the initiative often means waiting for
  the government to stumble or exposing some scandal or irregularity.

Happily, yesterday it did seem that again - and by and large - we came into
the House without our gladiatorial armour and weaponry. [Laughter.] The hon
Mdlalose pointed all of us in the right direction when she quoted from
Sandile Dikeni’s poem A Love Poem for my Country, as follows:

    My country
    Is for unity
    Feel the millions
    See their passion
    Their hands are joined together
    There is hope in their eyes
    We shall celebrate

But despite everything I have said, some comments made by the hon Stanley
Simmons and by the hon Sandra Botha perhaps correctly brought us face to
face with the hard reality we have to deal with, of perceptions we have to
confront, centred around what the hon Leader of the Opposition denounced as
“racial nationalism”. Because of the important issues the two hon members
raised, I would like to deal with these instances in some detail.

The hon Simmons accused hon Minister Membathisi Mdladlana of making a
racist remark directed against the coloured people. The hon Minister is not
with us today as far as I know, as he is attending the annual International
Labour Conference in Geneva. I will indeed find occasion when he is in the
House to address the grave accusation made against him by the hon Simmons.

The hon Simmons also criticised my parliamentary counsellor, the hon John
Jeffery. In this regard, the hon Simmons said that in response to his
request “for an opportunity to discuss this issue” of a sense of belonging
“around brown people”, my parliamentary counsellor had said, “No one is fit
to discuss the issue of coloured people.”

Because of the seriousness of these assertions, I consulted the hon Jeffery
about what exactly had happened. He confirmed that indeed the hon Simmons
had requested to meet the President to discuss “concerns experienced among
coloured people of being marginalised, or sidelined, in the greater South
African context”.

The hon Jeffery then enquired whether this would be a delegation of the
United Party of SA, Upsa, arguing that no single political party, including
Upsa, could claim to represent and speak for the coloured people.
[Applause.]

According to the hon Jeffery, the hon Simmons said he was speaking of a
nonpartisan delegation and mentioned some of the people who would be in the
delegation, all of whom are among our leading citizens. He undertook to
speak to these people, constitute the non-partisan delegation and revert
back to my parliamentary counsellor. This has not happened.

The hon Jeffery still expects the hon Simmons to come back to him so that
he can take the necessary steps to arrange the meeting with the President
requested by the hon Simmons. I would like to assure the hon Simmons that
the hon John Jeffery and I have agreed that I should meet the Simmons
delegation whenever it is ready and available. [Laughter.]

There is a simple rule of logic which says that two diametrically opposed
statements about the same thing cannot both be correct. I must assume that
the account I have just given represents what is sometimes described as a
breakdown in communication, rather than an example of bad faith or
misrepresentation of the truth.

However I must, at the same time, make the point that the story also tells
us something about the persistence of the issue of racism in our minds and
social reality, which resulted in conclusions being arrived at, that what
was said in good faith in fact constituted a manifestation of vile racism.

Consistent with this frame of mind, the hon Simmons said yesterday:

  The United Party of South Africa subsequently came to the conclusion that
  the hon President concurs with the hon Minister of Labour’s racist
  sentiment, putting a question mark behind the sincerity of the hon
  President’s calls for cohesion.

The best I can do in these circumstances is to assure the hon Simmons that
the President has been involved in the organised and conscious struggle
against racism in our country for over 50 years, and assume that he and the
United Party of South Africa reached the conclusion he announced yesterday
about the antiracist credentials of the President, once again, because of a
breakdown in communication.

I am more than ready to meet the nonpartisan coloured or brown delegation
he has presumably gathered, whenever he indicates to the hon John Jeffery
that the delegation is ready to meet us. I wish the hon Simmons success in
his work to constitute the delegation ... [Laughter.] ... and will formally
inform the House once the requested meeting has taken place.

For her part, the hon Leader of the Opposition said:

  Here, Mr President, are two latest examples of how the policies of racial
  nationalism divide our people and compromise service delivery.

  Just two weeks ago, the choices for three top medical posts at two Western
  Cape hospitals were rejected by the provincial health department. Why?
  Because the candidates chosen by the institutions involved were white.


  The result is a double loss to South Africa, because one of the candidates
  has given up hope and is now going, as it were, into voluntary exile in
  Australia. This, while disadvantaged South Africans dependent on the
  hospitals in question are having to wait longer to get the treatment they
  need, because the posts are now empty.


  I cannot, for a moment, believe that is the intentional outcome of what
  you would like to achieve. But it is the outcome and, Mr President, you
  must take responsibility for it.


First of all, I must express my appreciation for the remark made by the hon
Leader of the Opposition that I would not intentionally seek to deny our
people adequate health care, as indeed I never would. Secondly, I must
assume that the hon Sandra Botha said what she said in good faith, because
she and the DA do care about the welfare of all our people. Thirdly, I must
presume that the hon Leader of the Opposition based her comments on media
reports and not any noxious concoction of fabrications brewed in the think-
tanks of the DA.

The specific media report to which I refer is an article that was published
in the 3 June 2007 edition of the Sunday Times, under the heading “Race
quotas cripple hospitals”, with the subtitle “Surgery cancelled as province
insists on hiring nonexistent black doctors.”

And indeed, as the hon Sandra Botha said, this article does state that the
Western Cape provincial health authorities refused to appoint three white
doctors to senior positions, that one of these has decided to emigrate to
Australia, and that patients have to wait for long periods for treatment,
because of the imposition of racial quotas.

Again, because these, like those made by the hon Stanley Simmons, are very
serious allegations made by an elected representative of our people, I
thought it was my responsibility to investigate what the hon Sandra Botha
said, in order immediately to correct what was evidently an eminently
unacceptable outcome of our policies to build a nonracial society.

I would like to inform the hon Leader of the Opposition and the House that
the Sunday Times report, on which the hon Sandra Botha based her comments,
is entirely false. To repeat - the Sunday Times report, on which the hon
Sandra Botha based her comments, is entirely false.

Here are the facts. In 2005 the Western Cape health authorities published
an advertisement requesting applications to fill the post of principal
specialist in anaesthesiology and critical care tenable at Tygerberg
Hospital. Three people applied but one decided to withdraw before the
interviews were conducted.

It was then decided to readvertise the post in the hope that this would
attract a larger number of applicants. Again, only three people applied. It
was then decided to consider whether these applicants met some particular
requirements, despite the apparently poor response to the advertisement.
Principal among these requirements was the consideration whether the
applicants were registered with the Health Professions Council of South
Africa as Specialist Anaesthesiologists with experience in all areas of
Anaesthesiology and Critical Care. On this basis, it was decided to
interview all three applicants, all of whom were white.

However, two of them withdrew their applications before they were
interviewed. The interviewing panel then went ahead and interviewed the one
remaining applicant, the determination having been made that the obligation
to provide health care to our people required that the post should be
filled without further delay.

I am certain that the Western Cape government will shortly make an
announcement in this regard, based on the recommendation of the
interviewing panel. I trust that the hon Leader of the Opposition and the
House will accept that all of us must await the announcement of the
provincial government in this regard.

Reporting on this process, the Sunday Times said that “Dr Fred Mattheyse –
one of the candidates whose appointment was deferred – is now leaving for
Australia.” It quoted Dr Mattheyse as saying: “I’m leaving reluctantly but
I have reached a ceiling in my career here.”

The truth, however, is that Dr Mattheyse was one of the three doctors who
were scheduled to be interviewed for the post at Tygerberg Hospital. He,
together with another doctor, withdrew his application before he was
interviewed, and therefore, naturally, was not interviewed. In this regard
I must repeat that Dr Mattheyse was competing for the post at Tygerberg
Hospital against two white doctors, with no possibility that he could be
passed over simply because there was a black and less qualified doctor
applying for the same post.

Dr Mattheyse may indeed have decided to emigrate to Australia, as the
Sunday Times and the hon Sandra Botha have said. But it is entirely false,
and dishonest of the Sunday Times, to suggest that this was a result of the
implementation of government policies that the hon Leader of the Opposition
characterised as racial nationalism.

The hon Sandra Botha spoke of “three top medical posts at two Western Cape
hospitals that were rejected by the Provincial Health Department because of
this racial nationalism”. So far I have spoken of only one of these posts.

The Sunday Times said that the Head of Surgery at Groote Schuur Hospital,
Prof Del Khan, had said:


   The filling of two top posts at the hospital in the last six months had
   taken more than two years to finalise because the candidates had been
   white.

Presumably, these are two of the three to whom the hon Leader of the
Opposition referred. In this context, I must say that we have spoken to
Prof Del Khan and he says the two positions to which he referred have now
been filled.

However, the Sunday Times article quotes another professor at Groote Schuur
Hospital, Prof Bongani Mayosi. Contrary to what Prof Khan is alleged to
have said, Prof Mayosi said “he had successfully motivated for three senior
posts to be filled by white specialists, while training black specialists
for the future.” This wording attributed to Prof Mayosi is highly
tendentious. It is deliberately intended to convey two impressions
consistent with the thesis alleging racial nationalism. One of these is
that in the Western Cape, it is always necessary to motivate for the
appointment of white specialists, who would otherwise be excluded from the
Public Service because of the existence of racial quotas. The other is that
the days of the white specialists are numbered, as they will be replaced by
black specialists once these have been trained.
Let me now deal with the truth. With regard to the three posts to which
Prof Mayosi referred, these being three principal specialists, the
professor said that in terms of the relevant employment policy, firstly,
the applicants had to be medical doctors; and secondly, the applicants had
to be recognised as scholars within the medical profession and registered
with the Professional Health Council of SA as such.

It would only be after these two requirements were met that issues in our
legislation concerning employment equity would kick in as only one of the
factors in the selection process. It was on this basis that the three
principal specialist posts were filled by three white doctors, with no need
to persuade anybody about the suitability of these doctors.

Prof Mayosi insists quite correctly that our country is experiencing a
serious shortage of many medical specialists. He sees it as his task to
train as many young professionals as possible, including black
professionals, to address this shortage. In the future situation of the
equitable skills availability across the racial divide, the playing field
will have been levelled, making it unnecessary to invoke the equity
provisions in our Constitution and statutes.

The Sunday Times reported that, having heard the details of its fabricated
story –
   The Democratic Alliance’s health spokesperson, Gareth Morgan, said: “this
   amounts to playing racial politics with patients’ lives.”

Responding to this story, one of the Sunday Times readers wrote:


   Perhaps the ANC will use this for their next re-election propaganda
   speeches, showing that they are so determined to give black people a
   chance that they’d even sacrifice the lives of other people to make sure
   that the whites don’t have the opportunity to take their jobs.


   They will certainly spare no lives to make sure white people don’t get a
   job in South Africa, which I’ve been saying over and over. It’s not about
   racism or correcting the wrongs of the past anymore, it’s about getting
   white people the hell out of Africa where they don’t belong.


Let us once again return to the difficult matter of the truth, contrary to
the falsehoods peddled by the Sunday Times, which were seemingly readily
accepted by the hon Leader of the Opposition.

Since last year, 2006, the Western Cape Provincial Health Authorities have
appointed 72 specialists, 55 of whom are white and 17 black, to serve in
the public health system. The Sunday Times could have accessed this
information without difficulty before it published its dangerous
falsehoods, as could have the hon Leader of the Opposition, before she
advanced the extremely serious allegations she made yesterday.

It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that this was not done because the
false story told by the Sunday Times was, for particular partisan reasons,
too good to check and verify. This same mindset informs the persistent
negative propaganda about our preparations for the 2010 Fifa Soccer World
Cup, which strives to use the power of the word, conveyed in print and the
airwaves, to present the physical bricks-and-mortar story visible to the
naked eye at all the relevant stadiums, as being nothing more than a
conjurer’s fiction or a desert mirage.

I believe that anyone among us who decides to resort to untruths, thus to
advance their cause, dreaming that this would indeed promote their cause,
should bear in mind the difficulty to which Shakespeare’s Hamlet referred
when he spoke of the false comfort of false dreams and said:


   ... perchance to dream. Ay, there’s the rub;
   For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
   When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
   Must give us pause.

As I said when I began this response to yesterday’s debate on the budget of
the Presidency, I felt that we were at last beginning to move beyond the
needlessly fractious debates of the past and had come into this House
without our gladiatorial armour.

Despite everything I have said about the unfortunate remarks made by the
hon Stanley Simmons and the hon Sandra Botha, I would like to think I was
not wrong.

Nevertheless, I would like to say that there are some in our society who
see it as their task to pull us backwards towards a future defined by the
racial divisions and conflicts of the past from which we are striving to
escape - the conflicts that killed Steven Bantu Biko, Mapetla Mohapi,
Onkgopotse Tiro and countless others, sustained by the lies that were told
then, which have as their kith and kin the lies that are told today.

I believe that those of us who serve in this House as the democratically
elected peoples’ tribunes, have a responsibility to repudiate all
falsehoods propagated to provoke confrontation among our people, that are
intended to impose on us nonexistent differences that are impossible to
reconcile and that are designed to abort the birth of the new, by
imprisoning our minds within an inert world of thought that has no capacity
to break out of an age of darkness which had required floods of human blood
to destroy.
I believe that the hon Mdlalose, borrowing the voice of a poet, and
regardless of what might be happening on our streets today, was correct to
say to us:

   My country
   Is for unity
   Feel the millions
   See their passion
   Their hands are joined together
   There is hope in their eyes
   We shall celebrate

Tomorrow His Excellency President Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic
of Congo will address a joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament and our
nation from this podium. Whatever our own problems, this should give us an
opportunity to salute and applaud the sister Congolese people for the truly
great efforts they have made and are making to pull their country out of
unimaginable depths of despair.

Hopefully, we will request him to convey a message to his people that the
people of South Africa, because of their own experience, remain determined
to hold hands with their sisters and brothers in the DRC as they begin
their journey along the difficult road towards transforming the Democratic
Republic of Congo into the progressive African giant it must and will be,
towards the resumption by the Democratic Republic of Congo of its place as
a bright star in the African sky, towards its reassertion of loyalty to the
agenda of African renewal for whose accomplishment the immortal African
patriot, Patrice Lumumba, an esteemed member of our National Order of
Companions of OR Tambo, sacrificed his life.

Yesterday the hon Themba Godi of the PAC ended his intervention with the
words:

   To our Palestinian brothers and sisters, we humbly counsel:
   Peace among the Palestinians! War against the enemy!

I would like to take this opportunity to repeat after the hon Themba Godi:
“To our Palestinian brothers and sisters, we humbly counsel: Peace among
the Palestinians!”

As South African patriots, loyal supporters of the noble cause for the
recovery of the national rights of the Palestinian people, the security of
the state of Israel, and a just and stable peace throughout the Middle
East, we cannot accept that the deadly fratricide engulfing occupied
Palestine, especially Gaza, is either inevitable or desirable.

Twenty-five years ago, in 1982, addressing our own situation, our respected
national hero, Oliver Tambo, said, and I quote:
   We have striven for seven decades to build one common nationhood, with
   one destiny. Our shared experience of collective sacrifices in the
   struggle for a common goal has knit us together as one solid block of
   liberation. The comradeship that we have formed in the trenches of
   freedom, transcending the barriers that the enemy sought to create, is a
   guarantee and a precondition for our victory. But we need still to build
   on this achievement. All of us – workers, peasants, students, priests,
   chiefs, traders, teachers, civil servants, poets, writers, men, women and
   youth, black and white – must take our common destiny in our own hands.

At this hour of great suffering for the people of Palestine, which in
essence is no different from the dismal period in our country when enemies
of our people, with their collaborators among us, instigated and sustained
what was described as black-on-black violence, we would like to convey to
our brothers and sisters in the Fatah and Hamas the same message that
Oliver Tambo conveyed to the then struggling people of South Africa.

Your shared experience of collective sacrifice in the struggle for a common
goal must knit you together as one solid block of liberation. Your
comradeship is a guarantee and a precondition for your victory in the
struggle for the emergence of an independent state of Palestine.

This victory is not possible on the basis of an internal war for hegemony,
fought by the powerless to gain power over the powerless, at great cost to
the masses that have placed their hopes in the hands of the leadership of
both Fatah and Hamas. The incontrovertible truth is that a just peace with
Israel is not possible when Palestine cannot make peace with itself.

Once more we make the heartfelt appeal – those who have ears to hear, let
them hear – above the din of the guns, the bombs, the mortar shells, the
angry shouts and the dirges of funeral marches in the desolate streets of
the towns and the refugee camps of Gaza and the West Bank!

Let all of us learn from the inspiring African example of the Democratic
Republic of Congo that, as the Book of Ecclesiastes says:

   To everything there is a season, A time for every purpose under heaven:
   ... A time to kill, And a time to heal ... A time of war, And a time of
   peace.

Again, I would like to thank hon members for the constructive suggestions
they made during the budget debate, which we will follow up.

I would also like to join hon Minister Pahad and the Deputy President in
thanking all our Members of Parliament, the Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
the patriots in the Presidency who constitute the hard-working staff headed
by Rev Frank Chikane, everybody in all spheres of government, and everybody
else in our country and abroad who have facilitated and supported the work
of the Presidency, even to the point of lacing their compliments with words
of flattery that feed our vanity! [Laughter.]

In particular, taking advantage of the fact that I am speaking in this
truly august House of the elected representatives of our people, which all
of us must respect, I would also like to salute and thank the hon Deputy
President, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, whose extraordinary energy and
dedication to her work and the welfare of our people, whose ability to
demand and get results from all of us without sounding like a shrew, whose
humility and aversion to personal aggrandisement in any form, whose
humanity and empathy shine through in the most adverse circumstances, whose
capacity to stand up for the species of her gender, yet remain feminine and
still exercise effective leadership in what is still a predominantly
masculine world, whose courage rises with danger, as the hon Inkosi
Buthelezi said when he spoke of Albert Luthuli, whose training as a
conscientious teacher she cannot hide, and whose instinctive comradeship
and ability to listen and admit her own and the mistakes and failures of
the Presidency all serve as the glue that holds all of us together as one
team, even as we see ourselves as superstars. [Applause.]

I do believe that through her actions she has taught and is teaching us an
important lesson about what it means to be a true leader of the people of
South Africa in the challenging conditions of freedom, in which it is very,
very easy indeed for the liberators to transform themselves into self-
serving masters and mistresses, rather than servants of the people.

Life imposes on all of us, the elected representatives of our people, the
obligation to rely on our conscience, our sense of self-respect and
personal dignity, and our minds, beyond party programmes and beyond short-
term personal interests, to decide what is right and what is wrong. On all
this will be based the realisation of the dream that, as Sandile Dikeni
said, we shall celebrate. I thank you for your attention. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:48.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:


         (a)     South African Express Bill [B 14 – 2007] (National Assembly
             – sec 75)


         (b)     Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)
     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 77 Bill:


          a) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee, dated 25 May
     2007:

     The Joint Committee on Constitutional Review met with Mr B Druchen,
     National Director, and a delegation from DEAF South Africa, on 16
     February 2007. The Committee had agreed to meet DEAFSA after receiving
     a request from them, to make representations to have South African Sign
     Language constitutionally recognized as the 12th official language.


     DEAFSA was requested to provide additional information regarding the
     implications of such an amendment, in order to enhance further
     deliberations.


     The Committee met on 16 March 2007 and had an in-depth discussion on
     the DEAFSA representation.


     The Joint Committee on Constitutional Review wishes to express its
     appreciation for the comprehensive motivation that was presented by
     DEAFSA, in its endeavors to have South Africa Sign Language (SASL)
     recognized as the 12th official language:


     The Joint Committee on Constitutional Review -


        1.  agrees that the status quo is unacceptable and discriminatory,
            as is being experienced by an appreciable section of our
            community;
        2.  recognizes that the accommodation of SASL as the 12th official
            language will have significant logistical and budgetary
            implications which would have to be investigated;
        3.  requests the Minister in the Presidency to consider convening a
            task team in conjunction with the Minister of Arts and Culture
            and Minister of Education to investigate this matter; and
        4.  urges the Pan South African Language Board to give credence to
            the instruction in section 6(5)(a)(iii) of the Constitution to
            promote SASL and report back to Parliament on progress that has
            been made in this regard.


     Report to considered.

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
   Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill [B 20D - 2006] National Assembly -
   sec 76), dated 13 June 2007:

      The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered  the
      Electricity  Regulation  Amendment  Bill  [B  20D  -  2006]  (National
      Assembly - sec 76), amended by the National Council of  Provinces  and
      referred to the Committee, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws
   Amendment Bill [B 18– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 12 June
   2007:

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the  subject  of
      the Taxation Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007]  (National  Assembly  –  sec
      77), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
      Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws
   Second Amendment Bill [B 19– 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 12
   June 2007:
      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the  subject  of
      the Taxation Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] (National Assembly  –
      sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging  Mechanism
      as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendments.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Banks Amendment
   Bill [B 12 – 2007 (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 13 June 2007:

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the  subject  of
      the Banks Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] (National Assembly –  sec  75),
      referred to it and classified by the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a
      section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 12A -2007].


5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on International
   Study Tour Report: Sudan

   1. Background
    The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs resolved to undertake a Study
    tour to The Sudan on the 16th- 27 November 2006.  The Committee  decided
    on the visit to empower  itself  in  order  to  understand  the  current
    position of The Sudan mainly because South Africa had been appointed the
    Chairperson of the Post-conflict in  The  Sudan  reconstruction  by  the
    African Union.

    Sudanese mandate is critical to  bringing  about  peace  and  stability,
    which is one of the key Foreign Policy pillars of South  Africa  in  its
    quest to build and create a better Africa in the world. It was therefore
    important that South Africa engaged the Sudanese, Government  and  other
    stakeholders such as the civil  organisations,  political  organisations
    and the Country’s Academics. It was the Committee’s  considered  opinion
    therefore that for peace in the  Southern  Sudan  to  succeed,  it  will
    depend on, among other things, South Africa’s ability to build peace  in
    Darfur.

2.    Objectives of the visit:

    • Assessing the deteriorating humanitarian situation in The Sudan
    • Evaluating and observing the extent to  which  peace  agreements  have
      been implemented in Sudan
    • Developing practical methodology in order to efficiently carry out the
      mandate South Africa is charged with.
    • Exchanging  experiences  with  the  Sudanese  Parliamentarians  in  an
      attempt to attain peace in the horn of Africa.
    • Understanding and monitoring the  conditions  under  which  the  South
      African contingent operate as deployed in Darfur


3.    Composition of the multiparty delegation:
        1. Ms SP Rwexana, Leader of Delegation     (ANC)
        2. Mr MU Kalako                      (ANC)
        3. Dr M Sefularo                     (ANC)
      4.    Mrs S Seaton                      (IFP)
        4. Dr M Van Dyk                      (DA)
        5. Mr Madikiza                  (UDM)
        6. MS B Cabangana                    (Committee Secretary)



N.B Mr S Tshivhula, Deputy Director of the Department  of  Foreign  Affairs,
dealing  with  the  Horn  of  Africa  and  Sudan  specifically  joined   the
delegation.


4.    Structure of the Report

The report  will  attempt  to  outline  the  activities  undertaken  by  the
delegation  pertaining  to  the  objectives  of  the  visit   with   various
presentations  made   by   various   stakeholders,   site   visits,   formal
interactions and experiences identified by the Committee during  the  visit.
Findings will cover all regions visited namely:

    • Khartoum
    • Darfur
    • El Fasher
    • Juba

   5. Meeting with the various stakeholders

 The Committee met and interacted with the following stakeholders:

A. Khartoum
    • Speaker of the Sudan National Assembly
    • Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence
    • Leaders of political parties in the National Assembly
    • Minister of Foreign Affairs
    • African Mission in Sudan
    • Leader of the Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement
    • Leader of the Umma Party
    • Leader of the Communist Party
    • Leader of the Popular National Congress
    • Chairperson of the Assessment & Evaluation Commission

B. Darfur
   Deputy Head of Mission
   Force Commander
   Wali of the North Darfur
   Internally Displaced Persons
   United Nations Aid Agencies
   Signatories & the Non-signatories of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
   South African Military/Civil Police Personnel

C. Juba
    • Government of the Southern Sudan
    • Undersecretary of the Ministry of Regional Co-operation
    • Minister of Parliamentary Affairs


D. Kenya

    • Parliamentary Committee of Foreign Affairs and Defence
6.    Findings

6.1   Khartoum


 6.1.1      Government


(a) Speaker of the Sudan National Assembly – Honourable  Ahmed  Ebrahim  Al-
Tahier
    • The Comprehensive Peace agreement was signed on 09 January 2005
    • Sudan had 570 ethnic groups and a 100 different spoken languages
    • In addition there was great diversity of cultures and religion
    • Sudan enjoyed 50 years of independence since 1956
    • Khartoum National Assembly was a transitional parliament
    • 70 women representation totalling up to 16% members of parliament  and
      some of which were leaders in their own right.
    • It was envisaged that Elections would be held in 2008/09
    • One of the major questions to be  resolved  was  whether  or  not  the
      country should be split into autonomous  states  or  should  remain  a
      unitary Sudan.
    • Much of  the  territories  outside  Khartoum  have  been  historically
      neglected,  causing    backwardness  and   lack   of   infrastructural
      development in most areas.

(b) Minister of Foreign Affairs- Dr Lam Akol
    • Peace agreement was a  solid  basis  towards  the  resolution  of  the
      conflict in Darfur
    • A few organisations remained outside of  the  agreement,  refusing  to
      sign
    • The non-signatories included the National Redemption Front,  supported
      by Eritrea and Chad.
    • The Government of Sudan (GoS) was open to discuss the causes  for  the
      conflict with the idea to move forward
    • An important priority is the facilitation of humanitarian relief.
    • Position of the Sudanese government was accepting an African commander
    • Commissions became some of the structures to be established in  sought
      of the solution
    • Intergovernmental Authority Unit found it  difficult  to  monitor  the
      structures
    • Issue of compensation were complicated
    • Government put aside 30 million rand, which the non-signatories is not
      enough. They proposed 300 million

(c) Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence
    • The Committee was impressed with the assistance from South  Africa  in
      establishing peace initiatives under hostile circumstances in Sudan
    • Very happy to have South Africans coming to  see  what  was  happening
      than getting false perceptions from the media.
               • Always delighted to have well-wishers  who  would  back  up
                 Sudan.
    • The media did not reflect reality in its reporting.  Sudan  maintained
      the position not to allow the UN to tell Sudan what to be done.
    • UN forces were not necessarily doing any good on the  countries  where
      they were currently     deployed

(d) African Mission in Sudan
    • The memorandum of understanding had been prepared and was  due  to  be
      sent shortly
    • African Mission in Sudan (AMIS)  continued  to  experience  logistical
      challenges such as lack of funds.
    • Logistical and personnel support were also an issue  (more  battalions
      were awaited)
    • Africans should not only rely on the assistance of the European  Union
      (EU), but should        organise to support their own initiatives.
    • Some of the causes  of  the  conflict  involved  clashes  between  the
      Government of Sudan and non-signatories in Darfur
    • Performance of the African  Union  could  not  be  duplicated  by  the
      deployed troops in other countries
    • There was an appeal to South Africa (SA) to add 100 more troops to get
      the full strength battalion.
    • Another issue was the problem with the main donors,  the  EU  and  the
      United States of America (USA), reducing the funding  of  the  African
      Union (AU) mission
    •  The  general  feeling  of  the  opposition  parties  was   that   the
      implementation of the Commissions as well as the way they  were  being
      handled was not satisfactory

(e) The Umma Party-Mr Sadig Al Mahdi
    • Mr Al Mahdi indicated that the coup d’etat that  took  place  in  1989
      changed the political landscape which then resulted into  a  political
      polarisation
    • The UmmaParty rejected the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)  mainly
      because it excluded other citizens of the country.
    • The CPA was more of a problem than a solution
    • The Darfur  Peace  Agreement  (DPA)  has  also  been  an  unsuccessful
      agreement which like the CPA was just wishful thinking
    •  Part  of  the  solution  depends  on  the  ceasefire,  protection  of
      civilians, bringing in the UN forces, reduction  of  the  trans-border
      conflict and bringing an end to violation of the human rights

(f) The Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement/Army
    • According to the Sudanese People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A),
      the cause of the conflict was as a result of the marginalisation of
      the Sudanese and the introduction of the Janjaweed by the Government
      of Sudan
    • SPLM/A was in favour of the United Nations because AMIS had failed to
      contain the situation in Darfur.
    • Particularly, the fact that the humanitarian situation continued to
      deteriorate unabated testified to that extent
    • SPLM/A welcomed South Africa‘s involvement in the resolution of he
      Darfur crisis.

(g) The Communist Party - Mr Ali Suliman Hamid Elhaj
  The following were 5 challenges outlined as challenges to the CPA
         • The CPA
         • The Abuja Accord
         • Cairo Accord
         • East Sudan Peace Agreement
         • Deteriorating Economic Situation
(h) The Democratic Unionists Party-Mr Ali Hassanain V
      • Total peace has not yet been achieved in Darfur
    •  Darfur  remains  a  place  of  death  and  blood,  meaning  that  the
      humanitarian situation has deteriorated
      • Government must be held accountable for the happenings in Darfur
      • Efforts should continue to resolve the in Darfur.
    • The Democratic Unionists are hopeful that time  will  come  when  good
      experiences of Darfur are exchanged

(i) The Popular National Congress- Dr Turabi
    • The Popular National Congress Party has always canvassed for peace and
      stability in Sudan
    • It has differed with the decentralization of the Sudan
    • Dr Turabi aired that the party had no conflicting resolutions with the
      governing party in The Sudan
      • He acknowledged that part of the conflict resulted  from  religious
        motivations and   differences.
    • The Party believed that the CPA was not a coordinated  and  consistent
      peace process
    • The established Commissions were not significant to the process.
    • The feeling of the party was that Interests of the entire nation  were
      not taken into consideration

(j) Chairperson of the Assessment & Evaluation Commission- (AEC)  -  Mr  Tom
Vraalsen
    • Mr Vraalsen communicated that there were unrealistic terms towards the
      implementation the CPA
    • He added that  he  was  however  happy  about  some  of  the  positive
      activities that have taken place including the  establishment  of  the
      Commissions
    • Oil remained the key issue in and around Sudan, and there was hope  to
      generate revenue from it
    • The understanding expressed  by  the  AEC  was  that  should  the  CPA
      collapse, everything else would collapse.
    • The AEC was in communication with other political  parties  that  were
      not necessarily involved in the CPA
    • The AEC was in no position to force the implementation of the CPA

(k) Briefing by the Ambassador, His Excellency Mampane


The Honourable Ambassador briefed the delegation on the following areas:


           I.     Understanding on the CPA



The CPA was signed on the 9th January 2005


    • Boundaries demarcating regions (Commission submitted a report)
    • No agreement could be reached about the report
    • Would be administered at a later stager to make a decision
    • Reaching a political agreement/settlement
    • If the CPA remains unresolved, more hiccups could emanate
    • Time frames remain to be a challenge and as such a need  to  speed  up
      the process


          II.    National Elections 2008


Electoral commission to enact legislation regulating  elections  that  would
be considered credible. A need to meet deadlines as the years unfolds.



           III.   Commissions established in terms of the CPA

In total, there are about nine commissions. They are  like  the  task  teams
that were created under  the  Interim  Executive  Authority  during  the  SA
Negotiations at CODESA. Among the commissions, the following are important
    • Assessment Evaluation Commission (EAC)- evaluating progress made by
      the other commissions to implement the CPA
    • National Petroleum Commission
    • Ceasefire Commission in place but vary in terms of success achieved up
      to this point.
    • National Financial Commission
    • Judicial Service Commission
    • Bank of Sudan
    • Human Rights Commission (Not yet established)
    • South-North Border Commission
    • Civil society Commission (Not yet established)
    • Land Commission  (Not yet established)
    • Ad-hoc Border Commission


           IV.    Darfur Peace Agreement



    • Pressure on the African union to sign  the  agreement  after  enormous
      pressure by the US
    • Challenge. No process of the implementation of the DPA
    • Non-signatories formed the National Redemption Front fighting the DPA,
      which then explained the ongoing conflict in Darfur
    • The groups are splitting up further and as such there  is  an  ongoing
      trend of groups emerging and breaking up.
    • As long as there is conflict in the North, the South would  never  get
      to develop.
    • This has influenced the motives of the conflict.
    • Sudan is on  a  serious  campaign  to  allow  the  UN  to  remain  the
      monitoring body



           V.     Reasons for the ongoing conflict in Darfur



    ▪ Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)  does  not  continue
      to have an  effective  role  to  play  in  as  far  as  evaluation  is
      concerned.
    ▪ There was not much done to  ensure  that  consistency  allows  for  an
      ongoing role and a mechanism to fall back on.
    ▪ Another challenge has been less communication between the  big  bodies
      and the countries concerned.
    ▪ National Congress Party objects to the deployment of the UN forces
    ▪ SLM and  other  parties  support  the  deployment  of  the  UN  forces
      because that would take care of the lives of the people  who  continue
      to die as a result of the conflict.
    ▪ Cross border involvement in the conflict
    ▪  Government   forces   destabilized   the   community   and   enhanced
      destruction in Darfur
    ▪ There is a planned Darfur-Darfur Dialogue, which has not  taken  place
      yet. There is still hope that it will take place.



           VI.    Impact on the neighbouring countries



    ▪ Chad has been drawn into  conflict,  with  mutual  accusation  between
      the GoS and the Chadian government that the one  is  sponsoring  anti-
      government rebels
    ▪ On the Eastern front, Eritrea has also harboured Sudanese rebels


6.2 Darfur

(l) Meeting with the Acting  Deputy  Head  of  Mission-  Ambassador.  Hassan
Gibril



        Background

   The situation in Darfur has the  following  main  groupings  involved  in
   armed conflict
      • Signatories to the DPA
      • Non-signatories
      • Rebels
      • Janjaweed (Arab and Islamisists forces, including nomads,  who  are
        believed to be armed by the GoS)

   Fragmentation of the parties has led to the following
      • Since the 11 of November fighting has escalated.
      • Increased banditry  activities-  patrols  have  been  increased  to
        monitor targeted areas
      • Increased attacks on civilians, causing  internal  displacement  of
        mainly women and children
      • Most if not all of their properties and  livelihood  are  destroyed
        during the attacks
      • There is occurrence of systematic  rape  of  women  as  an  act  of
        aggression


        Achievements by AMIS

       Significantly reduced massed killings
       Instilled confidence on the people



        Challenges

      • Under  5500  Troops  in  an  Operational  Area  of  50,0000  Square
        kilometres
      • Significant areas left without coverage- e.g. Sector 6- covered  by
        SA
      • Inadequate troops to implement tasks
      • Deployment timelines were not adhered to
      • New sectoral structure proposed to ensure security in Darfur
      • There is a need to take strength of the troops to a total of 5936
      • Government of  Sudan  patrol  vehicles  are  the  same  with  those
        provided by the AMIS - rebels cannot tell the difference

(m) Meeting with the Wali (Governor) of El Fasher-


The Wali briefed the Committee on the following areas:



      On Darfur

           • Darfur is a wide spread centre of crisis. Everything stems from
             the crisis
           • Media transfers issues to  other  causes  which  might  not  be
             factual
           • Reality reflects that there is no stability at all in Darfur
           • Humanitarian situation is deteriorating  as  indicated  by  the
             media, but we maintain that,  there  has  been  a  considerable
             progress.
           • Main crisis reported on the researched report: Hijacking cars
           • In 2004, crisis declined
           • 2006, before signing the agreement in Abuja,  430  crimes  were
             reported
           • In 2005 the total no. of crimes has declined up to 560 (?)
           • Percentage of improvement over the past 9 months

   I. On the Internally Displaced Persons  (IDPs)
           • 5 major IDP camps with the total of 300600
           • All the IDPs deliver in regular areas
           • Anything that disputes these statistics is not correct
           • The affected people receive 80% of assistance (water and  other
             services)
           • United Nations Children’s Fund  (UNICEF)  report  details  that
             there is some assistance to the affected  families  which  then
             shows some improvement
           • UNICEF/UN agencies are assisting the government.
           • IDPs even have sporting teams
           • IDP and children have access to good water, education and  food
             which are all free


      On the DPA



       The disagreements affecting the citizens- position of Darfur


      • The Wali believes that there needs to be an end to the situation by
        bringing forth all  the  parties  related  to  the  Darfur  problem
        including the International communities such as the UN.
      • He supports the DPA but it does not solve most problems
      • He was encouraging the international  community  to  take  part  in
        signing and coming to the DPA
      • There were hopes to discuss the matter of the authorization of  the
        deployment of the        troops
      • There should be compensation for IDPs as mentioned in the DPA
      • GoS has increased its contribution  from  $30m  to  $100m  and  are
        calling for
      • an increase in the funds provided to the IDPs
      • Darfur should be a united region, not divided into three states  as
        is the case at present

(n) Meeting with the South African Sector Commander (Sector 6,  Kutum)-  Col
R G Lourens



   I. Background

    • Troops deployed in 2004 as the South African  National  Contingent  in
      Darfur comprising of 50 members  of  the  SA  National  Defence  Force
      members (Fourth Contingent)
    • No fatalities experienced by the South  African  troops,  compared  to
      those of other countries
    • The main mission is to provide protection to the civilians of Darfur
    • Present situation is very hostile rebel leaders feel betrayed by their
      leaders
    • AU Mission has been extended until December 2006
    • Further UN/AU would be taken further to the DPA.
    • The AU deployed AMIS to Darfur in good faith  to  achieve  a  daunting
      task-We must not fail
    • Approval granted to increase the force levels to 556 members
    • Deteriorating humanitarian situation
    • Ambush and attacks on AMIS and humanitarian personnel
    • SA troops delivered 7 new born babies to the local community
    • Some of the rebels seek refuge within the  IDPs  to  seek  refuge  and
      humanitarian assistance
    • Division of Darfur, the Northern part to rich people
    • Failure to have meetings with the AU in 5 months has kept the  process
      to stabilize Darfur slow

6.3. Kutum


(a) Visit to the IDPS
    • Properties belonging to 24000 people were burnt down
    • No patrolling at night
    • Rape cases reported and no protection of women/victims
    • Movement within the areas is restricted


      NB 450 additional IDPs arrived two nights  before  the  visit  by  the
      delegation

(b) Meeting with the NGOs
    • Representatives of some of the Non Governmental  Organisations  (NGOs)
      alluded to the fact that circumstances deteriorated with the inception
      of the CPA
    • They added that some areas have been neglected because of the scope of
      the assistance offered by the NGOs
    • Logistical and financial support from the donors declined dramatically
      and this has impacted on the  extent  to  which  assistance  could  be
      offered

(c) AMIS mandate
    • The AMIS is mandated to contribute to the improvement of the  security
      situation in Darfur and the return of refugees and IDPs to their homes
    • Far behind the timelines for the implementation of the DPA
    • Actions of non-signatories to the DPA are not accounted for
    • Janjaweed cannot be followed up


(d) Threats against the AMIS –
AMIS faces challenges in the following areas:

    • Against the force
    • Against the signatories
    • Against the security


(e) Meeting with  the  Non-Signatories  to  the  DPA  namely,  the  Sudanese
Liberation

[Army - SLA - and Justice and  Equality  Movement  –  JEM  (Members  of  the
Ceasefire Committee in attendance)]


      Background

    • Members of  the  Justice  and  Equality  Movement  acknowledged  South
      Africa’s role in ensuring peace in Darfur
    • They added that war has had  a  devastating  impact  on  the  ordinary
      people of Darfur
    • Solution should be found around the table not with the arms
    • They did not sign because they don’t want peace, but differed with the
      manner in which peace is sought
    • While the main agreement was for humanitarian purpose,  the  situation
      has worsened than before
    • They decided to go into negotiations on the elements of Abuja
    • Certain elements needed to achieve peace on the Abuja agreement
    • Possibility of extending the views if  there  are  contacts  with  the
      delegation
    • Verified that the purpose is to achieve peace in every possible way


      On the Darfur Peace Agreement

   Their reasons for not signing are as follows:
    • Regional disputes
    • Govt should compensate the families whose houses have been destroyed
    • Disarm the Janjaweed to enable people to return home safely
    • Sharing of power and resources
    • Already about 10 thousand deployed Janjaweed troops across Darfur
    • The JEM would like more career positions  within  the  Government  and
      civil service
    • Ensuring  that  the  DPA  is  realistic  and  addresses  the  concerns
      affecting the people
    • Public participation and justice


      On the AU

    • Regular meetings should take place with the  AU  and  these  have  not
      taken place and this is not right because  concerns  of  the  JEM  and
      interests are not taken into consideration
    • There are crucial things that the AU does not  know  about  which  are
      happening on the field. These could be communicated  through  meetings
      that the AU is not committing to.
    • Lack of communication between the AU and the JEM
    • The JEM Waited to hear from the AU to respond to the letter  that  the
      JEM had written indicating their wish to meet the AU
    • No one from the AU ever showed interest in negotiating with the JEM
    • Two committees between JME and the SLM to convene meeting dealing with
      the conflict-resolution
    • No meetings with the AU have been convened

(f) Meeting with the Signatories of the DPA- the  SLA,  Free  Will  Movement
and the
   GoS

   I. The SLA (Free Will Movement) on the DPA
    • The signatories of the DPA indicated that  all  the  parties  wish  to
      further the interests of the agreement
    • They are not aware why other parties did not sign, never been told the
      reasons
    • There should be a time-table of the activities of the agreement
    • It is not clear who is following the principles of the agreement
    • Signatories and monitors agreed in Abuja that parties  that  have  not
      signed should be fined. Those fines have not been administered
    •  The  Free  Will  Movement  have  experienced  co-operation  from  the
      Government
    • The Movement has complied wit  the  principles  of  the  agreement  to
      ensure peace in Darfur
    • Up to this time, still concerned with the programme of  power  sharing
      in Darfur
    • Wish to  call  upon  the  international  community  to  ask  the  non-
      signatories to play along (sign)
    • There is a misunderstanding between Sudan and Chad and this impacts of
      the stability of the country
    • Everyone who commits crime should be punished
    • There is a need for the politicians in Sudan/  Khartoum  to  carry  on
      with the peace agreements


      On the Janjaweed - The position of the GoS



    • Government of Sudan is responsible for disarming the Janjaweeed
    • A plan has been established to attend to the conflict and a  copy  has
      been  sent  through  to  various  parties  who  would  make   valuable
      contribution towards it
    • Media is not doing a great job in the country.
    • Allegations have not been proved
    • Not happy with the mandate of the AU.
    • Africans should start doing their own business and  not  rely  on  the
      assistance of the European union


      On the role played by the AU


    • The SLA has always been asking for more troops,
    • It is not clear why the troops have not been assisted with  everything
      that they have requested to play a more effective role
    • Donors should assist the AU when required, however the problem is  for
      Africans and should be solved by the Africans.

6.4 Juba- Southern Sudan

(a) Meeting  with  the  Undersecretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Regional  Co-
operation- Dr Cirino
   Hiteng Ofuho


    • Highlighted the issue of insufficient  space  to  carry  on  with  the
      parliamentary business.
    • But commented that there has been some progress  since  20  years  ago
      when meetings and official business was done under the trees


(b) Meeting with the Minister  of  the  Parliamentary  Affairs:  HE  Gabriel
Changson Chang



          On the CPA

   CPA provisions are
      • Government of National Unity (GNU)  adopted  a  federal  government
        comprising of all political parties
      • Some parties chose not to take part in the process
      • CPA –interim constitution was legislated, enacted  and  is  now  in
        operation
      • Legislature has two parts- National Assembly  and  the  Council  of
        States
      • CPA talks about power sharing between the North and the South
      • The National Congress Party as the major party, has 52%
      • South- SPLM has 28%
      • Other political parties of the south have 14%
      •  SPLM leaders have been appointed to key branches- the cabinet
      • The President comes from the NCP while the Vice President  is  from
        SPLM
      • National Assembly- total of 120 members

      Power-sharing ratios with in the South Sudan

      • SPLM has 70%, NCP - 15% and other parties have 15% according to the
        CPA
      • This is a transitional arrangement for  peace  to  prevail  in  The
        Sudan
      • Interim constitution  for  The  Sudan  was  passed  (governing  the
        activities of the Southern Sudan)
      • The CPA endorsed an arrangement that  already  existed  within  the
        states (separate constitution)
      • Office  holders  of  these  institutions  are  appointed  based  on
        consultation with political parties
      • SPLM is represented across the board  because  of  the  portion  it
        enjoys. This means that not all political parties are represented
      • NC has 26 members and other 6 political parties share the remaining
        seats


      Wealth sharing


    • CPA outlines what resources to be shared between the government of the
      South and that of the National Unity
    • Nett Oil Revenue is to be split between the two governments
    • Deductions include the share that goes to  the  investing  parties  as
      well as running cost including transportation, pipeline and incidental
      costs
    • 2 % deducted to the oil producing state
    • Remaining balance is split into half (50/50)
    • CPA also clarified the taxes to be collected at the levels of the GoS,
      GNU and the state
    • Government of the  Southern  Sudan  relies  specifically  on  the  oil
      revenue which is very vulnerable because of the various changes  going
      on


      Security arrangement

    • There should be established a Joint integrated Unit force made  up  of
      39 thousand troops that are split into 24  thousand  stations  in  the
      South
    • SPLA 12 thousand plus
    • Khartoum has 10000 split into two
    • Running the security affairs in Sudan
    • SPLA forces should not be in the designated areas


      Challenges within the CPA


    • There is a delay in withdrawal of forces by the GoS
    • North-South boundary is yet to be determined
    • The number  of  armed  forces  that  would  contribute  to  the  joint
      integrated unit
    • This arrangement did not go as planned
    • Some forces have not joined any of the forces agreed upon in the CPA
    • Movement of the South forces towards the North,
    • The demarcation of the boundaries and the oil fields has an impact  on
      progressing with the census in preparation of the elections
    • Capacitating the ministers, members of parliament and  civil  servants
      to enable them to understand and deal with the affairs  of  governance
      and service delivery
    • Resources are not available in the country
    • Central forces aligned to the GoS are ambushing transport that  comes
      to South for assistance and close roads to the central  South  in  an
      attempt to prevent development of the South
    • Population can never be less than 10 million.



      Threats to the CPA

    • Lack of service delivery
    • Border demarcation
    • Elections
    • Strongly upholding the provisions of the CPA because it is this
      agreement that will carry through the Sudanese during the interim
      phase

(c) Meeting with the Speaker of the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly  Lt-
   Hon. Lt. Gen. Wani Igga
    • The speaker expressed his sincere gratitude relating to the  visit  of
      members of the South African parliament.
    • Highlighted the role played by South Africa in  bringing  the  present
      peace in The Sudan
    • He indicated that the Assembly was in total support of  the  CPA  even
      though there ongoing challenges
    • Explained one major  success:  the  existence  of  the  Government  of
      National Unity, two houses in Khartoum,  Government  of  the  Southern
      Sudan (GoSS), Southern Sudan Liberation Army and the State Governments
    • Welcomed the involvement of the International community to ensure that
      principles of the CPA were carried through
    • Adamant that elections will take place in 2011
    • Expressed a need in the fields of training for staff and MPs in Sudan,
      Exchange visits by MPs  and  staff  of  parliaments  and  the  meeting
      between the Secretariats of the  African  National  Congress  and  the
      Sudan People Liberation Movement to step up common programs

6.5 Kenya, Nairobi

(a) Briefing by the High Commissioner-HE Msimang

    • The High Commissioner informed the Committee of the following:
    • Kenya s going through some political turmoil
    • Last year, a new constitution  was  meant  to  be  adopted  after  the
      election of President Kibaki
    • MOU never adhered to that would see a government representative of all
      the political parties
    • President Kibaki shelved the MOU and this led to a dysfunction in  the
      Government of Kenya
    • At some point- cabinet failed to meet for more than 9 months
    • Wide consultation through out the country to indicate what could  work
      for the country
    • Bomas draft- contributions of everyone- never happened
    • As a result a Gilifi draft  was  decided  upon-  which  called  for  a
      referendum on the new Constitution
    • Government lost to the opposition political parties
    • The president decided to react  by  halting  government  meetings  and
      parliamentary activities
    • New cabinet ministers  were  appointed  by  the  President  with  some
      designated persons declining
    • The government started to function and there are only two  years  left
      before the next elections
    • Government is trapped in corruption scandals
    • Donor countries have squeezed and pressured government to react
    • No hope that anything would happen soon

   I. Economy
    • Growth Domestic Product (GDP) is at growing at 5.8% per annum
    • Country is doing well despite droughts experienced last year
    • About 32 South African companies have invested in Kenya
    • President Moi and the then South African President never  saw  eye  to
      eye which strained  relations  within  the  mission  and  other  South
      African visitors
    • Joint Cooperation Commission with Kenya is proposed to be signed  some
      time in 2007
    • This might introduce some progress in the manner in which  things  are
      done in Kenya politically and otherwise

  II. Crime
    • Cases of violent crimes
    • Attacks of Diplomats
    • An alarming security situation in the country


(b) Meeting with the Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence
The purpose of the meeting was to allow  the  South  African  delegation  to
engage with the Kenyan Committee in order to understand how both  committees
operate.

The following are some of the key points addressed:
    • The Kenyan Parliamentary  Committee  acknowledged  that  a  huge  task
      remained for the entire world to search for peace and stability in the
      Middle East, Israel, Darfur, Palestine, Lebanon, Afghanistan and Iraq
    • Both Committees comprised of various parties represented in parliament
    • Gender was considered when looking into the Committee’s composition
    •  The  Committees  enable  members  to  exercise  their  mandate   when
      monitoring Foreign Affairs issues locally and abroad
    • The Kenyan Committee members invited the South  African  Committee  to
      maintain the established relation by means of a visit to  engage  both
      committees in detail.


7. Conclusion

The delegation viewed the study tour as an eye opening experience and all
members felt honoured to have been part of the fact-finding delegation.
Having met with the relevant stakeholders, the delegation acknowledged that
objectives of the visit were met. However, the delegation acknowledged that
another follow up visit would be necessary to ensure that the agreed terms
have been adhered to. Members were satisfied that meetings held allowed
them an opportunity to understand the very complicated history of The
Sudan, Darfur and the Southern Sudan, Juba.

8. Recommendations
Having monitored and evaluated the situation in Darfur, Sudan and Juba,  the
delegation recommends the following:

    • The Government of South Africa and responsible stakeholders should
      Increase the forces in Darfur to ensure effective peacekeeping in the
      Darfur region to alleviate the human sufferings
    • The general Sudanese opinion seems to choose the UN to monitor Darfur
      instead of the AU. An international structure comprising both the AU
      and the UN should be established to oversee the implementation and the
      review of certain terms of the CPA and the DPA where and if necessary
    • The Committee mandates the leader of the delegation to urgently
      consult with the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign
      Affairs to convene an extended PC meeting for consultation and way
      forward
    • A request must be made with the Peace and Security committee of the AU
      to
        (a) Increase the mandate of the forces in Darfur

        (b) Provide necessary equipment to assist the troops in executing
their task
        (c) Call for the involvement of the UN troops
        (d) Strengthen the Assessment and Evaluation Committee with the role
       players involved



Glossary

AEC                              Assessment and Evaluation Commission
AMIS                             African Mission in Sudan
AU                                 African Union
CP                                 Communist Party
CPA                              Comprehensive Peace Agreement
GDP                              Growth Domestic Product
GoSS                            Government of the Southern Sudan
GoNU                            Government of National Unity
DPA                               Darfur Peace Agreement
IDP                                Internally Displaced Persons
JEM                               Justice Equality Movement
NGO                              Non-Governmental Organisation
PNC                              Popular National Congress
SLA                              Sudanese Liberation Army
SNA                              Sudan National Assembly
SPLM /A                       Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement/Army
SSLA                            South Sudan Liberation Army
UN                                 United Nations

6. Report of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Foreign  Affairs  on  the  India,
  Brazil, and South Africa  (IBSA)  Summit  that  took  place  in  Brasilia,
  Brazil, on 13 September 2006:

1. Introduction

  The Portfolio Committee on Foreign  Affairs  exercises  oversight  of  the
  Department of Foreign Affairs in line with the constitutional mandate  set
  out in section 55(2) of  the  Constitution.  The  Portfolio  Committee  on
  Foreign Affairs adopted a resolution on 29 August 2006 to  send  a  multi-
  party parliamentary delegation to the first IBSA summit held in  Brasilia,
  Brazil, on 13 September 2006.


2. Delegation

  The delegation was as follow:


1. Ms F Hajiag, ANC (Leader of the delegation)
2. Mr B Skosana, IFP
3. Mr A Hermans, Support Staff


3. Background

  Following ongoing interactions between South Africa, India and Brazil, and
  after the initial discussion between the Heads of State and Government  of
  their countries at the G-8 summit  in  Evian  in  2003,  the  relationship
  between theses countries was subsequently formalised with the adoption  of
  the Brasilia declaration on 6 June 2006.

  The main objectives of the  IBSA  Dialogue  Forum  can  be  summarised  as
  follows:


   1. To promote South-South dialogue, cooperation and common  positions  on
      issues of international importance;
2. To promote trade and investment opportunities between the three regions;
3. To promote international poverty alleviation and social development;
   4. To promote the trilateral exchange of information, international  best
      practises, technologies and skills, as  well  as  to  compliment  each
      others competitive strengths and collective synergies; and
   5. To promote corporation in a broad range of areas, namely  agriculture,
      climate  change,  culture,   defence,   education,   energy,   health,
      information society, science and technology, social development, trade
      and investment, tourism and transport.


4. Purpose


  The IBSA  summit  held  in  Brasilia  was  to  strengthen  the  trilateral
  relations which  were  the  culmination  of  the  three  IBSA  Ministerial
  Trilateral Joint Commission meetings held in New Delhi (2004),  Cape  Town
  (2005) and Rio de Janeiro (2006) respectively. This partnership is a major
  development in the area of South-South cooperation. These  countries  have
  developed substantial capabilities in different sectors,  but  they  still
  have to be utilised for the benefit of the South in general.


  The major objectives for the summit were as follows:

1. To deepen the  South-South  dialogue  and  cooperation  within  the  IBSA
   context;
2. To intensify and enhance coordinated positions on the multilateral fora;
   3. To further promote the combination of the collective strengths of  the
      three IBSA countries into complimentaries;
4. To further consolidate the  three  continents  Southern  regions  on  all
   levels;
5. To further promote trade and investment opportunities and development  of
   new markets;
   6. To take stock of achievements so far in terms of broad range  of  IBSA
      cooperation areas that  would  lead  to  technology,  information  and
      skills  transfers,  social  development,  poverty   alleviation,   job
      creation etc;
   7.  To  issue  a  joint   declaration   between   the   IBSA   Heads   of
      State/Government after concluding the summit;
8. To review programme on three key areas of trilateral cooperation, i.e.
    1. Energy
    2. Transport and
    3. Climate Change; and
   9. To conclude Trilateral Agreements/MOU: Transport, Agriculture, Energy,
      ICT and Trade facilitation.

  5.  The IBSA Summit

  The IBSA Dialogue Forum  has  regular  consultations  at  Senior  Official
  (Focal Point), Ministerial (Trilateral Joint  Commissions)  and  Heads  of
  State and Government (Summit) levels,  but  also  facilitates  interaction
  amongst academia, business and other members of civil society.



  5.1 Academic Summit


  The Heads of States Summit was preceded  by  two  parallel  events  on  12
  September 2006, the Academic Seminar attended by academia, and a  Business
  Meeting, attended by captains of industry from the  respective  countries.
  As these were parallel events, the delegation attended the Academic Summit
  at the Itemaraty Palace, in Brasilia. The seminar was hosted by the Gusmoa
  Foundation and chaired by  its  Director,  Ambassador  Moscardi  and  Prof
  Cardim of IPRI.
  The Academic Summit mainly focussed on the following themes:
     a) Science and Technology and Innovation and Economic Development  and
        Cooperation.
     b) Public Policies and Social development.
     c) Democracy and Cultural Diversity.


  The consensus views  expressed  during  the  discussions  on  Science  and
  Technology and
  Innovation, and Economic Development and Cooperation could be captured  as
  follows:

     1. Technological development in the developing world is lagging behind
        and  IBSA  countries  should  take  the  lead  in  developing   new
        technology.
     2. In  order  to  make  large  sectors  of  IBSA’s  industry  globally
        competitive requires public investment in both old and  new  nature
        technologies.
     3. Investment in Research and Development (R and D) from  both  public
        and private  sector  to  ensure  that  IBSA  countries  become  the
        catalyst for new technological development is crucial.
     4. IBSA  countries  have  significant  technological  capabilities  in
        different fields and cooperation could take these  capabilities  to
        new heights that could also benefit the developing world.
     5. Closer relations should be  forged  between  the  various  research
        institutions, academia and industries to provide  both  the  vision
        and expertise to develop the next generation of systems.
     6. Joint research projects on various matters of communality should be
        encouraged, as it would also facilitate the flow of information.
     7. Cooperation in the area of developing safe,  renewable,  affordable
        and environmentally sustainable energy sources  to  the  collective
        benefit of all  three  countries  should  continue  as  this  would
        benefit rural communities


  The consensus views expressed during the discussions on Public Policy  and
  Social Development could be captured as follows:


     8. The issue of poverty in IBSA countries  and  how  to  address  this
        anomaly within the context of a global economy was a major concern.
     9. There was consensus that there is a need to close the  gap  between
        the  rich  and  poor,   and   that   public   policy   should   not
        unintentionally widen the gap.
    10. The empowerment of the marginalized, especially the poor and women,
        through  public  policy  interventions  in  IBSA   countries   were
        welcomed.
    11. Within the process of economic reform  and  deregulation  lies  the
        challenge for policy makers  to  ensure  that  through  appropriate
        public policy interventions, with respect  to  social  development,
        the role of government should not be shrinking.
  5.12      HIV/AIDS remains  the  major  threat  against  economic  growth,
        alleviation of poverty and democracy,  and  IBSA  should  lead  the
        global campaign to fight HIV/AIDS.
  5.13      The pooling of resources  to  develop  vaccines,  not  only  for
        HIV/AIDS but other diseases, to resolve the common problem of  IBSA
        countries is crucial to ensure that IBSA becomes a global  economic
        force.
  5.14      The issues of intellectual property rights  and  its  impact  on
        access of medicine for the poor provoked passionate debate.

  The consensus views expressed during the discussions on the Democracy  and
  Cultural diversify could be captured as follows:


15. A countries face similar  challengers  that  of  poverty,  unemployment,
   land reform and
      women emancipation.
16. IBSA countries have rich cultural mixes trying to  overcome  the  legacy
   of
     colonialisaton and the subordination of indigenous cultures.
17. IBSA countries should build on areas of common value.
18. IBSA countries believe that the strengthening of democracy, through  its
   various
      constitutional institutions, would enable conflicts to be resolved.
19. Largest democracy respectively on each of the  continents  committed  to
   economic
      growth, with social equity and inclusion.

6.     IBSA Dialogue Forum, Brasilia – 13 September 2006


6.1   Meeting of the Heads of State and Government, Ministers, and Business
      leaders.


The Heads of State and of Government made  general  remarks  on  the  common
challenges,  the  need  for  closer  cooperation  and  the  need  to   share
information and best practise. The  IBSA  dialogue  forum  brought  together
three countries from different  continents  to  consult  and  coordinate  on
global issues of concern is without precedent.

The views expressed by the Head of State and Government  can  be  summarised
as follows:

   1.  The  need  to  forge  closer  relations  with  the  South  cannot  be
      overemphasised.
   2. The exchange of  experiences,  to  found  common  ground  on  cultural
      issues,  trade  and  investment,  and  development  in   science   and
      technology is crucial, as it would  have  a  positive  impact  on  the
      South.
   3. The vision to improve the quality of life for  all,  closing  the  gap
      between the rich and poor are shared goals and can be achieved through
      combining the capacity of IBSA countries to fasten this process.
   4. Interaction should translate into practical,  real  cooperation  which
      impacts on the economy, trade, investment, and producing conditions to
      address these challenges.
   5. There should be a common resolve to remove obstacles that impede  this
      process, as there are significant synergies  between  these  countries
      that have developed significant capabilities in different sectors over
      the years.
   6. The IBSA countries  cooperation  within  the  framework  of  the  G-20
      developing countries has facilitated coalition building on World Trade
      Organisation (WTO) issues.
   7. The leaders express the importance of  IBSA  countries  in  playing  a
      leading role in the multilateral trade negotiations  in  developing  a
      more constructive proactive agenda.


Views expressed by  the  Chief  Executive  Officers  can  be  summarised  as
follows:


   8. The South African private sector has a special history with India  and
      Brazil and through continued interaction on  the  economic  front  can
      address the challenges faced within the global environment.
   9. Business leaders were encouraged  by  the  invitation  to  attend  the
      summit  as  it  could  form  the  catalyst  for  unblocking   economic
      cooperation among the IBSSA countries.
  10. The establishment of IBSA Business  Council  to  facilitate  areas  of
      business growth and remove impediments that would  hinder  free  trade
      was mooted.
  11. The Business community has the shared  goal  of  eliminating  poverty,
      creation of jobs, and contributing to economic growth.


7.2 Signing of Agreements by Ministers


One of the  objectives  of  the  IBSA  summit  was  to  conclude  Trilateral
Agreements/ Memoranda of Understanding (MOU). Below  is  the  list  of  MOUs
signed. See Annexure A for full details.

   1. IBSA  Acton  Plan  on  Trade  facilitation  for  Standards,  Technical
      Regulations and Conformity Assessment.
   2. Memorandum of Understanding on Biofuels.
   3. Memorandum of Understanding on Trilateral Cooperation  on  Agriculture
      and Allied Fields.
   4. IBSA Trilateral  Agreement  Concerning  Merchant  Shipping  and  other
      Marine Transport Related Matters.
   5. IBSA framework of Cooperation on Information Society.




7.3 Joint Press Statement


At the end of the proceedings the Heads of State and  Leader  of  Government
issued a
Joint Press Statement at the conclusion of the Summit.  The  salient  points
are highlighted.

   1. The three leaders reaffirmed their commitment to promotion  of  peace,
      security and sustainable economic and social development on the  world
      and in their respective regions.
   2. They reiterated the support for the comprehensive reform of the United
      Nations  Organisation  (UNO)  and  welcomed  the   creation   of   the
      Peacebuilding Commission and Human Rights Council.
   3. They unequivocally condemned terrorism in all forms and manifestation.
   4. They expressed their outrage at the terrorist attacks on 11 July  2006
      in Mumbai.
   5. They reiterated their strong commitment to the Action  against  Hunger
      and Poverty Initiative and, in particular, the Millennium  Declaration
      and the 2005 World Summit Outcome.
   6.  They  committed  themselves  to  further  enhancing  the   trilateral
      cooperation in the field of HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis.
   7. They shared common vision regarding the promotion  and  protection  of
      human rights.
   8. They  share  similar  views  regarding  the  importance  of  achieving
      sustainable development and eradication of poverty.
   9.  They  took  stock  of  the  global  security   situation   concerning
      disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
  10. They reaffirmed the  inalienable  right  of  all  States  to  peaceful
      application of nuclear energy,  consistent  with  their  international
      legal obligations.
  11.  They  deeply  regretted  that  the  WTO’s  Doha  Development   Agenda
      negotiations have been suspended.
  12. They reiterated their  commitment  towards  a  fairer  global  trading
      system.
  13. They reviewed initiatives for further trilateral sectoral cooperation.
  14. They expressed their deep satisfaction with the signing  of  the  IBSA
      Acton Plan on Trade facilitation for Standards, Technical  Regulations
      and Conformity Assessment.
  15. They expressed they full support and  commitment  to  the  expeditious
      establishment of the Working Group to focus on the modalities for  the
      envisaged India-Mercosur-SACU trilateral Free Trade Area.
  16.  They  reaffirmed  the  importance  of  ongoing   India-Mercosur   and
      Mercosur_SACU negotiations.
  17. They expressed the satisfaction of the presence of the important high-
      level business delegation from India, Brazil and South Africa.
  18.  They  expressed  they  deep  appreciation  for  the  signature  of  a
      Memorandum of Understanding on Biofuels.
  19. The Prime Minister of India and the President of South Africa  praised
      the Ethanol international initiative launched by Brazil.
  20. They  agreed  that  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  Trilateral
      Cooperation on Agriculture and Allied Fields  would  be  an  important
      instrument to promote socio-economic development.
  21. They welcomed the signing of the IBSA Trilateral Agreement  Concerning
      Merchant Shipping and other Marine Transport Related Matters.
  22. They emphasised the  importance  of  implementing  the  Memorandum  of
      Understanding of Civil Aviation as soon as possible.
  23. They expressed the satisfaction with the signing of the IBSA framework
      of Cooperation on Information Society.
  24. They emphasised the fact that the IBSA  Facility  Fund  constituted  a
      pioneer and unique initiative of South-South cooperation.




8. Concluding remarks


1. The IBSA summit in Brasilia, Brazil in 2006 was further evidence  of  the
   success of the experiment that has its roots  at  the  G-8  summit  of  a
   shared vision that unites the three countries.
2. The summit consolidated the IBSA Dialogue Forum in the achieving  synergy
   required that set the IBSA countries on path that would fully benefit the
   South.
3. These three countries are committed to economic  growth,  through  social
   equity and inclusion.
4. This summit reinforced the economic strengths of each countries  and  the
   need to synergise complementarities in areas such as industry,  services,
   trade, and science and technology.
5. The Academic Summit identified five initiatives that  would  harness  the
   collective resources and strengths within the IBSA partnership.


        a. That  IBSA  countries  develop  an  initiative  focused  on  the
           promotion of non-violence and peace;
        b. That mechanism are put in place that  would  encourage  cultural
           exchange,  through  the  film  industry,  literature   and   art
           festivals that would  promote  a  deepen  understanding  of  our
           cultural heritage;
        c. To harness the rich bio-diversity to  mitigate  the  threats  of
           human security and sustainable development;
        d. To consider  a  communication  strategy  that  would  provide  a
           balance  in  the  geo-politics  of  information   dissemination,
           advanced from an IBSA perspective; and
        e. To establish a tri-lateral  fund  that  would  promote  research
           partnerships, encourage academic exchange,  and  facilitate  the
           movement of scholars, intellectuals, and social  activist  among
           continents.


6.  The  presence  of  the  high-level  business  delegation  was   welcomed
   especially with respect to the exchanges with business leaders.
7. The Business summit called for the establishment  of  and  IBSA  Business
   Council that would focus on areas of growth,  closer  business  relations
   and address areas that may hinder free trade.
8. This is vital to achieve the investment  potential  and  would  establish
   institutional and business linkages in important sectoral areas.
9. The signing of MOUs and Trilateral Agreements are major achievements  and
   would further cement the relationship of IBSA countries.



9. Conclusion

9.1 Further activities planned by Committee:



   1. The Minister of Foreign Affairs brief the Committee within six  months
      to discuss the implementation of the MOUs  and  Trilateral  Agreements
      signed at the respective Heads of State and of Government;
   2. The Department of Foreign Affairs brief the Committee on  a  quarterly
      basis on   outstanding matters relating to  India-Brazil-South  Africa
      (IBSA) Dialogue Forum.


10. Recommendation

10.1  In light of the success of the IBSA summit,  the  Portfolio  Committee
      on Foreign Affairs would like to make the following recommendation:


   1. The  House,  through  its  relevant  forums,  gives  consideration  to
      establishing a multilateral parliamentary forum with  the  Parliaments
      of India and Brazil to oversee the implementation  of  agreements  and
      memorandums of understanding of the India-Brazil-South  Africa  (IBSA)
      Dialogue Forum.
 
Report to be considered.

6.    REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION ON STUDY TOUR TO
    MAURITIUS, NOVEMBER 2006:

A.    Background


The Portfolio Committee undertook a study tour to Mauritius for  the  period
17-25 November 2006, allowing for two days of travelling.  The  report  will
focus on visits conducted from 20 to 24 November 2006.


B.    Motivation for the study tour



The Portfolio Committee on  Education  needed  to  gain  insight  and  share
learning experiences about the education system of Mauritius.  Their  system
is similar to  the  South  African  system.  Also,  there  are  problems  of
commonality,  which  would  be   better   addressed   through   sharing   of
experiences. There are also interesting  initiatives  aimed  at  educational
reforms undertaken  by  the  government  of  Mauritius,  which  could  be  a
learning experience for South Africa.


The education system in  Mauritius  is  designed  along  the  lines  of  the
British model, and has improved greatly since independence.  The  government
of Mauritius has made an effort to provide adequate funding  for  education.
Education is a right and  is  offered  for  free  from  primary  through  to
tertiary level, while a system of grants exists for the  pre-primary  level.
Education in Mauritius has been free from pre-primary through the  secondary
level since 1976 and through post-secondary level since 1988.



C.    Logistical Arrangements

The multi-party delegation was led by Prof S M Mayatula  [ANC],  Chairperson
of the Committee, Mr B G Mosala [ANC]; Ms  J  J  Matsomela  [ANC];  Mr  G  G
Boinamo [DA] and Mr A M Mpontshane [IFP] was replaced by Ms S  Sigcau  (UDM)
because he could not be part of the delegation due to other commitments.

D.    Findings

1.    Meeting with the Minister of Education

The delegation received a courtesy call  from  the  Minister  of  Education,
Hon. D Gokhool, at the Industrial Vocational Training Board (IVTB) House  in
Phoenix.

The Honorable Minister gave a brief  overview,  identifying  the  system  of
education. The African Peer Review mechanism has  identified  a  shortcoming
in that learners are passing for the sake of passing. The new government  is
placing  emphasis  on  quality  education,  and  the  introduction  of   new
curriculum. He mentioned that the reform proposals  have  been  accepted  by
the opposition parties and his predecessor.

The Mauritius Teacher Institution is dedicated for professional teaching  of
educators. It is a specialized body for teacher training  and  research.  It
provides training on in-service training. It also serves as pre-service  and
distance learning for teachers.

The legislative process  in  Mauritius  is  handled  by  the  cabinet  which
considers the Bill. The draft is prepared by the Minister with the  help  of
State Law Advisers. Once the Cabinet is satisfied, it  goes  to  Parliament,
for 1st reading debate. The second stage is when it is debated by  political
parties. Thereafter Minister concludes on the Bill and then it becomes  law.
  In Mauritius there are no Portfolio Committees.

In South Africa the legislative process involves interested parties and  the
public. This is evident in elaborative processes followed by  committees  of
both the National Assembly and the National Council  of  Provinces.   It  is
noted that there is a gap in the level of competency in that  the  Mauritian
system only involves few stakeholders, the Ministry and the Legal Advisers.

The educational reforms introduced a new curriculum, which uses  English  as
a medium of instruction in schools, with French being taught as  a  subject.
It  has  been  commonly  felt  that  the  education   system   must   pursue
dissemination of both French and English, in order to  meet  the  challenges
of globalisation and technical progress.



The Ministry of Education intends reversing the situation by providing  more
colleges and by bringing diversity in the curriculum to  allow  the  balance
between the logic and aesthetic aspects.


The delegation also received presentations from the Ministry  of  Education,
covering the focal areas, its structure and the program for reform.
Mauritius has a free and compulsory education system for the past 30  years.
 In terms of the system of education, learners go  through  eight  years  of
formal schooling from age 5 up to 12 years.  Those  who  fail,  during  this
period, have to go through two additional  years  at  Secondary  School.  At
grade 12, are assessed through external examination  and  could  proceed  to
Cambridge University.

The South African system provides for free  and  compulsory  education  from
grade R up to grade nine. The FET phase, allows for learners  an  option  to
either proceed through normal route  or  vocation  education  (FET  College)
through to Tertiary education.

2.    Human Resource Development Council (HRDC)

This Directorate is attached to the Ministry of Education.
The Human Resource and Development Council (HRDC) was established  in  terms
of
Human Resource Development Act  of  2003,  to  promote  HRD  needs  for  the
country. It comprises a 27 member council representing Labour, Business  and
the  Trade  Unions.  The  setting  up  of  the  HRDC  was  inspired  by  the
recommendations of the report  of  the  (International  Labour  organization
(ILO) Consultant on the National Integrated Training Strategy  (NITS).   The
mission is to  develop  institutional  synergies  for  an  integrated  Human
Resource Development Strategy.

Functions of HRDC
      - Advise the Minister on the formulation of HRD Policies and
        Strategies
      - Establish linkages between the education and training systems and
        the workplace.
      - Provide a forum for constant dialogue and consensus-building among
        stakeholders on all matters relating to HRD.
      - Take appropriate measures to reduce the mismatch between demand and
        supply of human resource.

Main projects of HRDC
    - Revised Levy/Grant Incentive Scheme
    - National Human Resource Development Plan (NHRDP)
    - Study on HRD in SMEs
    - Call Centre Operations
    - Empowering Women through promotion of leadership & entrepreneurial
      skills.

Overview of Mauritius education system

The University of Mauritius offers free  tuition  to  A+  student.  However,
adult learners do pay fees. In the University of  Technology  everyone  pays
fees.

The University of Mauritius also  welcomes  the  government’s  programme  of
renewed curriculum. The University is aware of the fact  that  the  mode  of
teaching has to be different as well. It is essential for achieving  quality
education. Therefore the review of teacher training programme  into  content
and quality of teaching, indicate  a  move  away  from  traditional  way  of
teaching. Thus it is important to have  clear  implementing  and  monitoring
mechanisms for teachers.

There have been concerns about the high failure rate at the end  of  primary
education cycle. The Ministry  identified  30  poor  performing  schools  in
deprived parts of the island to benefit from the  ZDP  Project  (project  on
infrastructure development of schools),  where  schools  are  provided  with
assistance. The government, through the partnerships with stakeholders,  has
developed mechanisms to redress the situation.  Each  of  the  schools  will
have four  programmes:  Infrastructural  support  (physical  refurbishment),
food supplementary  programme  for  learners,  health  school,  and  medical
scheme. Also, in order to improve  the  level  of  competency  of  teachers,
educators  are  taken  to  in-service  training,  especially  on  children’s
programmes. The partnership with the  department  works  through  the  Joint
Economic Council (consists of private companies). Issues are brought to  the
Ministry from the level below.

Even though education is free and compulsory, Mauritius has a high drop  out
rate in schools. In another survey conducted the Ministry wanted to  get  an
understanding of causes of this problem. The  government  contacted  members
of the public to come up  with  ideas  to  encourage  learners  to  come  to
schools. The social workers and  community  workers  are  also  involved  in
encouraging  learners  to  go  to  school.  The  ministry  is  underway   in
considering mechanisms for addressing the problem of drop outs. The  Parent-
Teachers-Association (PTSA) is also involved in  assisting  all  schools  to
trace learners who are out of school.

In terms of private education, Mauritius has legislated that  learners  from
grades one to three  cannot  be  offered  private  education.  Teachers  who
charge for private education are not controlled, so there are no  mechanisms
to determine their charges. These educators also do not pay  taxes  on  fess
paid for private tuition.
However at a primary level private education takes place within  the  school
premises and is optional. In the case of Secondary  education  parents  tend
to pay for private  tuition.  There  is  a  likelihood  that  this  parallel
education system will disappear. Government has taken a decision to do  away
with Community-Based Education (CBE).

The country has three foreign languages that are used  in  primary  schools,
Arabic, French and English. The law states that English and  French  are  to
be used as medium for instruction. However, in  the  first  three  years  of
primary school, learners are taught in their  mother  tongue  as  medium  of
instruction. In some cases, the use  of  English  as  official  language  is
permitted post the three years period.

   In 2005, the government conducted a  population  profile  to  assess  the
   curriculum needs of the people of Mauritius. The  following  issues  were
   investigated:
    - Profile of learners post 9 years of schooling.
    - Projection of the needs of the future.
    - Reinforce acquisition of foundation skills.
    - Whatever is examinable should  not  be  used  as  a  major  domain  of
      learning.
    - Profile of the teacher.
    - Core subjects/courses  taken up until age 16
    - This was followed by  evaluation,  which  provide  for  assessment  of
      learner acquisition.


   The scholar transport system of Mauritius was introduced in 2005; 75%  of
   learners travel by bus, it caters for  all  primary  secondary  and  post
   secondary school. The government has signed a Memorandum of Understanding
   (MoU) with the service provider. The Service provider is paid on  monthly
   basis. The students (post secondary) use student pass to travel only from
   home to university and back.

3.    List of Institutions visited

Meetings with Stakeholders
3.1   The Technical School Management Trust Fund (TSMTF)

The mission of TSMTF is to provide high quality and  up  to  date  technical
education to paraprofessionals in line with the  development  needs  of  the
republic of Mauritius and of the region.

The Fund provides training to young school leavers on a full-time basis  and
also training to in-service personnel of the private  /  public  firms.  The
Trust Fund offers three different types of  programmes,  namely  Long  Award
Courses, Short Award and part-time courses.

The Fund seeks to respond to the needs of both public and private  companies
to respond to further training needs of their personnel.  It  works  closely
with a network of trainers who continuously research  skills  shortages  and
gaps within the industries.

3.2   Meeting with Vice Chancellor, University of Mauritius (UoM)

Policy and Regulatory Framework
The Tertiary Education Commission Act was enacted in order to  regulate  the
Tertiary Education system in Mauritius. It came into effect in 1988 and  was
amended in 2005. The objectives of the Act are to:
    • Foster the development of post-secondary education in Mauritius
    • Promote and enhance quality assurance.
    •  Implement  the  regulatory  framework:    registration   of   private
      institutions  and  accreditation  of   their   programmes,   determine
      recognition and equivalence of qualifications, make recommendations to
      the Minister on applications received for the setting  up  of  private
      institutions, or branches, centres or campus of overseas institutions,
      and protect the term “University”.
    • Promote co-ordination  amongst  the  Tertiary  Education  Institutions
      (TEIs)
    • Allocate funds to the TEIs and ensure accountability.
    •  Advise  on  all   post-secondary   education   including   award   of
      scholarships.

 Future Scenario of Tertiary Education in Mauritius
    • Increasing demand
    • Shrinking role of government
    • Impact of technology on teaching and research – digital divide
    • Demand for international quality and standards from learners
    • Education is increasingly becoming a highly competitive business
    • Borderless education/new markets (suppliers and students)
    • Emergence of new types of institutions, new forms of competition,  new
      modes of operation and delivery and new opportunities from ICT.
    • Growing importance of Science & Technology
    • Competing demand for public funds – cost sharing
    • Better connect with business, commerce and industry
    • Pressures for reforms and structural changes
    • Rise in Community expectation
    • Increasing difficulty in attracting and retaining high calibre staff

3.3    Mauritius Qualifications Authority (MQA)

   Presented by Mr Kaylash Allgoo the Director, MQA


   The  vision  of  the  MQA  is  to  provide  valued   qualifications   for
   employability and lifelong learning.  This  will  be  done  by  continued
   enhancement of good practices & relevant expertise  to  safeguard  public
   interest in quality education & training.


   The objectives of MQA are to develop, implement and maintain  a  National
   Qualifications Framework. The Authority has  to  ensure  compliance  with
   provisions for registration and accreditation. Furthermore to ensure that
   standards and registered qualifications are internationally comparable.


   In response to its objectives, the MQA identified the  following  as  its
   functions:
         • To formulate and publish policies for registration of bodies for
           establishing national standards
         • To generate and register national standards for any occupation
         • To register and accredit training institutions
         • To approve /accredit training programmes and register trainers
         • To register qualifications.
         • To recognise  and  validate  competencies  outside  the   formal
           educational system
         •  To recognise and evaluate qualifications
         •  To recognise non-award courses
         •  To keep a database of learning accounts of Mauritians


In terms of Regional Protocol, Mauritius is a member  of  SADC  Protocol  on
Education & Training. The MQA is involved in processes of harmonisation  and
standardisation of education and training system in the region. The  country
has also participated in establishment of  a  SADC  Regional  Qualifications
Framework (RQF).


In line with the objectives of the Act,  MQA  has  formulated  a  number  of
policies. The Authority has relations with registrations of bodies that  are
responsible for  establishing  national  standards  and  qualifications  and
together with accreditation bodies who are responsible  for  monitoring  and
auditing such standards and qualifications.


Recognition of Prior Learning allows an  individual  to  obtain  credit  for
knowledge, skills and aptitudes acquired from previous study,  work  &  life
experience and even provide the opportunity to be more  mobile  through  the
framework and go up the levels.


They  have  links  with  Industry  led  Industrial  Training   Qualification
Syndicate  (ITQS), who advise and recommend to the Authority a framework  of
fields within the  sector  and  also  generate  unit  standards  within  the
sector. The Industry also abides by the decisions of the Authority  relating
to the development and implementation of the NQF.


In terms of Unit  Standards  and  Qualifications,  there  are  a  number  of
standards set for Qualification and Accreditation mechanisms. These  have  a
clear criteria set up for Registration  of  Training  Institutions  for  the
managers; Programme Officers; Trainers; mechanisms for approval  of  courses
and guidelines/criteria for Accreditation.


The delegation also learnt that the  Authority  was  instrumental  in  other
future Developments.
    • Marketing of the NQF – development of unit standards/qualifications in
      collaboration with the HRDC.
    • Establishment of Awarding Bodies –  policy  under  discussion  at  the
      level of the MQA Board.
    • Further development of RPL – policy already approved by the MQA Board.

The  Authority  would  like  to  share  ideas   with   the   South   African
Qualifications Authority (SAQA).

3.4   Industrial and Vocational Training Board (IVTB)

The IVTB operates under the Ministry of Education and  Human  Resources,  it
is mandated to improve  employability  and  work  performance  through  top-
quality training to different kinds of audiences.

The  IVTB  is  responsible  for  monitoring  the  needs  for   training   in
consultation with relevant  authorities.  Also  to  administer  and  operate
training schemes and impose or take any related  fees  or  charges.  Further
promoting and assisting in the training or  apprenticeship  of  persons  who
are or will be employed in commercial, technical and vocational field.

The delegation also got an opportunity to  tour  around  and  interact  with
educators and students from different IVTB centres which  provide  different
programmes in Automation, telecommunications, Graphic &  multimedia,  Art  &
Design as well as the Fashion & textile Design.

3.5   The Pre-school Trust Fund (PSTF)

The meeting took place at D. Basant Rai Pre-primary School Unit in La  Rosa,
New Grove.  The  Chairman  of  PSTF  gave  a  background  on  the  role  and
objectives of the Pre-school Fund.

The Fund falls under the Government Directorate. It is still  at  foundation
phase and has not yet been legislated. It  covers  children  from  3-5  year
band. The Pre School Fund is an implementing Agency, and is  guided  by  Act
41 of 1984. It receives funding from the private sector in return  for  free
tax rebate. It is governed by the norms and standards, as  is  the  case  in
South Africa. The Fund receives 16% of the grant  from  government  and  the
84% is given to  the  private  sector.  This  translates  to  2%  grant  for
learners.  All teachers are trained and recruited from  the  pool  of  those
who have been trained. The remaining number is employed by private  schools,
they also  receive  grant  from  the  government.   The  Fund  is  also  the
regulator of the primary education system.

In terms of history of pre-schooling in Mauritius, for the  past  30  years,
pre-schooling was provided  for  by  the  private  sector,  yet  each  child
receives 200 rupees per month from the government.

In order to improve the standard & quality of  teaching  provided,  in  2005
the government gave each pre-school 10 000  rupees  to  upgrade  themselves.
When  recruiting  educators,  emphasis  is  on  experience,  aptitude  test,
academic qualification and language. The teaching methods  are  informed  by
the Convention of the Rights of the Child. To encourage the  involvement  of
parents in their education, parents are encouraged to  participate  in  food
programme, and the preparation of learning aids. They  are  also  encouraged
to accompany their learners to school activities.

Research has shown that in Mauritius importance is attached  to  pre-primary
education. In order  to  make  pre-primary  education  accessible  to  every
child, specific measures have been taken along various  lines.  Children  in
the age group 4 to 5 receive a per capita grant.  Standards  and  guidelines
have been developed to ensure that the physical environment  of  the  school
is  pleasant  to  allow  the  child  to  develop  fully,  both   physically,
emotionally and mentally. The involvement of the community in the  field  of
education in Mauritius has the consequence of an  increase  of  pressure  on
schools to perform better and thus putting much effort  to  bridge  the  gap
between these two categories of schools, those who  perform  very  well  and
those that perform badly.

   6. Accreditation Syndicate (Equivalent to our SAQA in South Africa)

The   Syndicate   encourages   best   performing    learners    from    star
colleges/schools to attend National Colleges. The  Syndicate  organises  all
examinations and also processes  the  admission  of  learners  to  colleges.
Their certificates are accredited by  Cambridge  University.  The  Mauritius
University  prepares  the  syllabus  in  collaboration  with  the  Cambridge
University. Each year about 30 000 students sit for examinations.

Each year, 15 students from the College  qualify  for  scholarship  and  are
offered the opportunity to further their studies  at  Cambridge  University.
The previous government had put an end  to  scholarship  because;  this  was
seen to encourage  elitism  among  the  nationalists.   However  the  recent
government is seen to be encouraging the learners to study further and  they
offer scholarships to 15 boys and girls to  further  their  studies  at  the
University.

The National College is considered to accept those who  have  been  accepted
and are considered to be less performing. The challenge is  that  about  40%
of learners do not succeed grade  11  and  this  is  seen  as  a  matter  of
concern.

The Minister of Education is of  the  view  that  he  should  do  away  with
examinations, which reflects those who fail,  but  encourage  assessment  on
academic grounds. In a study conducted in 2005, 30 000  candidates  set  for
exams through to star colleges and 9 000 set  for  school  certificate.  The
findings however, were taken after two years  after  the  examinations  were
conducted.

In terms of the trends  for  qualifications,  the  pass  rate  for  National
Examination (grade 8) is 65% each year, 35% get the second opportunity,  out
of which 30% of them pass through. The 5% of them follow the  pre-vocational
stream of education until they reach grade 11.

On the other hand, the qualification trend for the  IVTB  Programmes  has  a
75% successful rate and the learners graduate with Higher  Certificate.  The
government however, would like to attract  more  students  to  Universities.
There are also considerations of introducing new techniques  for  evaluating
learners.

   7. Mauritius Examinations Syndicate (MES) ( Equivalent to Umalusi )

The MES ensures that examinations are maintained in  view  of  international
recognition. In the conduct of examinations, it provides  a  high  level  of
confidentiality and security, so vital for  strengthening  confidence  among
users of its service and public in general.

The following were identified as some of the challenges for  the  Syndicate,
which were being  considered:  localisation  of  examinations  at  Secondary
level, introduction of schools based assessments,  recording  and  reporting
children’s achievements, assessment and accreditation of competences.

In order to address the challenge of tempering  with  question  papers,  the
MES decided to have the question papers for CPE  moderated  and  printed  in
the UK.

The exam papers are kept in the tamper-evident envelopes and then stored  in
a strong room secured by three locks,  which  are  held  by  three  separate
persons. It is of importance that each time the room is  opened,  all  three
persons are present. Also services of the private security guards  are  used
to monitor the premises over 24 hours.

In terms of  security  for  examinations,  there  are  strict  measures  and
mechanisms that are followed for accessing all examination  papers.  On  the
examination day, policemen have  control  over  access  to  CPE  examination
centres and their presence is required on receipt,  opening  and  return  of
question paper bags. These are kept under lock  and  key  in  the  Presiding
Invigilator’s room. Officers of the  MES  inspect  examination  centres  and
report to the Director through the CPE Section.

3.8   Mauritius Institute of Education (MIE)

The delegation was met by Prof V K  P  Parmessur  and  his  management.  The
meeting shared information on the role and functions of the Institute.

It was set up by an Act  of  Parliament  in  1973,  and  is  an  Institution
dedicated  to  teacher  education,  research  in  education  and  curriculum
development.
Initially it was responsible for training  the  senior  secondary  educators
and later included all primary school and teaching  and  management.  It  is
the only institute in the country that provides expertise on  education  and
training.
The Institute acts as a professional unit for  planning  and  monitoring  of
education policies. It focuses on Curriculum development  for  learners.  It
focuses in education  research,  developing  distance  education  materials.
This was to ensure that there is consistency in lesson delivery amongst  all
the schools that are involved in e-learning projects. Also to  identify  the
challenges where they exist and to develop mechanisms to combat them.

The MIE  has  links  with  various  institutions  worldwide  on  matters  of
research and training programmes. The Institute has signed a  Memorandum  of
Understanding (MoU) with India, to set up e-networking.

The Institute was instrumental in  holding  a  3  day  workshop,  to  enable
teachers to gain better understanding and to share knowledge and  skills  on
ICT related matters.

3.9   Royal College Curepipe (Secondary School)

The delegation was received by the Rector (Principal) Mrs  H  B  Nabheebucus
and her management. The management welcomed the proposed  reforms  mentioned
by the Minister of Education and considered them as long overdue.

The College admits only the best ranked students’ from Primary  Schools,  it
is considered as the jewel in the crown of the public  education  sector  of
the island. It has a prestigious status and plays  a  leading  role  in  the
Mauritian Society.

The system was explained as follows:

At the end of their fifth year (form 5) at school, students sit  for  School
Examination (O-levels)  as  per  the  University  of  Cambridge  Examination
Syndicate.  Normally eight subjects are taken by  each  pupil  and  a  grade
will be attributed to each. The best grade an “A” is called a distinction.

During the last two years called the  Lower  Six  and  Upper  Six,  students
prepare for the Higher School Examination (A-levels) also organized  by  the
University  of  Cambridge  Examination  Syndicate.  They  study  three  main
subjects and two subsidiary ones- of which General paper (English  language)
is compulsory. The examination is carried out at the end of their last  year
at school and the results are due in February of the following year.

The academic year starts in January and ends in  November,  and  is  further
broken down into three terms. During the first two terms small  class  tests
are carried out while a final examination is conducted at  the  end  of  the
third term. During Form 5 and Upper Six these  end  of  school  examinations
are replaced by the University of Cambridge Examinations.  All  results  are
determined and ranked according to A–level specifications.

3.10  Technical School Management Trust Fund (TSMTF)


The Manager of the Fund, Mr Bramdeo Lotun gave a brief overview on the role
and objectives of the Fund.


As a way of addressing skills shortage in MRU, technical schools  are  aimed
at  offering  programmes  that  are  responsive  to  industry   needs.   The
government of Mauritius decided to expand Technical  and  Further  Education
and the (TSMTF) was set up in 1994  under  the  Ministry  of  Education  and
Scientific Research to manage Institutes of Technical and Further  Education
in Mauritius.

The Institute was set up with the sole objective  of  training  students  as
technicians,  who will operate at middle management  level  in  the  service
sector of the economy and progressively constitute the bulk of the  manpower
needed for the high value added tertiary sector.

This close relationship is evident in South Africa,  through  FET  Colleges,
industries  further  assist  in  ensuring  that   students   take   relevant
programmes that get them to employment market.

The committee noted with  concern  the  lack  of  women/female  students  at
technical schools taking industrial programmes.  The  gender  imbalance  was
noted evident amongst both teaching staff and students. It  was  noted  that
out of 380 students only 2 females have qualified.

3.11  University of Technology, Mauritius (UTM)
The delegation was received by the Director  General,  Prof.  Peter  Stephen
Coupe who gave an overview of the institution.
The University of Technology, Mauritius Act was proclaimed on June  2000.The
initial phase of the project consisted in the merging of the MIPAM  and  the
SITRAC Ltd. These three Schools, namely School of Business  Informatics  and
Software Engineering, School of Public  Sector  Policy  and  Management  and
School  of  Sustainable  Development  Science   became   operational   since
September 2000.
The University of Technology, Mauritius has the determination to become  one
of the leading tertiary education institutions of the  region.  The  aim  of
this University is to provide a wide range of students with  acquisition  of
knowledge and skills to be able to make  future  professional  contributions
in various key sectors of the socio-economic and  technological  advancement
of Mauritius.

The objectives of UTM are as follows:
    • To admit students with a range of entry qualification and academic and
      professional experience
    • To deliver programmes which can be entered  and  exited  at  different
      levels
    • To cooperate with  government  and  business  in  developing  lifelong
      learning, research and consultancy
    • To promote entrepreneurship and complete education amongst students
    • To build up and develop full-time staff of high calibre.
    • To help students benefit from a physical  environment  appropriate  to
      their development.

The UTM is different from other institutions because of certain aspects.  It
works closely with employers in industry, commerce and government bodies  in
designing its Bachelor and masters degrees in both the academic content  and
their professional applicability. This has resulted in 90% of UTM  graduates
being employed shortly after graduation.

The UTM is also working with employers to develop entrepreneurial  attitudes
amongst its students such that, on graduation,  an  increasing  number  will
develop their own small  to  medium  enterprises  and  offer  employment  to
others and help Mauritius develop its economy. Many of the  employer  inputs
is largely from part-time lecturers  and  employers,  who  bring  up-to-date
case studies and entrepreneurial attitudes through their teachings.

4.    Observations
   i) Examination Centre


As a way of ensuring quality  education,  MRU  offers  examinations  through
national assessment of learners in grades 11 to  12.   South  Africa  should
consider introducing national examination at grade 9, at end  of  compulsory
stage of education and thereafter at matric.


  ii) Pre-schools


Every learner of the age group zero to five  years  receives  a  grant  from
government  to  access  pre-schools.  In  the  South  African  context,  the
children of the age group  0-14  years  from  poor  families  receive  child
support grant.


The system of education on MRU, offers 6 years  primary  education,  5-years
secondary and 2 as part of secondary for those who have failed grade 8.  The
1st primary phase- if you fail as a leaner you are expected  to  go  through
the vocational system =  3  years  pre-vocational,  where  learners  receive
skills.  It  is  important  that  to  note  that  there  are   disadvantages
associated with this system. In South  Africa  the  system  does  not  allow
failure twice in a given phase, if so the  learner  is  promoted.  Mauritius
promotes teacher training and quality education and these are entrenched  in
their programmes. There are programmes for poor performing schools.

 iii) Rajiv Ghandi Science Centre
The Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre is a non-formal educational institution  for
the promotion of science and technology among students and  members  of  the
public. The first of its kind in this region, the centre operates under  the
aegis of the Ministry of Education and Human Resources of  the  Republic  of
Mauritius.
The Centre offers an opportunity to students and members of  the  public  an
opportunity to interact and find out how science helps to better  understand
the world and how technology could be used to improve lives.
South Africa has  similar  centres  but  these  are  not  well  utilised  by
students and members of the public. The Science Centres need to be  marketed
vigorously  to  educators  and  learners,  and  that  students   should   be
encouraged to use these for their projects.

5.    Lessons Learnt

   a) The country has mechanisms for children from poor  social  backgrounds
      especially for the low performing schools.
   b) The Mauritius Institute of Education compared to  University  Colleges
      of Education can be a useful method of ensuring good quality education
      for teachers.
   c) The MIE offers training for Managers  of  education,  inspectors,  and
      Circuit managers and also encourages educators to be involved. In  the
      case of South Africa, it is proposed that  the  Universities  are  not
      detached from development. The education faculty should take  part  in
      curriculum development. This will enable them to teach new  curriculum
      at Universities.
   d)  The  Certificate  management  Course  for   training   of   managers,
      Principals, Circuit Managers. Our faculties of Education should  offer
      similar programmes of leadership and development of Managers.
   e) Parents through SGB should be  encouraged  to  participate  in  school
      activities and also ensure professionalism amongst educators.
   f) The contribution to eNepad programme through e-schools.
   g) South Africa should consider introducing the practice of involving the
      industry in offering programmes  in  Universities  of  Technology,  in
      order to enhance programmes with entrepreneurial flair, as is the case
      with FET Colleges.



Though Mauritius has through lessons from other  countries  developed  their
tertiary education sector, the biggest problem  that  even  the  first-world
economies face, is simply who pays for the nation’s education system.

Vote of thanks

The delegation extends appreciation to the support given by the  Speaker  of
the National Assembly, the Mauritius Department of Education  and  the  High
Commissioner for making our study tour the most memorable one.

Report to be considered.


