---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 September 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-09-05
---

WEDNESDAY, 05 SEPTEMBER 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag sal voorstel:

   Dat die Raad kennis neem dat -

   (1)      die Matthew Goniwe Behuisingsprojek in die Nelson Mandela Metro
        skouspelagtig misluk het;


   (2)      van die beplande 2 000 huise slegs ongeveer 400 voltooi is;


   (3)      die projek al vir die afgelope ses jaar voortploeter;
   (4)      tenders aan vyf kontrakteurs toegestaan is wat nie die nodige
        opleiding of ondervinding het nie;


   (5)      oorstroming van die halfvoltooide huise daagliks plaasvind en;


     6) in die proses belastingbetalers duisende rande verloor en dat mense
        nog steeds in plakkerskampe moet woon.


Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of the House:

   That the Council notes that –

   (1)      the Matthew Goniwe Housing Project in the Nelson Mandela Metro
        has failed spectacularly;


   (2)      of the planned 2 000 houses, only 400 have been completed;


   (3)      the project has been plodding on for the last six years;


   (4)      tenders have been allocated to five contractors who do not have
        the necessary training or experience;


   (5)      flooding of the half-finished houses takes place daily; and


   (6)      taxpayers lose thousands of rands in the process and that people
        still have to live in squatter camps.]

I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There is again a problem with interpretation
up there. Could the staff please look into that? Any further notices of
motion? We proceed to motions without notice. Hon Priscilla Themba.

                        CELEBRATIONS OF WOMEN’S MONTH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move a motion without notice:

   That the Council –

     1) notes –

          a) the vibrant activities that were held by women throughout
             South Africa in celebration of women’s month during the month
             of August; and


          b) that this year’s central focus was commemorating women’s
             historical contributions to the liberation of our country and
             to further give voice to the challenges that many women are
             still facing;

     2) acknowledges the role of women in taking this opportunity to
        articulate the appalling experiences and conditions that they
        endured under the inhumanity of apartheid;


     3) recognises that -

          a) women in South Africa have played an important role in the
             liberation struggle as members of the national democratic
             revolution and allied organisations, as trade unionists and in
             their capacity as mothers of the nation; and


          b) many women suffered restriction, imprisonment, torture and
             even brutal assassination by the racist regime; and


   (4)      calls upon all the women of South Africa to continue their quest
        to ensure a better quality of  life  in  our  country  and  to  work
        tirelessly to redress the legacy of apartheid, underdevelopment  and
        abuse in our communities.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Gift Mpho Leremi)

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I want to move without notice:


   That the Council -

            1) notes –


        (a) with profound sadness and loss the sudden departure in a car
             accident of Gift Mpho Leremi on Monday, 3 September 2007;

        (b) that Leremi, a fierce midfielder and a living epitome and
             embodiment of the country’s rich soccer talent, won four caps
             for the national team and played for the under-23 national
             squad; and


          c) that he spent most of his soccer life at Orlando Pirates and
             recently moved to Mamelodi Sundowns;


     2) takes this sad moment to convey its profound condolences to the
        Leremi family, his two daughters, the soccer fraternity,
        particularly the fans of Mamelodi Sundowns and Orlando Pirates, as
        well as the people of South Africa for their loss; and


     3) remembers, when a young talent dies, the words of the poet Thomas
        Gray in the poem “Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard”:

          Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
          The dark unfathom’d caves of ocean bear:
          Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
          And waste its sweetness on the desert air.

        May his soul rest in peace


        God bless!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL REVIEW

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, accountability is what sets apart successful
democracies from failed ones. Democracies the world over are as good as the
institutions that make them up. Yes, democracies succeed or fail because
the institutions that constitute their life-blood either work or fail to
work. While the regular holding of elections is an essential ingredient for
democracy, it is by no means sufficient to ensure that democracy is
deepened and its benefits are enjoyed by all citizens.

As South Africans, our endeavour to deepen democracy must entail deliberate
and concerted efforts to strengthen our institutions of democracy. And we
must start here in this House. We must start by strengthening the oversight
capacity of Parliament by enabling it to hold all those entrusted with the
responsibility of using public resources for the creation of a better life
for all to account for what they do.

Timely availability of reliable information on the delivery of basic
services is an essential tool for exercising oversight. Today I have
pleasure in tabling the Provincial Budgets and Expenditure Review -
formerly called the Intergovernmental Fiscal Review - which sets out trends
in provincial spending and budgets for a seven-year period: 2003-04 to 2009-
10. In other words, this document will cover that period from the year
before the last elections right up until 31 March 2010.

Let me remind this House that we do this because we appreciate its
contribution in empowering you, the elected representatives, to hold us,
the executive, to account for the resources you have allocated to our
respective departments to use for the betterment of the lives of our
people, and not because there is any legal obligation on us to publish this
document.

During budget debates Ministers and MECs make wonderful promises. By so
doing we enter into "contracts" with Parliament and legislatures to deliver
services to the citizens. Surely, Parliament is the House that allocates
resources to the three spheres of government through the Division of
Revenue Act – and this is the epicentre. This is the place that allocates
nationally raised revenues to other spheres of government. Because of that
this House must know what the money buys across all spheres of government.

This review places hon members in a position to assess more effectively the
progress we are making towards progressively realising the social and
economic rights enshrined in the Bill of Rights. Moreover, it enables you
to determine whether we are making good progress towards effecting equity
and equality in the delivery of services to our people. Do feel free to ask
tough questions where you detect failure from whoever is charged with the
responsibility to execute their public mandate. We should not mask the fact
that achieving our developmental agenda is not an easy task. Our people
deserve honesty.

While our fiscal policy stance has adjusted from time to time, we remain
focused on providing more resources to fund the services that are vital in
bringing about positive change to the lives of our people: School
education, health, social welfare services, housing and also a range of
services such as water, sanitation, electrification as well as roads and
the built environment more generally.

Under a carefully managed expansionary fiscal stance, public spending has
been growing at about 8,4% a year in real terms since 2003-04, faster than
growth and population size – making more money available to spend on public
services. And this is then the measure. We have seen countries that are
barely able to grow their spending at the same rate as the population
because that merely leaves you in the same place. If we grow our spending
at the same rate at which the economy grows we will be doing quite well.
But we can do all of that and go over and above that. And therefore the
quantity and quality of services ought to also improve concomitantly.

The real test is in our ability to take advantage of the expanded fiscal
envelope to accelerate the process of measuring improvement on the quality
of life of our people. Parliament must keep the executive focused on the
attainment of the commitments we made in the People's Contract. This is
what the people who elected us expect, and this is what we must deliver.

The review we are tabling before you today is important because it is a
measure of whether the policy objectives we set three years ago have been
achieved. It lays the basis for agreement on areas that might require
review and refocus. It provides Parliament with the information it needs to
engage the executive on the effectiveness of our policies. Where we detect
inadequacies we must be bold enough to change direction.

When members examine the trends in this review they will notice that
spending has increased across all sectors. The social services programmes
which include education, health and social welfare services have been
growing quite strongly.

Fuelled by robust growth in national transfers to provinces, total
provincial education expenditure grew at 5,3 percent above inflation
between 2003-04 and 2009-10. It is not an accident that, today, education
spending is the largest item on the Budget.

Between 2003-04 and 2006-07 government has built 407 new schools and over
18 000 classrooms. The numbers of learners enrolling for matriculation have
risen, and so have the numbers that pass the matriculation examination.
Provincial reports also indicate the increased participation rate among
female children that stood at 98% in 2006, up from 93% in 2003. This lays a
solid basis for empowering our women leaders of tomorrow.

The no-fee schools policy introduced last year covers 13 912 schools
benefiting about five million learners. This goes a long way towards
further improving access to education and thus realising the constitutional
right of access to a basic education. In the current financial year R3
billion is budgeted for the implementation of no-fee schools.

We have also invested R520 million in the re-equipment and refurbishment of
further education and training institutions in the past two years. The
investment is promising good returns. Enrolments in the fields of
engineering and science are rising. This will make a dent in the skills
shortages in these areas.

We should derive some encouragement from the positive trends that are
emerging from interventions such as the Dinaledi Schools initiative which
promotes mathematics and science education. Pass rates in these schools are
higher. So we should look at expanding this kind of initiative.

In spite of all these notable accomplishments, we all should not hide from
the tough challenges that we still face. If we compare South Africa with
countries like India, Turkey and Chile, the value per rand invested in
education is less than the equivalent value obtained in these other
countries. Further, the senior certificate pass rate has declined from
70,7% in 2004 to 66,6% in 2006.

We should also note that an even harder challenge is whether those passing
matric are also equipped to find jobs or further their education. As a
country we should take collective responsibility to support the education
sector in its endeavour to address the curriculum content and quality
challenges we face and improve links with out-of-school training. That is
in chapter 2 of the document and I think there is a wealth of information
that should certainly occupy the minds of hon members here this afternoon.

Turning to the Health chapter - health expenditure has been growing by
about R3 billion a year above inflation since 2003-04. With strong growth
sustained over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, per capita spending
per uninsured person is projected to reach R500 per family per month by
2009-10. Let me just explain. The only way in which we can measure it,
Chairperson, is to distinguish the hon members here and their families who
are members of Parmed. So, people who have medical aid have to be excluded.
So, when we measure, we exclude that and that is almost 20% of the
population. So, our spending only looks at the remaining 80%. It is trying
to get that right.

We have also stepped up investment in health infrastructure. This has
facilitated refurbishment and rehabilitation of 40 hospitals across the
nine provinces. The health sector is also a place where you will find good
examples of how government can join hands with the private sector to
accelerate delivery. The world-class Inkosi Albert Luthuli Hospital in
KwaZulu-Natal is a very good example of a public-private partnership.
Primary health care has been considerably strengthened with the policy
objectives of government in bringing services to where people live.
Accordingly, primary health care recorded 20 million more patient visits a
year than eight years ago. It is very high in numbers: It is twenty million
more than eight years ago. Those recorded visitors might not be to some of
the clinics that the hon Ralane knows about, Chair, but these are actually
recorded visits to clinics where there are doctors, nurses and medicines.
We leave that discussion for another time.

Our interventions through the scarce skills and rural allowances are also
showing good results. Since 2004 the health sector has been able to employ
31 710 additional health care workers and 7 000 of these are professionals.

Provincial reports also confirm that the health sector is implementing a
systematic and comprehensive response to HIV and Aids. Under the auspices
of the national strategic plan approximately 264 000 persons were on
treatment at the start of the current financial year, up from about 143 000
just 12 months earlier. So, that is almost a doubling of the programme. It
is anticipated that the number of people on treatment will certainly exceed
300 000 by 31 March 2008. The sector is budgeting to have over 600 000
persons on treatment by 2010.

So, the policy commitments we have made with respect to health are funded.
I say this not to suggest that our health system does not face challenges.
The emergence of multi-drug resistant and extreme-drug resistant strains of
tuberculosis is an enormous challenge. But this is not unique to South
Africa. It is a worldwide challenge. These strains of TB kill about 1,7
million people across the world each year. Notwithstanding these challenges
and the mobility of restoring it, our health system is on a sound footing,
but we need to stay on the course with the interventions.

In respect then of social welfare services, following the shifting of the
social security grants administration from the provinces to the SA Social
Security Agency, provincial social development departments have been able
to focus on the remaining social welfare and development services. Combined
social welfare services budgets more than doubled over the seven years
covered in this review. They grew from R2 billion to R5,6 billion, though,
as a share of total provincial budgets, this function remains modest in its
importance for the wellbeing of the aged, vulnerable children and persons
with disabilities.

We cannot sufficiently emphasise the need to get services to the more
vulnerable in society. Some of it is done directly by the provincial
departments of social development, but a fair amount of it is delivered by
nongovernmental organisations which are funded through the budgets of the
provincial departments. That is what we have got to get right to get a good
measure of the extent to which these services can be, but we find in
chapter 4 interesting stories for incidents in respect of the aged, Chair.
The distribution of old-age homes, for instance, is very uneven across the
provinces. Why is that? Might it be sociological? Might it be that some
families prefer the aged to stay with the family and in other communities
the aged go and stay in homes?

But what is – I think that part of the inquiry that we would like to invite
this House to undertake is into questions like that. I think certainly we
want to ensure that others get the necessary support. Are we doing
sufficient in that space between schools for learners with special needs
and people who are disabled and then need a different kind of education? We
want to invite this House – members of this House – in their engagement
with the provincial legislature to talk, because there is now some
information and we need to take it to the next phase. So, the strong
projected growth in the combined provincial growth budget for the social
welfare sector is certainly exceeding the ... [Inaudible.]

If we look at other provincial functions: over the period covered by this
review, the provinces are increasing their budgets for "other" provincial
functions, from R31,4 billion in 2003 to R69,8 billion by 31 March 2010.
That is more than the doubling of budget. This includes a very substantial
investment in roads and public buildings, but the investment also includes
the productive capacity of the facilities through which public services are
delivered.

Housing remains a critical component of provincial nonsocial services
expenditure. To date government has spent a cumulative amount of R40
billion on the housing programme. Over three million housing subsidies have
been approved over the same period. In the period ahead, we need to narrow
the gap between subsidies issued and actual houses constructed, for only
when subsidies are converted to homes shall we succeed in making a dent in
the housing backlog. Parliament and provincial legislatures must play a
vigorous role to ensure that houses actually get built; that we can deal
with this problem of blocked projects. The numbers are published in the
document here and we must ensure that these houses are built as quickly as
possible. Municipal councillors surely should also play a greater role in
ensuring the quality of the houses being built. Our submission would be
that it is exceedingly unfair for people who are in need of housing to be
put in houses where you haven’t even had a building inspector examine the
quality of the house that’s been built. We shouldn’t be doing things like
that, because we are harming the poor and that’s, I think, the inquiry that
a document like this in its chapter on housing would like to invite hon
members to undertake. Look at chapter 5; try and understand; fill it with
your own observations about the houses that you visit in your own
constituencies and then write the report so that Parliament can be informed
so that we can adjust our policies going forward.
With regard to resource allocation in the context of the intergovernmental
system, one of the major successes of our democracy has been the creation
of the system of intergovernmental relations founded on the principle of co-
operative governance. This system has matured over the years and I think is
serving us well. But it would be remiss of me to pretend that the system is
perfect. In this regard, I want to touch on areas in which our co-operative
governance arrangements could be improved.

The efficacy of any intergovernmental system depends on its ability to
foster strong linkages between policy-making and resource allocation. Our
intergovernmental system is predicated on the view that Cabinet decides the
vertical split of nationally raised revenue between the three spheres. We
arrive at the vertical division of revenue after a thoroughgoing
consultative process, which takes into account future priorities and the
capacity of each sphere to raise its own revenue.

The hon Ralane sits with us and observes what we do so that we don’t do
anything in secret. The other person who sits with us is the hon Ganief.
[Interjections.] No not ... [Laughter.] Chairperson, I think some people
are missing the Lotto and now they are taking chances elsewhere.
[Laughter.]

We then apply a revenue-sharing formula which seeks to redistribute the
share allocated to the provincial sphere to enable provinces that inherited
areas that were previously neglected to equalise their spending. This is
something that the FFC has close oversight over. Look at the report of the
FFC and that is what they are trying to do to ensure that we do not favour
one province over the other.

Would it be unreasonable then to ask this House, as the institution charged
with looking after the interests of provinces, to monitor whether we are
succeeding in achieving inter- and intra-provincial equity in the delivery
of services? For our part as National Treasury we undertake a very thorough
benchmarking exercise of each province's budget against the national
priorities and funding norms where these exist. We send these very smart
people to go and visit the provinces and try to get a sense. Take for
instance the Dinaledi Schools. We will be able to see very quickly if this
function is underfunded. They then advise the director-general, who will
advise me. We talk to the MEC, and they will leave behind a very detailed
report.

Sometimes the provinces tell us to stay out of their business, and battles
ensue. There are instances such as when my colleague, Minister Pandor,
would say: “It looks like that province is underfunding a policy direction
that we have taken.” We don’t always get it right, but we try to do it in a
way to ensure that we can improve on the alignment between the three
spheres of government. We do so understanding that the allocations remain
the responsibility of the Provincial Executives and MECs of Finance and
they must place that before the provincial legislatures and have their
budgets approved there, because Provincial Appropriation Acts are Acts of
the provincial legislatures, but we can try and we do try to influence the
process.

I do hold the view that this House, the NCOP, has a very important
oversight role to play because you can take the helicopter view, as they
say; you can look from above and then assess the picture province by
province, allocation by allocation. If you look at chapter 8 of this
document, which deals with the trends in provincial allocations and all of
the tables that follow, you will be able to see that the attempt is there,
but it is putting power in the hands of the NCOP to delegate this. I am
appealing through you, Chairperson, to this House to find a way of staying
engaged in the Budget process beyond the passing of the Division of Revenue
Bill.

Let me conclude by reminding members of three issues that were previously
raised in the 10th anniversary of the NCOP conference: First is the need to
examine how we redesign our intergovernmental system, such as the link
between how policy-making, on the one hand, and the budgeting
implementation, on the other hand, is strengthened. This is important for
concurrent functions. The economists always serve on the one hand and the
other one holds the hands together with one hand. One holds one view of
budgeting and the other of actual outcomes together; mostly the party
politics of South Africa in the NCOP is a very important part of that.

The second area relates to the assignment of powers and functions across
the spheres. Our Constitution states that a function must be assigned to
the sphere that can deliver it more effectively. We give all provinces the
same functions in the hope that they will be able to deliver them equally
effectively in each of the nine provinces. The review of the
intergovernmental system presents a unique opportunity to move functions
around to meet the criterion of that institution, that part of government
best capable of delivering service.

Finally, I raised the issue of accountability and oversight, again in
respect of concurrent functions. I said "the policy process on the system
of provincial and local government" that has been instituted by my
colleague Minister Mufamadi is a step in the right direction, and I want to
urge members to participate fully in the process as it is central to the
work of this House and the functioning of our democracy. I’m sure if I woke
any member of this House, including your good self, sir, at 3am tomorrow
morning and I asked you to name 20 of Minister Mufamadi’s 65 questions,
every member of this House will be able at least to raise the questions. We
would have memorised them because we are busy working on the answers.

This House has an important role to play in the purview of
intergovernmental relations and I endorse the approach taken by Minister
Mufamadi to float the questions, to invite the responses, to write the
paper and to make policy suggestions arising from that important process.
We shouldn’t ever underestimate the valued judgments that can emanate from
individuals and members of this House and collectives in this House. As I
said in the beginning, without accountability there can be no democracy.
The provincial budgets and expenditure review is a very important part of
the accountability of government for your money raised and allocated by the
legislative document. I commend the document tabled here and I ask that we
be advised of the outcome of the evaluation by the National Council of
Provinces. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you very much, Minister. We are not
going to debate the statement by the Minister today. He has tabled the
document, but can I urge all the chairpersons of committees to take the
document and go back to your different committees and study it.

We had a workshop yesterday; you went into depth in the discussion of those
issues raised in the document. Let’s use that document as a tool for
playing an oversight function. The Minister is quite correct, we do get
these challenges when we go down, but what I can say to you is that we have
work to do and we have got to perform the job.
That is my invitation to the chairpersons of committees, all of you, under
the guidance of the House Chairperson dealing with oversight functions.
Perhaps you may want to get a report also as this House as to what has
happened in those committees in terms of the information that we heard in
this hour. We will make the report about the debate in this House. Thank
you very much.

                  EXPENDITURE REPORT FOURTH QUARTER 2006-07

             (Consideration of Report of Joint Budget Committee)

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister and my colleagues, I feel
honoured to table the expenditure report for the fourth quarter of the
financial year ending in March 2007 in this session of the NCOP. On behalf
of the Joint Budget Committee, the report was published in the ATC on 18
June this year.

This report before Parliament is consistent with the terms of reference of
the Joint Budget Committee. In terms of our reference, the Joint Budget
Committee is required to monitor, on a quarterly basis, the actual revenue
and expenditure incurred by the national department and provinces. The
purpose of this monitoring exercise is to ascertain that the patterns of
spending are consistent with budgets of both the national and the
provincial departments.

My colleagues are reminded that this monitoring exercise affords tangible
opportunity to visualise the purpose of our Parliament - to build an
effective People’s Parliament, responsive to the needs of our people and
driven by the idea of concretising a better quality of life for all people
of South Africa. The Joint Budget Committee is aware that this in-year
monitoring exercise is crucial to ensuring that prompt detection of the
slightest discrepancy in spending obviates further derailment of service.

Increased volume of service, promptly delivered, is a major contribution to
our pursuit of a better life for all. It is our obligation to work
untiringly in order to ensure that obstacles to delivery are removed. The
crucial message is that we must do better. Government comprises numerous
departments each with its specific functions, objectives and
responsibilities.

For sure, the national Budget helps us to ensure that public resources are
allocated in accordance with the national priorities that maximise welfare.
But, this does not guarantee that our actual expenditure aligns with
declared objectives crucial to the strategic plans of national departments.
It must be emphasised that it is not the task of National Treasury to
monitor departmental spending. The Treasury may compel departments to align
their strategic plans and budgets, but it is the NCOP and members of the
public who are in the best position to question actual performance in order
to ensure that government departments have in actual fact delivered.
All departments spent almost R261 billion in the financial year ending
March 2007. Departments have underspent 1,98% of their total budgets. The
report notes the following: The Department of Home Affairs received six
consecutive qualified audits by the Auditor-General; and that the bucket
system is still in common use and the current backlog is approximately 118
000 units. The department aims to eliminate this practice altogether by
December 2007.

The Joint Budget Committee recommends the following: Firstly, that the term
“savings”, which is used to describe under-expenditure and lack of
spending, must be revisited - the co-operation of National Treasury is
earnestly required; secondly, National Treasury in consultation with the
JBC, should revise the content of section 32 reports, published in terms of
the Public Finance Management Act, to include additional details of
departmental expenditure; and lastly, lack of research capacity in
Parliament compromises effective and efficient oversight. The committee
recommends that Parliament should expand its research capacity.

Therefore, on behalf of the committee, I recommend approval of this report.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question. The question is
that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all the
delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.
Are all the delegation heads present? Are you alive, or are you not here?
[Interjections.] Are you present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I
shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must
please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Eastern Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: Free State votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Siyavuma. [We support.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re a e thekga. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the report agreed to, in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
              HEARINGS OF JUSTICE AND PROTECTION CLUSTER, 2006

             (Consideration of Report of Joint Budget Committee)

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put
the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I
shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must
please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Eastern Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: Free State supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ha seketela. [Limpopo supports it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the report agreed to, in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

          THIRD QUARTER NATIONAL EXPENDITURE 2006-07 FINANCIAL YEAR

             (Consideration of Report of Joint Budget Committee)

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put
the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I
shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must
please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSEN: Eastern Cape supports.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: Free State supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ha seketela. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the report agreed to, in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                          BUDGET ANALYSIS WORKSHOP

             (Consideration of Report of Joint Budget Committee)

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put
the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are you all present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to do so? We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I
shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must
please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: Free State supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?
Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ha seketela. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Siyayivuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the report agreed to, in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 14:49.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          WEDNESDAY, 22 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bill passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 21 August 2007:


         (a)     Health Professions Amendment Bill [B 10D – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 76)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Social Development

     a) Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA) for 2005-2006 [RP 6-
        2007].

 2. The Minister for Public Enterprises

     a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Airways
        (Proprietary) Limited (SAA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary) Limited for
        2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

 3. The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements  of  Business  and  Arts  South
        Africa  (BASA)  for  2006-2007,  including  the   Report   of   the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007  [RP
        141-2007].


 4. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)      Convention  on  the  Conservation  and  Management  of  Fishery
         Resources in the South East  Atlantic  Ocean  (SEAFO),  tabled  in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on the Conservation and
         Management of Fishery Resources in the South East  Atlantic  Ocean
         (SEAFO).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
    National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B17B – 2006] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 22 August 2007:

        The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having considered
        the subject of the National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill
        [B17B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
        classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill ,
        reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


                          THURSDAY, 23 AUGUST 2007
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

         (a)     National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2007]
              (National Assembly– proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of
              Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 30142 of 3 August 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 23 August 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Banks Amendment Bill [B 12B – 2007] (National Assembly –
              sec 75).


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
              of the National Council of Provinces.

         (b)     Diamond Export Levy Bill [B 22 – 2007] (National Assembly
              – sec 77).


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
              of the National Council of Provinces.


         (c)     Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
              of the National Council of Provinces.


2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Extradition Treaty between the Republic of South Africa
              and the Argentine Republic, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
              of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Extradition Treaty between
              the Republic of South Africa and the Argentine Republic.


        (c)      Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the
              Argentine Republic on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
              Matters, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Treaty between the Republic
              of South Africa and the Argentine Republic on Mutual Legal
              Assistance in Criminal Matters.


    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Accession to the Framework Agreement for the International
              Collaboration on Research and Development of Generation IV
              Nuclear Energy Systems, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
              the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Accession to the Framework
              Agreement for the International Collaboration on Research and
              Development of Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems.

    (3)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness,
              Response and Co-operation, 1990 (OPRC Convention), tabled in
              terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention on
              Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation, 1990
              (OPRC Convention).

    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:

        (a)      Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department on the
              South African Reserve Bank for the year ended 31 December
              2006.


        (b)      Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
              Deposits for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
              ended 31 March 2007.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
              Board on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2005.

    (5)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration:

        (a)      Repositioning Strategy of the Financial and Fiscal
              Commission (FFC) for 2007-2010.


    (6)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:

        (a)      Government Notice No R 621 published in Government Gazette
             No 30072 dated 13 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/291) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (b)      Government Notice No R 622 published in Government Gazette
             No 30072 dated 13 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/292) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (c)      Government Notice No R 624 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Correction Notice to Notice No 518
             of Government Gazette No 29455 dated 15 December 2006,
             Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1338) to the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (d)      Government Notice No R 625 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1339) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No R 626 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1340) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (f)      Government Notice No R 627 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1341) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (g)      Government Notice No R 628 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/614) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (h)      Government Notice No R 629 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007:  Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/615) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (i)      Government Notice No R 630 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/616) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (j)      Government Notice No R 631 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/617) to the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, made in terms of
             section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).


        (k)      Government Notice No R 632 published in Government Gazette
             No 30075 dated 20 July 2007: Correction Notice to Notice No R
             105 of Government Gazette No 29596 dated 9 February 2007,
             Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No 5/85) to the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (l)      Government Notice No R 576 published in Government Gazette
             No 30051 dated 13 July 2007: Cancellation of an Authorised
             Dealer in Foreign Exchange in terms of the Exchange Control
             Regulations, 1961.


        (m)      Government Notice No R 577 published in Government Gazette
             No 30051 dated 13 July 2007: Appointment of an Authorised
             Dealer in Foreign Exchange in terms of the Exchange Control
             Regulations, 1961.


        (n)      Government Notice No 647 published in Government Gazette
             No 30074 dated 20 July 2007: Listing and delisting of public
             entities, made in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the Public
             Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

    (7)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services:

        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Senegal on
             Cooperation with regard to Civil Aviation Security, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Republic of Senegal on Cooperation with regard to Civil
             Aviation Security.

    (8)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Ltd and the
             Group for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (9)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and  Environmental Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Government Notice No 505 published in the Government
             Gazette No 29996 dated 19 June 2007: Establishment of the new
             Mokala National Park, made in terms of section 20(1)(a)(i) of
             the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act,
             2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).


        (b)      Government Notice No 514 published in the Government
             Gazette No 29999 dated 21 June 2007: Constitution of the
             National Environmental Advisory Forum, made in terms of Chapter
             2, section 6(1)(a)(i) of the National Environmental Management
             Act, 1998 (Act 107 of 1998).


        (c)      Government Notice No 830 published in the Government
             Gazette No 30057 dated 6 July 2007: Notice of intention to
             establish the National Framework , made in terms of section 7
             of the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004
             (Act No 39 of 2004).


                           MONDAY, 27 AUGUST 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill
     (a)    Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12D – 2006] – Act No 28 of
         2006 (assented to and signed by President on 17 August 2007).


2.    Membership of Committees

     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
    Committees:


         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons


         Appointed:         Marais, Mr S J F


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

        (a) Government Notice No 505 published in Government Gazette No
           29996, dated 19 June 2007: Establishment of the new Mokala
           National Park, made in terms of section 20(1)(a)(i) of the
           National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003
           (Act No 57 of 2003).
        (b) Government Notice No 514 published in Government Gazette No
           29999, dated 21 June 2007: Constitution of the National
           Environmental Advisory Forum, made in terms of Chapter 2,
           section 6(1)(a)(i) of the National Environmental Management Act,
           1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


        (c) Government Notice No 830 published in Government Gazette No
           30057, dated 6 July 2007: Notice of intention to establish the
           National Framework, made in terms of section 7 of the National
           Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
           2004).


    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:

        (a) Report of the Central Drug Authority (CDA) for 2005-2006 [RP 6-
         2007].

    (3)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Airways
           (Proprietary) Limited (SAA) for 2006-2007, including the Report
           of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
           2007.


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary) Limited
           for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
           on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
    (4)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
           Africa (BASA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
           [RP 141-2007].

    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a) Convention on the Conservation and Management of Fishery
           Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), tabled in
           terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on the Conservation and
           Management of Fishery Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean
           (SEAFO).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
         Corporation Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 187-
         2007].

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    General Notice No 900 published in Government Gazette No 30099,
         dated 20 July 2007: Prescription of a new form for an application
         for a registration certificate or provisional registration
         certificate, and the form of the registration certificate or
         provisional registration certificate: For public comment in terms
         of the Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act, 1965 (Act No 45 of
         1965).

     (b)    General Notice No 955 published in Government Gazette No 30142,
         dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends introducing the National
         Environmental Management Waste Bill in accordance with the
         provisions of Rule 241(1) of the Rules of the National Assembly.

     (c)    General Notice No 956 published in Government Gazette No 30142,
         dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends introducing the National
         Environmental Management Second Amendment Bill in accordance with
         the provisions of Rule 186 of the Rules of the National Council of
         Provinces.

     (d)    General Notice No 957 published in Government Gazette No 30142,
         dated 3 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends introducing the National
         Environmental Management Laws Amendment Bill in accordance with
         the provisions of Rule 186 of the Rules of the National Council of
         Provinces.

     (e)    General Notice No 954 published in Government Gazette No 30141,
         dated 6 August 2007: Notice is hereby given that the Minister of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism intends introducing the National
         Environmental Management Integrated Coastal Management Bill in
         accordance with the provisions of Rule 241(1) of the Rules of the
         National Assembly.

     (f)    Government Notice No 711 published in Government Gazette No
         30164 dated 17 August 2007: Correction Notice: Substitution of the
         map describing boundaries of the Vaal Triangle air-shed priority
         area, in terms of the National Environmental Management Air
         Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).

                           TUESDAY, 28 AUGUST 2007


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 37-2007].

     (b)    Government Notice No 736 published in Government Gazette No
         30173 dated 14 August 2007: Appointment of Subcommittee on
         Amnesty, in terms of the Promotion of National Unity and
         Reconciliation Act, 1995 (Act No 34 of 1995).

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre Foundation
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 149-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
         Republics for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 149-2007].

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Parks (SANparks) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 173-
         2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Environmental
         Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2006-2007 [RP 158-2007].


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     (a)    Notice of intervention in Utrecht Municipality in terms of
         section 139 of the Constitution, from the Kwazulu-Natal MEC for
         Local Government, Housing and Traditional Affairs.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration and report.


                          WEDNESDAY, 29 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 76).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:
         (a)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2007] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 29 August 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons
              Bill [B 7B – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
              Security and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
              Provinces.

         (b)     Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
              of Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B 9B –
              2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).


              The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
              Security and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
              Provinces.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
         South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 101-2007].

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

3.    The Minister in The Presidency

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
         Council of South Africa (IMC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 144-2007].

4.    The Minister of Education

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African
         Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 168-2007].

5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2006-
         2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007.


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker Museum –
         Isigcinamagugu for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [PR 107-2007].


                          THURSDAY, 30 AUGUST 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill

     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

         (a)     National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 36 –
              2007] (National Assembly– proposed sec 76) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 30142 of 3 August 2007.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
              well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
              classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

2.    Translations of Bills submitted

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Wetsontwerp op die Suid-Afrikaanse Regterlike
              Opleidingsinstituut [W 4 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).



              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the South
              African Judicial Education Institute Bill [B 4 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).

     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Herroeping van die Swart
              Administrasie Wet en Wysiging van Sekere Wette [W 34 – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).
              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Repeal
              of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
              Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).

     (3)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Strafreg (Seksuele Misdrywe) [W
              50 – 2003] (National Assembly – sec 75).

              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2003]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
         Centre for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 133-2007].

2.    The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
         Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority (FoodBev-
         Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 65-2007].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
         Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 67-2007].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector Education
         and Training Authority (Services Seta) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 88-2007].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Finance, Accounting,
         Management Consulting and other Financial Services Sector
         Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 63-3007].

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
         Education and Training Authority (Agri-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 56-2007].

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education
         and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 57-2007].

     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
         Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 77-2007].

     (h)    Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail
         Sector Education and Training Authority (W&R-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 78-2007].

     (i)    Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare Sector
         Education and Training Authority (HW-Seta) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 66-2007].

     (j)    Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training and
         Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority
         (ETDP-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 62-2007].

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
         Bloemfontein for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007.


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
         Theatre for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 156-2007].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
         South Africa (NAC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 186-
         2007].

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 161-2007].

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
         Language Board (Pansalb) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         174-2007].

     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
         Gallery for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


4.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia Wetland
         Park Authority for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

                           FRIDAY, 31 AUGUST 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     (a)    Technology Innovation Agency Bill, 2007, submitted by the
         Minister of Science and Technology. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Science and Technology and the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation.


2.    Translation of Bill submitted

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
         (a)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Reëling van Onderskepping van
              Kommunikasies en Kommunikasie-verwante Inligting [W 9 – 2006]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).

              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
              Communication-Related Information Amendment Bill [B 9 – 2006]
              (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
         Commission (FFC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 143-
         2007].

2.    The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements Clothing, Textiles, Footwear
         and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority (CTFL-Seta)
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 60-2007].

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
         Foundation (NFVF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 150-
         2007].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape
         Town for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
         Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2006-2007.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 102-2007].

                          MONDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees

(1)   The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
    Committees:


            Constitutional Review:
            Appointed:   Montsitsi, Mr S D
            Discharged:  Schoeman, Dr E A

            Defence:
            Appointed:    Schoeman, Dr E A
            Discharged:   Montsitsi, Mr S D

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

  1. The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of
         Public Enterprises for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2006-2007
         [RP 196-2007].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
         Company Limited (SAFCOL) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pebble Bed Modular
         Reactor (Proprietary) Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

  2. The Minister of Labour

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
         (UYF) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
         Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 93-2007].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
         Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 59-2007].

    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
         Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority (MER-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 71-
         2007].

    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
         Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education
         and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007 [RP 68-2007].
    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
         Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
         Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 70-
         2007].

    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualifications
         Authority (MQA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 72-2007].

    (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
         Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2006-2007, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2006-2007 [RP 64-2007].

  3. The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
         Institution for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 153-2007].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
         Arts for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
         Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 191-2007].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
         South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 175-2007].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.


  4. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
         Service (SAWS) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 114-2007].


                          TUESDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism

    (1)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


    (2)     The Joint Tagging Mechanism, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6),
         classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 4 September 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
              Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2007] (National Assembly –
              sec 75).


          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Public
         Protector of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         193-2007].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
         Corporation of South Africa for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-
         2007.

                         WEDNESDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2007


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    Second-Hand Goods Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of
         Safety and Security. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety
         and Security and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
         Defence for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 21 for 2006-2007.

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
         Southern Africa Limited for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2006-2007,
         including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2006-2007.

    (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
         Board (ASB) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 85-2007].

3.    The Minister of Education

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
         Education (CHE) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
         Relations Council (ELRC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         145-2007].

    (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
         Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) for 2006-2007, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007
         [RP 180-2007].

4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library for
         the Blind for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
    (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
         Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
         195-2007].

    (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National English Literary
         Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

    (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage Council
         for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 192-2007].


    (e)    Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company for
         2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

5.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Marine Living Resources Fund for 2007 to
         2010.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)    Programme 2009 – Review of Priorities for 2007/8 and 2008/9
         Financial Years.


CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert T070905 – insert - PAGES 1653-1681

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Convention between
     the Republic of South Africa and the Portuguese Republic for the
     Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
     respect to Taxes on Income, dated 5 September 2007:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Republic of
         South Africa and the Portuguese Republic for the Avoidance of
         Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect
         to Taxes on Income, recommends that the Council, in terms of
         section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.



     Report to be considered.


2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Convention between
     the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
     the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
     the Prevention of Tax Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 5
     September 2007:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of
         Saudi Arabia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Tax Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
         recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231 (2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Convention.



     Report to be considered.


3.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Convention between
     the Republic of South Africa and the Swiss Confederation for the
     Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 5
     September 2007:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Republic of
         South Africa and the Swiss Confederation for the avoidance of
         Double Taxation with respect to Taxes on Income, recommends that
         the Council, in terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution,
         approve the said Convention.



     Report to be considered.


