---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 08 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-06-08
---

FRIDAY, 8 JUNE 2007
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 09:35.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 1832.

                    WELCOMING OF MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, before
I start, I would like to welcome the national Minister of Home Affairs to
this House.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council I shall move, on behalf of the IFP, as follows:

   That the Council –
     1) notes with sadness and shock that a 63-year old man, David Matjele
        from Orlando East, was murdered by a man whom he was trying to
        help;

     2) further notes that Mr Matjele let the man into his home after
        responding to the man’s claims that he was being atttacked;

     3) realises that criminal activity is diminishing the compassion and
        kindness of many South Africans; and

     4) commends the police for the swift arrest of a suspect, and hopes
        that he is dealt with accordingly by the law.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chairperson, I wish to give notice that I will move
on the next sitting day of the Council:

   That the Council -

     1) notes that, further to a motion brought before the Council on 23
        May 2007 condemning the action of the Metro Police in removing
        street people’s possessions in the heart of winter, Ms Maria
        Visser, one of the street people, died of exposure;


     2) condemns the action of the city police and asks them to take full
        responsibility for Maria’s death; and


     3) sends its condolences to her family.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, owing to the incapacity
of my voice, I have requested the programme Whip to read the motion on my
behalf.

     RE-ENACTMENT OF TRADITIONAL HEALTH PRACTITIONERS ACT AND CHOICE ON
  TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY AMENDMENT ACT IN COMPLIANCE WITH CONSTITUTIONAL
                                 COURT ORDER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chair, I move the draft resolution printed in the name of
the Chief Whip of the Council on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Council, with the concurrence of the National Assembly –

   1) notes that –


            a) on 18 August 2006 the Constitutional Court declared the
               Traditional Health Practitioners Act (Act No 35 of 2004) and
               the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Act (Act No
               38 of 2004) invalid, and that the order of invalidity is
               suspended for a period of 18 months to enable Parliament to
               re-enact these statutes in a manner that is consistent with
               the Constitution;


            b) the 18-month suspension period expires on 16 February 2008;
               and


            c) the Rules do not provide specifically for Parliament to deal
               with legislation that has been declared invalid; and


   (2)      resolves that -


            a) the above-mentioned statutes be re-enacted, in compliance
               with the court order;


            b) the legislation be deemed introduced in the National Council
               of Provinces, as the first House;


            c) the Acts, as they now exist,  be deemed as the text before
               Parliament, as extensive work has been done during
               Parliament’s previous consideration of the legislation; and

            d) the Select Committee on Social Services be put in charge of
               the Bills before the Council.


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
programme Whip. As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put the
question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyasixhasa. [We support it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Siyavuma. [We support it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re a thekga. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: iMpumalanga iyavuma. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Northern Cape ke a rona. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z C KOLWENI (North West): North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?
Ms J WITBOOI (Western Cape): Western Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
have voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                         LEAVE OF ABSENCE FOR MEMBER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution printed in the
name of the Chief Whip of the Council on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Council, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 17(1) of the
   Rules of the National Council of Provinces, grants hon J O Tlhagale leave
   of absence from proceedings of both the Council and committees of the
   Council in terms of Rule 17(2) until the hon member has recovered to
   resume duty.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
programme Whip. As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put the
question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyavuma. [We support it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Siyavuma. [We support it.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPI: iMpumalanga iyavuma. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Siyavuma. [We support it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z C KOLWENI: Key a rona. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Ms J WITBOOI: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
have voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 4 - Home Affairs:

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Before I call upon
the Minister, I would like to announce that the hon Deputy Minister will
not be participating in the Budget Vote. He is on sick leave. I now call
upon the hon Minister Mapisa-Nqakula - Minister of Home Affairs - to open
the debate.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP,
firstly, I would like to thank the select committee ... But I don’t see the
Chair. [Interjections.] Thanks. I would like to thank the select committee
for the work they have been doing with us, and also for the unwavering
support of the chairperson, Ms Masilo.

Hon members, those of you who were around the parliamentary complex
yesterday might have seen the Home Affairs mobile units parked on the
grounds. We brought them here to demonstrate the capacity we have been
building since the Human Sciences Research Council report two years ago on
accessibility to the services of Home Affairs. With their ability to
connect via satellite to our mainframe computers, and thereby offer our
services even in the remotest parts of the country, the mobile units are
going a long way towards responding to the needs identified in the HSRC
report.

We currently have 109 mobile units operating in all nine provinces. So, I
felt it fitting that I should begin my budget address to this House by
mentioning them. We very deliberately did not keep the mobile units here
today, because they are needed out in the Western Cape, and it would be
typical for them to move on after a day like yesterday when they generated
a lot of traffic. Members may be interested to know that one of the units
working in the parliamentary precinct yesterday covers an area
incorporating Swellendam, Hermanus and Bredasdorp.

We heard from the driver who, by the way, is also a fully qualified Home
Affairs official able to register births and accept applications for IDs
and passports, that the services that the vehicles bring to the community
are always in demand and appreciated. That tells us that the mobile units
are going a long way towards raising awareness and meeting the demands for
accessible services identified by the HSRC.

On the other hand, as we build the fleet beyond 109 units deployed
nationally at the moment, we are aware of some of the challenges it faces.
A thorough analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the mobile unit
system in responding adequately to accessibility and its questions will be
part of the overall re-engineering process to be undertaken within the
framework of the turnaround action team’s work I will come to in a moment.

I think it is proper that I should give you a breakdown of these mobile
units per province: Eastern Cape - 16, KwaZulu-Natal - 16, Limpopo - 17,
North West - 10, Northern Cape - 10, Mpumalanga - 10, Western Cape - 10,
Free State - 10 and Gauteng - 10. Hon members will remember that I did say
before that the challenge to all of us as public representatives is to be
the eyes and ears, amongst others, of how officials utilise this particular
service.

Home Affairs is serious about transforming into government’s best delivery
arm. That is a very ambitious goal and we are all aware of that. It will
not be achieved overnight. At least we are sure of that much. A year ago we
gave an undertaking during our Budget Vote to get to the bottom of the
problems which are confronting us. Today we are able to say that we are
well on the way to implementing the recommendations we got from the
intervention task team report, which did a thorough investigation of the
department.

Much of what I have to say in my budget speech today will be centred on the
measures we are taking in pursuit of the President’s announcement in his
state of the nation address, and I quote: “We will bring the operations of
the Department of Home Affairs to full capacity.” We are aware that we have
a long and steep road ahead of us before we are able to say that we are
indeed the best delivery arm of government in South Africa, but we are
determined to go that route because we believe that the people of South
Africa have a right to expect reliable, consistent and efficient service
from this department; delivered with integrity and as promised.

Home Affairs is the department tasked with the responsibility to assist our
people with the right documentation from the first day to the last. On
behalf of the people of South Africa, we are the custodians of citizenship,
of the rights to visit, invest, work and take up permanent residence in
this country. Of course, the proper administration of refugee affairs is
important in empowering those who are less fortunate than ourselves,
because they have been victims of political and ethnic intolerance
elsewhere.

At the same time, we must remember that economic migration is an
international phenomenon confronting every region of the globe. There is no
country in the world which does not face an influx from its neighbours, if
it is economically more stable and successful. Let us remember, for
instance, that Gauteng alone produces about 9% of the GDP of the whole of
Africa. Therefore, it is logical that our economy would be a magnet for
economic migrants from the region.

In this context, it is important not to forget that the economies of the
region are networked, with families and communities in neighbouring states
relying on remittances from migrants working in South Africa. The other
side of the coin, of course, is that South Africa has long relied on those
workers to help build our economy, particularly in the area of mining. That
is not to say that, of course, we should invite or even tolerate a free-for-
all situation.

However, we are able to report that, since our last budget debate, we have
been able to clear a backlog of 13 000 applications for permanent
residence. Also, we recently announced 35 000 work permits for foreigners
with scarce and critical skills. I think I need to pause here and briefly
explain about the importance of all of us taking the responsibility of
publishing, pronouncing and educating people about the importance of these
quota lists. The advantage here is that a migrant may apply for a work
permit without necessarily having secured a job in the country. That’s the
difference between that and many other permits which we provide to people.

When a migrant applies for a work permit, we provide it, but the person
must be subjected to the process of verification of the qualifications.
However, that person can actually secure this permit without necessarily
being guaranteed a job in the country. The important part for all of us as
public representatives is to go out and educate the public about the
difference between a general work permit and a quota permit which would
have been secured under this category of persons.

We have not just left it at that announcement, because last year showed
that we need to publicise these permits around the world. We have begun the
process of mobilising our overseas missions, our Home Affairs consular
services, ambassadors, and our high commissioners in an effort to find the
maths and science teachers, the aerospace specialists and many others
required by our economy.

On my previous visit to Brussels recently, I gathered our ambassadors from
the region to enlist their support in popularising the quota work permits
and we provided embassies with a media kit to assist them further. We are
ready to provide hon members with media kits so that people are able to
popularise these quota lists. I will use other overseas trips in a similar
way in other regions.

Even though we have processed almost 37 000 refugee applications, the
backlog project has not gone as well as we would have wanted it to, so we
continue to work on the 75 000 applications. This project will be part of
the work of the turnaround action team, which I will discuss later.

I felt that we should mention this, specifically in the NCOP, because I am
aware that it is frequently the provinces that are confronted with the
realities of xenophobia and sometimes violence towards foreigners seeking
shelter with us. These are not easy matters, but I appeal to the provinces
to join with us in taking the lead in explaining to our people time and
again that our Constitution affords asylum to genuine victims of ethnic and
political persecution.
More importantly, it is a central core of the humane and just society we
want to build. It is central to our own humanity and we should recognise
and accept that these are people who need help and support, just as many of
those who fought for our own freedom were able to rely on the support and
help of others around the world.

We are aware, not only of the fact that we are the custodians of all these
vital areas from citizenship to refugee affairs, but that this makes us the
custodians of important aspects of South Africa’s sovereignty and economic
and physical security. A false identity document or a corruptly obtained
residence permit can be a gateway to crime - whether it is fraud or crime
of a more sinister nature. Our banks and our businesses who sell on credit
have a right to expect the identity document system to assist them in
preventing crime; so do our security services.

For those who missed the introduction of our new director-general, I would
like to take the opportunity to introduce him. He is sitting over there as
part of the delegation. His name is Mr Mavuso Msimang. It was possible to
recruit a person of his calibre, standing, experience and leadership
capabilities. He has, of course, been referred to as “Mr Fix-it”. But, of
course, in order for him to fix the Department of Home Affairs, he will
need the support of hon members and he will also need the critical support
of the entire staff of the Department of Home Affairs.

We have agreed with him that he must be given the resources and the
necessary time and space to do the job. That means financial and human
resources and, perhaps most important of all, resources like the
flexibility to do what must be done in taking the department from what it
is today to what it needs to be.

Two weeks ago, we were able to announce the deployment of a turnaround
action team. This deployment is the most significant step so far in our
strategy to transform and improve the department’s ability to serve the
people and contribute to economic growth. It includes public and private
sector experts from a number of fields, including information technology,
finance, business process re-engineering and communications.

It is a team which should be directed from the office of the director-
general and it has been tasked with – alongside the director-general and in
close co-operation with him - creating a radically more efficient customer
and business-friendly Department of Home Affairs. In a nutshell, we are in
the process of creating the new Home Affairs.

Our budget includes a rise of 18,36% this financial year, followed by a
further 20,3% increase next year, and 3,2% more for the following year.
These allocations mean that we will have resources that are needed to do
the job which we must do for our country. This is good news, because of
duties associated with securing the Soccer World Cup in 2010. More
importantly, it is good news because of the resources it provides us with
for the long term in making Home Affairs what it should be and what it must
be.

We are presenting a budget for things we believe are realistic, achievable
and necessary. This is why I am confident today when I refer to the new
Home Affairs, which has this budget cycle as a starting point. In other
words, we are building systems - we are re-engineering them and improving
them; and we are getting the institution fit for the future. We are saying
to our staff: “Of course, you can join in and become part of the new
department.”

So, I am announcing today the turnaround, the transformation or change. I
am not announcing that it is complete, I am saying, starting with this
budget and together with Parliament, together with the 7 000 staff in the
department, we are building a new department in the interests of our
country.

The new department is about setting realistic delivery targets and meeting
them consistently and efficiently. It is about new technology synchronised
with existing infrastructure to enhance our ability to oversee, direct and,
where necessary, speed up our delivery process. It is about a new level of
co-operation with the country’s law-enforcement agencies in driving
corruption out of our department.

It is, for example, about the new digital vision of the 29 million
fingerprints we keep, which we have completed and which now allow us to
ensure that people trying to obtain a second identity document number to
use for criminal purposes will consistently and reliably be found out. It
is about the new passport system which will allow us to cut delivery times
whilst we enhance the security and the international acceptance of the
documents at the same time.

But, perhaps, most importantly, the new Home Affairs is about creating and
sustaining new attitudes and a new will to serve the people among the staff
members of the department. It is about a new empowering approach to
management, which says that individuals must take daily responsibility for
the quality of their work and their output levels. This means saying to
every staff member that this is a new department in the making, with new
attitudes, a new vigour and a new will to deliver on its mandate.

The other side of the coin - and I say so clearly as we have said to staff
members - is: Of course, those who choose not to be full and committed
participants in this department are welcome to seek their future elsewhere,
if they so wish. This department has no place for corrupt, lazy or
inefficient loafers. It will be a home for industrious and energetic
officials for whom Batho Pele is much more than just a slogan; a home to
those who love our country and want to contribute their professionalism to
making it work properly.

When we mention setting realistic targets and meeting them, we are saying
the most important thing that we can offer our clients is reliability. It
is more important to me to say to an identity document applicant that he or
she can collect the document in four weeks’ time and for them to find the
document ready and waiting in four weeks than to say you can have it in two
weeks, but it is not there when you come to collect it. It is more
important to say to residents that, for example, a mobile unit will be
there once every three months to register births and to accept applications
for documents and permits than to promise visits once a month, only to find
that people walk all the way to the destination, but the vehicle does not
arrive for two months in a row. This is what we mean when we say that this
department must set realistic delivery targets and that it must meet them
consistently.

Hanis, as many of you are aware, comprises the ID smart card, automated
fingerprint identification system, Afis, electronic document management
system and others. Getting Hanis right will provide us with the necessary
technical platform towards the smart ID. We are continuing our work to
analyse and refine our understanding of the potential benefits of the smart
card. Our view is that a project of this size and complexity must provide
greater identity security and that this is not achieved simply by changing
ID formats.

I am pleased to report today that the Hanis disaster recovery site has now
also been fully implemented. At the same time, we are making important
progress on digitally capturing the birth, marriage and death records of
our citizens under the electronic document management system, where a total
of 57 million records have now been scanned.

The current financial year will see us spend a further R167 million to
expand this project. Besides enhancing our ability to guarantee the
integrity of the ID system, this is another example of how we will cut
corruption, because the fewer loopholes there are in the system, the less
manual matching of data that takes place and the fewer opportunities there
are to crook the system.

Chairperson, I am speeding, I can see that my time is running out and I
would appreciate it if you could cut down my response time from 15 minutes
to 10 minutes so that I can use the five minutes to complete my speech.

We have already gone some way down the road, with the introduction of the
track-and-trace system as an internal management tool. Track-and-trace
allows the department’s managers to trace and, if necessary, to speed up
the progress of an ID application. The system monitors progress from the
moment of application through every stage of the process until the ID is
delivered.

Managers are now able to establish which Home Affairs official has
responsibility for the processing at each stage of the application. That
means vastly enhanced security. But it is also a much more reliable method
to monitor and manage the output of individual staff members, because track-
and-trace allows us to see how much work each official involved in the ID
process is actually doing each working day. This is another indication of
how better infrastructure can assist in managing, monitoring and motivating
our most strategic asset – our people.

So, we are building a new Home Affairs brick by brick. One of those bricks
that we will announce during this financial year is the further roll-out of
the track-and-trace system beyond its current functionality as an internal
management tool. We will make details available as and when we are ready to
add this brick to the new Home Affairs.

Suffice it to say, track-and-trace, when it is fully developed and rolled
out to the public, will allow every ID applicant to follow the progress on
their IDs themselves and to know when it is ready or to get answers as to
why it might not be ready on time. Track-and-trace is one example and, of
course, others are the R150 million for the modernisation of the passport
system this year and R220 million for the live capture facility.

Live capture gives us the ability to record fingerprints, photographs and
identity numbers alongside each other electronically and at the same moment
within one document which belongs to one individual.

We have spoken about the turnaround action team, and our confidence that
resources being allocated are well invested. We are confident that this
intervention will make the necessary difference and be the catalyst in the
creation of a new department, because we have agreed on a process which
will ensure that the drivers on the road to the new Home Affairs are not
just external consultants who then leave us rudderless at some point. In
fact, the drivers of the process are all members of the department.

We will ensure that this intervention leaves behind a lasting and
sustainable legacy. Members of the turnaround action team will be active in
every significant area of the department and, of course, will be sponsored
by a senior official in each directorate.

We have identified the following six areas which are critical for this
turnaround action team: firstly, further development and roll-out of the
track-and-trace system as an internal management tool and an external
customer service tool; secondly, redesign and optimisation of the ID
process, and this will include a pilot phase for the revised and enhanced
ID process of the future; thirdly, redesign and optimisation of the permits
and refugee processes - again including a pilot phase of the new system;
fourthly, a review of the IT projects to assess their ability to align with
and support our strategy and requirements of all business units; fifthly, a
review of all key contracts and service level agreements; and, lastly, the
evaluation of all potential areas of risk in the department including, but
not limited to, corruption. In order for us to do this job, we have
received support amounting to R100 million for this year and R300 million
each year for the next two financial years.

The new Home Affairs is a necessity for our country. It is possible, in the
interests of serving our people. As the Minister, and on behalf of the
department, I pledge to you and to the people of this country that all
people of goodwill within the department will give their best efforts
towards making this new department a daily reality for all its clients.

I want to thank the management of the Department of Home Affairs and the
entire staff of the department for their support. I also want to express my
appreciation to my own family and, in particular, my comrade, who is my
partner, Comrade Charles. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you hon
Minister. I would like to make an announcement: It should be noted that two
committees – the joint ethics committee and the joint monitoring committee
on women are currently sitting. Members who belong to those committees have
not gone home but are in a meeting. Furthermore, four other members of the
Select Committee on Labour and Enterprise are on a study tour. So, these
people are busy with their work; it is not that they have gone home. It is
not that they do not like the Budget Vote, Minister; it is just that they
are busy. Thank you very much.

Ms J M MASILO: Hon Deputy Chair, I left my spectacles at home. I have had
to borrow from my colleague in the DA, so I didn’t cross the floor.
[Laughter.] Ms Lamoela, thank you very much.

Hon Deputy Chair, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister in absentia, and we
wish him a speedy recovery and good health, members, special guests,
director-general of the department and senior management of Home Affairs,
it gives me great pleasure to speak on the Home Affairs Budget Vote No 4.

Sa pele ke lebogise lefapha go bo le thapile motsamaisi-kakaretso, tlhogo
ya Lefapha la Merero ya Selegae, ntate Msimang, gore e nne ena yo o tlang
go le etelela pele. Re go eleletsa masego mo tirong le kgwetlho ya lefapha.

O na le dibeke di le pedi fela a dira mo lefapheng, mme ka Labobedi fa ba
ne ba re naya Tekayetsokabo ya lefapha ka bokhutshwane, re ne ra itumelela
manontlhotlho a a a bontshitseng mo komiting. Re tshepa gore re tla mo
tshegetsae bile re tla dirisana le ena sentle. (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[Firstly, I would like to thank the department for appointing Mr Msimang as
the Director-General, the one who leads the Department of Home Affairs. We
wish him everything of the best in his job and the challenges that go with
it.

He has been working in the department for only two weeks, but he has
already briefed us on the budget of the department. We applaud him for the
effectiveness he has shown to the committee. We assure him of our support
and co-operation.]

Thank you very much, Minister, for the appointment. The Department of Home
Affairs has a mandate to protect and regulate the interests of the
inhabitants of the Republic of South Africa in respect of their individual
status, identity and specific rights and powers, and to promote a
supporting service to this effect. It is also responsible for managing
migration and ports of entry, ensuring national security, enabling economic
development and tourism, and promoting good international relations.

The department deals with civic services and issues documents such as
birth, marriage and death certificates, identity documents and
identification, citizenship, travel documents and passports. By engaging on
this mandate, the department serves to service marginalised communities,
deepens democracy and promotes social security.

Concerning policy priorities for 2007-08, the strategic priorities of the
department for 2007-08 are primarily to improve its capacity to deliver per
its mandate and to deliver core services to its clients. These include
adopting measures to address the department’s structural capacity and
operational reorganisation, especially in frontline offices. In addition,
the department has to increase its human resource complement, particularly
at senior management level, improve delivery on its core function, and
ensure better governance.

In order to develop human resource capacity, the department plans to
reorganise its structure, capacity and operations to ensure that it has
qualified and suitable personnel to meet service demands. The department
has conducted training programmes approved by the SA Qualifications
Authority to improve its migration services. Furthermore, it aims to
strengthen its leadership at management level.

Improving business processes and turnaround times is achieved by issuing
enabling documents and minimising incorrect documents. The department has
started upgrading its information and communication system through the Home
Affairs National Identification System. Furthermore, the launch of the
smart ID will improve identity document security and reduce incidents of
fraudulent documents.
Civic service is the biggest branch in the department. The issuing of ID
and passport books takes about four to five months. I applied for my
passport on 2 February 2007 and I only received it last week, after five
months. I was assisted by Stevens, an official here in Cape Town. He really
works hard for the members to get through. We thank him for that.

What is the department and civic services doing to improve operations to
ensure effective and efficient service delivery? The select committee
welcomes the R150 million allocated for the turnaround of the passport
system process and the replacement of the old ones. It also welcomes the
R600 million from the National Treasury for the implementation of the
turnaround strategy.

Immigration offices must be classified as essential services by the
department. We welcome the roll-out of 109 mobile units and an additional
eight units for this department. I’m not going to speak about how these are
going to be distributed, the Minister has done that. But, it is important
for the members of this House to monitor those mobile units during their
constituency period.

Regarding increasing access to services, one of the key aims of the
department is to alleviate poverty by creating opportunities for applicants
for government social assistance to obtain enabling documents. The
department has launched on-line child registration facilities at hospitals.
We also request that the department looks at health centres and clinics in
the localities regarding those operations.

The department has also established mobile units in the rural areas and we
have mentioned that. The department plans to continue with building offices
and increasing the number of mobile units over the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework. Well done, hon Minister – also regarding the new offices in
Taung, which were not in good standing.

Regarding the upgrade of border control, the department reported that it
has started upgrading detention facilities for illegal immigrants and it is
investigating the possibility of expanding these services nationwide. The
department is also involved in the design of new border posts and it is
planning to undertake repair and maintenance programmes for some border
posts. In addition, a project office, special measures Bill and project
plan have been put in place in preparation for the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

The department has prioritised immigration management and the formulation
of border control policies and systems. We need to know about the progress
report.

Concerning key developments and legislative challenges, the department
promulgated the Civil Union Act to solemnise same-sex marriages. In 2006,
the department also amended the Immigration Act of 2002 to facilitate the
attraction of scarce skills into the country, in line with the Accelerated
and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asigsa. The department plans
to amend the refugees amendment Bill and the Electoral Amendment Bill in
2008. We welcome the initiatives by the department.

These priorities address the strategic objectives identified in the 2007
state of the nation address. Most importantly, the aforementioned
strategies are aligned to the findings and recommendations of the support
intervention task team.

One of the key recommendations made by the task team is the need to develop
a recruitment plan to fill senior management positions in order to
strengthen the capacity of the department. The organisational structure
should be implemented, urgently, to enable the department to carry out its
responsibilities. The department should establish monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms to provide up-to-date information management for decision-making
processes, and to identify areas that need urgent intervention to improve
performance management.

With regard to personnel expenditure for 2007-08, the department received
its increased budget allocation of R1,2 billion compared to R974 million in
the 2006-07 financial year. We welcome the increase.

The 2006-07 budget allocation was underspent by the department by 7,3%.
According to the department, this was due to the slow filling of vacant
posts. Nothing materialised on the smart ID project. There was a delay in
the repair and maintenance project, and it did not materialise, owing to
prolonged tender procedures by the Department of Public Works.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you, Chairperson, and hon members of
this august House, the Ministry, the director-general, and the senior
management for the role you are playing in our quest to improve the lives
of our people through accelerated service delivery in the various
constituencies. Ke a leboga. Dankie. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, let me start by
condemning the callous action of some youth yesterday along Modderdam Road,
who threw stones at the bus that was transporting MPs to Laboria Park. A
half brick broke the window against which the hon Sulliman had been sitting
just a few minutes before, otherwise hon Sulliman might have been injured.

Let us make South Africa a place full of hope and respect for human life
that comes once. Let us respect other people’s property, and lets show love
and dignity to all. That incident was really horrible and I don’t think
there is anybody who can actually condone it. We were nearly injured but,
fortunately, when I am around things work better. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]

Mohlomphegi Tona, mo selekanong sa go ka ba ngwaga le matšatši a go ka ba a
mabedi o be o le ka mo Ntlong ye, o bega ditšhelete tša lefapha la gago,
moo o ilego wa kgopela gore re ke re thekge kabotekanyetšo ya mašeleng a
lefapha la gago. O ile wa be wa bega ka moo tšwelopele e bilego ka gona
tirišong ya mašeleng ao. Bjale lehono ke tla leka go bona gore a naa tše
dingwe tša tšeo o ilego wa di bolela di phethagetše go fihla kae le gore
tšeo di padilego di paletšwe go fihla kae; gape le gore tšeo di šaletšego
morago di tla phethagatšwa neng. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[Hon Minister, a period of approximately one year and almost two days have
elapsed since you were in this House, reporting about finances in your
department, where you requested that we support the budget of your
department. You even reported how much progress you had made in utilising
these finances. Therefore, today I will try to see to what extent some of
the things you have spoken about have been implemented and which of them
have not been implemented; and again when to implement those which have not
yet been implemented.]

The DA wants to congratulate you on introducing mobile units with state of
the art technology that are valuable to our communities in the rural areas.
The units spent the whole week in my village in Limpopo in 2006 assisting
members of the community. I really appreciate that. Many parents managed to
apply for and received birth certificates for their children. Adults who
could not manage to travel to the next local office due to lack of finances
managed to apply for their IDs at these mobile units.

You promised to provide an additional six in the 2006-07 financial year in
Limpopo. You have just reported that there are now 17 in Limpopo. We really
appreciate that and they are really valuable.

Yesterday I went to apply for an ID and I hope that ID will come as
speedily as possible. I used the mobile unit up there and I hope it won’t
take as long a period as hon Masilo has indicated, regarding her passport.
The officials are here and they hear what I am saying and will check mine
quickly.

Modulasetulo, ntumelele ke diriše leleme la gešo. Ke kgopela Tona ya rena
ka tsweetswee gore a thuše mokgalabje yo mongwe kua gagešo yoo pasa ya
gagwe e ngwadilwego gore ga se modudi wa Afrika Borwa. Taba ye e bonagetše
ngwageng wo fetilego nakong ya dikgetho, moo a rilego ge a swanetše go ya
go bouta, ba mmotša gore yena ga se modudi wa Afrika Borwa gomme ka
senthealo a ka se dumelelwe go kgetha. Mohlomongwe o be a nyakile go kgetha
nna!

Ka ge bahlankedi ba mmušo ba le gona mo – le nna ke le gona mo – ke tla
kgopela thušo ka tsweetswee go Tona ka baka la gore go thwe monna yoo ``ga
se modudi wa Afrika Borwa’’ eupša rena re agilego le yena motseng wa gešo
ka moka re tloge re tseba gabotsebotse gore ke mogagaborena. (Translation
of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)
[Chairperson, allow me to use my mother tongue. I am requesting our
Minister to assist a certain old man in whose identity document it is
written that he is not a South African citizen. This became evident during
the elections in the previous year when he was supposed to cast a vote; he
was told that he is not a South African citizen and he will not be allowed
to cast a vote. Maybe he wanted to elect me!

As government leaders who are present - with me included - I plead with the
Minister for help because it is said that he is not a South African
citizen, but we as neighbours in our village all actually know that he is
our fellow South African.]

He was told that he was not eligible to vote as he was not a South African.
Go with your officials to my place, Indermark village, in Limpopo, and I
will take them to the old man to assist him as speedily as possible. It is
my request, Minister. If his business could be done quickly, I would really
appreciate that.

The DA wants to know how many of the 993 posts in the provinces for the
2006-07 financial year have already been filled, as promised in your Budget
Vote speech of last year in this House. You also indicated that you managed
to fill 634 of 898 critical posts in 2006. How many of the 898 are still to
be filled at this stage, so that we can have this department up and
running?

Our provincial delegation visited the Beit Bridge port of entry in Musina -
the once thriving copper-mining town - during our provincial week on 15 May
2007. The main purpose was to do an oversight assessment of this port of
entry during the not-so-peak times.

There are various government departments manning this port of entry, namely
Home Affairs, Safety and Security, Agriculture, Customs, SA Revenue
Services – to mention but a few. The following flaws that make our port of
entry highly porous were identified and need to be urgently addressed. You
know, things are “osmotic” through that port of entry, hon Minister.

Passenger goods trains that travel between Zimbabwe and South Africa are
not searched at the border post but are only searched in Germiston. Surely,
illegal items can easily be smuggled in and out of the country unnoticed.
These must be attended to as a matter of urgency. All trains must be
searched at the border post so that we are secure.

There are no CCTV cameras to monitor activities within the processing
offices and surrounding areas. Also, it is alleged that fraudulent
activities are taking place on a daily basis. Money changes hands. We would
really appreciate it if that particular port of entry was taken care of,
because it’s a problem.

There is a lack of scanners on the South African side. Trucks with
trailers, in excess of 50 per day, are passing through that border and are
manually checked by a few staff members. Surely, it is not practical for
such trucks to be checked manually without causing any delays. The scanners
will go a long way to alleviate the problem, cut down time spent on each of
the trucks, ensure that only designated goods are allowed to be exported
out of and imported into the country. By the way, the Zimbabwean side of
the border has scanners, yet illegals from the other side are coming
through, which means that that side is really not doing what it’s supposed
to do.

The existing buildings at that particular port of entry are outdated and do
not serve the present purpose, as they were made for that particular
terrible era that we all know about. Minister, in your last report last
year you didn’t mention that port of entry as one of the entries that are
to be attended to. I would really request that you consider that port of
entry, because it’s the busiest in Limpopo, and I suppose in South Africa.

It is also alleged that a police officer in that particular area declined
to be promoted to a higher position, wanting to remain at a lower position
because at that port of entry money is changing hands and he was making
more money than in the position that he was to occupy. The police officer
actually declined that particular offer and he resigned to form his own
company.

Therefore, Minister, these are some of the observations at the border that
need to be dealt with, before the start of the African Confederations Cup
and the subsequent Fifa Soccer World Cup in 2009 and 2010 respectively.
Beit Bridge border control is one of the busiest, and we would like you,
hon Minister, to take care of that.

The Minister introduced various campaigns, including the Lokisa Ditokomane
campaign, which assisted people whose identity documents were incorrect.
This campaign could not sufficiently reach the remote areas. In cases where
it reached these areas, the requirements were sometimes very difficult to
comply with.

The elderly are requested to get a letter from the school. Most people in
rural areas have never been to school. If they ever were at school, the
school is no longer in existence or records are no longer available. They
are asked to bring along their baptismal certificates but they have never
been to church.

Therefore, Minister, maybe some of the requirements can be relaxed so that
we can assist the elderly in getting their documents that they are supposed
to get. We really feel that ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Your time has
expired.

Mr O M THETJENG: God once said you don’t drown by ...
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Your time has
expired. Thank you.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I really appreciate your giving me this time
and I hope the department will proceed to do the job it is supposed to do.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon member, the
first time I call out to you that your time has expired is when your time
has expired.

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Sihlalo, ngibingelela uNgqongqoshe namalunga
ahloniphekile akhona kule ndawo, ngibingelele umqondisi-jikelele omusha
kanye nethimba lakhe lonke. [Chairperson, I greet the Minister and the hon
members present here, and the newly appointed director-general and his
entire team.]

I would like to say that, as a select committee, we are aware that the
Department of Home Affairs is doing its level best to meet South African
citizens’ needs regarding curbing corruption which is occurring amongst its
staff members around the issuing of the necessary documents to the citizens
of the country, and regarding practising the principles of Batho Pele in
all its offices.

Ngithanda ukuphawula ukuthi konke lokhu akwanele neze; usemkhulu umsebenzi
okumele wenziwe yilo Mnyango. Uma sihamba sivakasha siyikomiti
sihlangabezana nobugebengu noma ubelelesi. Mangisho ukuthi isihlava
sisekhona phakathi kwabasebenzi balo Mnyango. Abanye babasebenzi
basazenzela umathanda, abanye basaqhubeka nokukhwabanisa, bagombela kwezabo
izisu.

Ngakho-ke kuyisifiso sekomiti elibheke ukusebenza kwalo Mnyango ukubona
zonke izelelesi zixoshwa kulo Mnyango, ngoba zibambezela inqubekela-
phambili kuleli zwe lethu. Lobu belelesi buyabonakala emahhovisi ezifunda
lapho kufakwa izicelo zomazisi, zezitifiketi zokufa nezicelo zezimvume
zokuvakashela ngaphandle kwemingcele yaleli zwe. Kunabasebenzi abasagwazisa
umphakathi.

Mangize ezikhungweni zemingcele yakuleli. Emingceleni nakhona kusabheda,
Ngqongqoshe. Ngokunjalo kukhona abasebenzi abasazenzela umathanda njengoba
umhlonishwa uThetjeng eseshilo. Izifikanamthwalo ezingena kuleli
ngokungemthetho ziyanda nsuku zonke. Kokunye kucacisa ukuthi yizona
ezigwazela bona phela abasebenzi.

Sesingenile-ke isifikanamthwalo lapha eNingizimu Afrika, siyathathwa,
siboshwe, sithunyelwe eLindela eGauteng. Lezi zifikanamthwalo zifika lapho
zigcinwe izinsukwana, emuva kwalokho zithunyelwe emuva lapho ziqhamuka
khona. Esikushoyo siyikomiti sithi: Kungani kungakhiwa ezinye izakhiwo
ezifana neLindela khona lapho emingceleni ukuze ngaleyo ndlela imali
kahulumeni yongeke?

Okunye futhi esikuphawulile ukuthi abasebenzi emingceleni basebenza
izinsuku eziningi bengayi emakhaya ukuyobona imindeni yabo ngoba imindeni
ikude. Esikuhlongozayo ukuthi makwakhiwe izindlu khona lapho emingceleni
ukuze phela bakwazi ukuhlala nemindeni yabo uma bengasebenzi.

Uma ngiza kuBatho Pele, lesi sexwayiso seBatho Pele yisona esibaluleke
kakhulu ekwakhiweni kwesizwe sethu. Ngithanda ukusho ukuthi abanye
babasebenzi boMnyango abazifaki izichazimagama zabo, ngakho-ke kuba lukhuni
ukusizwa kwezakhamizi zakithi kuleli. Iningi lalaba basebenzi yibona
abangenaso nhlobo isineke ekukhulumeni nabantu. Ngingazi-ke noma mhlawumbe
basuke bekhathele yini ngoba kwezinye izindawo uthola imigqa emide kanti
futhi nezimo zokusebenza ziyabheda. Kwamanye amahhovisi abanawo ngisho
amakhabethe okubeka izincwadi zamafayela noma-ke ufika amakhompiyutha
ebheda. Amanye amahhovisi akhiwe ngendlela yokuthi abakhubazekile abakwazi
ukufinyelela kuwo neze.

Siyakuthakasela ukuba khona komahambanendlwana, ikakhulukazi emakhaya.
Kodwa angiphawule ukuthi abanele, kanti futhi abanye abakhona abasebenzi,
batholakala eceleni kwemigwaqo befile. Kunjalo sibabonile omahambanendlwana
lapha ngaphandle izolo, kodwa umbuzo uthi: Kungani bengabonakali ezindaweni
ezifanele?

Ngokunjalo, siyizithunywa zomphakathi siyaxhumana namahhovisi mayelana
nezinkinga esizitholayo emphakathini. Nokho mangisho ukuthi ziyatholakala
izisombululo. Usizo siyaluthola emahhovisi asemphakathini. Ngokunjalo-ke
siyaweseka kakhulu uMnyango. Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I wish to indicate that all this is not enough; there is a lot of work
that this department still needs to do. During our oversight visits as a
committee, we become vulnerable to crime or criminal activities. Let me say
that there are still remnants of bad behaviour amongst the officials of
this department. Some still do as they please; others still continue with
corruption and they only think about themselves.

It is therefore the wish of the select committee to see all criminals in
this department fired, because they stall progress in our country. This
criminality manifests itself in regional offices when people apply for
identity documents, death certificates, and passports. There are staff
members who still fraudulently take money from the public.

Let me come to border posts. Minister, things are still bad at the borders.
Likewise, there are staff members who still do as they please, as the hon
Thetjeng has already said. The number of illegal immigrants entering this
country every day is on the rise. It is sometimes these illegal immigrants
who bribe the officials of the department.
When illegal immigrants enter South Africa, they are arrested and sent to
Lindela Repatriation Centre in Gauteng. They are then kept there for a few
days and then deported to their respective countries. What we are asking as
a committee is: Why aren’t there many other structures like Lindela ... at
border posts which will help minimise the government spending on these
people.

The other thing which we have noted with concern is that officials at the
border posts work for many days and they do not have time to go home to see
their families because they are far away. Our proposal is that houses
should be built at the border posts for these officials so that they can
stay with their families when they are not working.

When it comes to Batho Pele principles, these principles are very important
in building our nation. I would also like to mention that some officials of
the department do not wear their name tags, and this makes it difficult for
the people to be served in this country. Most of these officials are
impatient when they speak to the people, though I do not know whether they
are tired because at some places you get long queues and the working
conditions are also bad. Some offices do not even have filing cabinets or
you find that computers are off-line. Other offices are built in such a way
that people with disabilities cannot access them.

We welcome the presence of the mobile units, especially in rural areas, but
I must indicate that they are not enough, and others that are available are
out of order, you find them by the side of the road broken down. It is
indeed true that we saw mobile units parked outside yesterday, but the
question is: Why are they not where they are supposed to be?

Likewise, we as the public representatives, consult with offices about the
problems that we encounter in communities. Let me state though that we do
find solutions. We get help from the offices which are within communities.
Therefore we support the department a lot. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]]

Ms J WITBOOI (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Minister of
Home Affairs, members of the House, colleagues and friends, allow me to
apologise on behalf of our MEC for social development, Ms Koleka Mqulwana,
who has had to travel abroad on official government business. I need to
make this apology in order for all of you to understand the context of the
message that I am bringing here today. I was asked at very short notice to
come here to the House on her behalf.

As we intensify programmes aimed at protecting the most vulnerable groups
in our society, the Western Cape department of social development is
particularly encouraged by the Minister’s
wide-ranging announcements, contained within her department’s new
turnaround action plan.

One of the core functions and constitutional requirements of the Department
of Social Development is the protection of children, especially the girl-
child. It is within that context that the Minister’s speech speaks directly
to the work we do in this province, rated amongst the highest in the
country, regarding the abuse and murder of children.

The Home Affairs Budget Vote comes at a time when our department is
grappling with the challenges of poverty, vulnerability, inequality and
social exclusion. Some of the main developmental obstacles facing us as a
nation include the increasing levels of impoverishment, rising unemployment
and the inability of the majority of people to access sources of livelihood
or free basic services.

Diseases such as HIV and Aids remain one of the key challenges of our time
and have the most severe impact on the poorest of the poor. These
conditions are denying communities the opportunity to participate fully in
an active economy and sustained livelihood, and instead burden them with
the costs of care, medicine and funerals.

In addition, the capacity of the state to reach the vast majority of poor
people is often limited because of resource constraints, due to the decades
of apartheid rule. Often, government requires the establishment of
strategic relations with progressive multiple agencies to provide social
protection. In this regard, we are encouraged by the Minister’s
announcement of the extension of government services to rural areas, via
mobile units, to ensure that deserving beneficiaries are registered and
provided with the necessary legal documents such as identity documents and
birth certificates.

We further applaud the Minister’s announcement that she has requested her
department’s legal team to investigate the possibility of taking children’s
fingerprints at a very early age, when they enter early childhood
development centres and primary school. This initiative, as announced by
the Minister, will enable law-enforcement agencies to track and trace a
child in the event of murder or abduction.

We support the hon Minister’s initiative as it speaks directly to our child
protection campaign which seeks to increase the awareness of communities
where the abuse of children is concerned. The overriding purpose of Child
Protection Week 2007 is to raise awareness and mobilise the whole country
around the protection of children against poverty and vulnerability.

We also seek to strengthen collaboration to address social ills such as
child neglect, abuse and exploitation as well as substance abuse and other
circumstances that perpetuate child vulnerability. Child poverty cannot be
dealt with in isolation from the broader context of the family and the
community.

Most South African families, in particular those who were disadvantaged by
the past regime, find it very difficult to get out of the poverty trap.
They have remained poor throughout their lifespan and in many cases across
generations.

There are many causes of poverty and its nature is also multidimensional.
Lack of access to basic services such as housing, water, electricity, and
education as well as the disintegration of families, communities and social
networks make up some of the common features of poverty. Families and
communities presenting these features suffer multideprivation, which
impacts on all its members, children in particular.

Evidence shows that, unless there is sufficient external intervention,
social mobility of children living in extreme poverty is very slow, and the
likelihood that they can make it to the top is often very remote. We have
to acknowledge that poverty is a multi-dimensional phenomenon. Tackling it
will therefore require a co-ordinated approach to services for families
with young children in order to improve access to employment, essential
public services and early childhood development services. It is again very
important to recognise the role of parents, community and faith-based
organisations and the private sector in tackling child poverty.

Government cannot uproot child poverty alone but through partnerships with
those who embrace the principle of a caring society. In South Africa, we
find a very high concentration of poverty among those households with young
children. In this regard, the above-mentioned announcement by the hon
Minister will effectively solve the problem of child-headed households,
where most of the children do not have the required documents to apply for
social grants.

I want to take this opportunity to further express our province’s and
specifically our department of social development’s gratitude to the hon
Minister for her initiative of establishing a system that registers
children immediately after their birth. This has made our work as the
Department of Social Development much easier when it comes to loading
newborn babies onto our system, regarding social grants.

As we approach the commemoration of Youth Day, I want to take this
opportunity and urge all departments, NGOs, private sector companies and
communities themselves to build onto the momentum already set in motion by
the Department of Home Affairs’ new turnaround action team. As the Minister
rightfully told us today, Batho Pele must be much more than a slogan; it
should be a principle in action as it guides us towards increased and
improved service delivery. The Western Cape supports this Budget Vote.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon MECs in absentia – since
I don’t see any of them - hon members and officials, the department is
judged solely on the quality of services rendered to the public. While
there have been general improvements in service delivery, it is still the
department’s biggest challenge that must be overcome. The IFP acknowledges
that the department, through a turnaround strategy, is succeeding in
improving service delivery but a proper evaluation of this would only be
possible after the lapse of more time.

The total allocation of Home Affairs for the 2007-08 financial year
increases by R514 million, that is 18%, from R2,8 billion to R3,3 billion,
when looking at the adjustment appropriation budget for 2006-07. This will
not cover the enormous backlog experienced by my province of KwaZulu-Natal.


In KwaZulu-Natal, service delivery has not yet improved in the rural areas.
The inhabitants do not have access to departmental services within a
manageable distance and they still have to travel long distances and long
hours to urban centres at great expense, in time and money, to obtain their
official documents that are needed for employment and other civic matters.

Iningi labantu engikhuluma ngabo alisebenzi. Akulula ukuya emadolobheni
ukuze bathole usizo abaludingayo; bangabantu abahlwempu. Baye bavele baqome
ukuhlala bengenaso nasicucu leso sezincwadi ezibalulekile. Kuyinkinga
enkulu lokhu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Most of the people that I am talking about here are not working. It is not
easy for them to go to town to obtain the services they need; they are
impoverished people. They simply choose to live without that important
document. This is a very big problem.]

We were promised that mobile units would be deployed and I know that 16
mobile units have been deployed in KwaZulu-Natal. They were supposed to be
used in the far-flung rural areas but, most unfortunately, that is not the
case - they just go around on the tarred roads. However, this has not
happened and the department recently considered that the mobile units are
not suitable to travel on the roads that do exist in the rural areas. These
are mostly gravel roads but the mobile units are apparently only suitable
for tarred roads.

Kusho ukuthi inkinga ayikathintwa. Ayikho imigwaqo emaphandleni
engasetshenziswa abantu abanswempu nabahluphekayo. Kusho ukuthi sekudingeka
nezokuthutha zingene lapho. Kodwa-ke noma kunjalo, ngicabanga ukuthi
kukhona okungenzeka. Inkinga le ithinta iMinyango embalwa.
Imigwaqo ayikho futhi eminye mibi, ayihambeki, kodwa omasipala bakhona
futhi nezinkantolo zamakhosi zikhona. Uma omahambanendlwana bengaya kulezo
zindawo singacishe sithi kukhona okwenzekayo, hhayi ukuthi bagcine
ngokuzungeza lapha emadolobheni kodwa bengayi ngaphandle kwedolobha.

KwaZulu-Natali bebezungeza khona nje lapho edolobheni kubantu abanosimapala
abathathu, iRichards Bay, Melmoth naseMpangeni. Laphaya kwanjakayiphume
ngempela akuthinteki lutho nje, kunjengoba kunjalo. Kusho ukuthi
ohluphekayo uyohlupheka aze afe. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[This therefore means that the problem has not yet been solved. There are
no roads in rural areas that can be used by the impoverished and destitute
people. This calls for the Transport department to play its role here. Be
that as it may, I think something can still be done. This problem concerns
a few other departments.

In certain areas there are no roads and others are in a bad state, they are
unusable, and municipalities and tribal courts seem to do nothing about
these. If the mobile units can go to those places we can, at least, say
that something is being done. These mobile units should not be seen just
roaming around here in towns and not go to the outskirts of town.

In KwaZulu-Natal these mobile units were just roaming around in town,
helping people who have the luxury of three municipalities, namely Richards
Bay, Melmoth and Empangeni, whereas in rural areas, nothing is happening at
all; everything is still the same. This confirms that a person who is
suffering now will suffer until she dies.]

The saga of the mobile units in KwaZulu-Natal clearly demonstrates the need
for the department to build permanent structures in the rural areas so that
the citizens can obtain services. Although such structures are expensive,
it is in the interest of the department and the country that services are
taken to the people, especially the rural poor.

Allow me to conclude by welcoming the Director-General of the Department of
Home Affairs in his very challenging post. He comes with the reputation of
being a turnaround specialist and I am sure he is already aware that all
his skills will be required at Home Affairs. We wish him well in his job
and wish him success with the department. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Voorsitter, alle mense se paaie kruis van tyd tot tyd
met die Departement van Binnelandse Sake en dit is nie altyd aangenaam om
na die departement toe te gaan nie. Mens staan in lang toue. Nou onlangs
moes ek vir ’n uur en ’n half daar staan om my paspoort te hernieu en voor
my was slegs 20 mense in die ry. Laat dit wees soos dit wil, die hele
omkeerstrategie lyk belowend en ons sal met belangstelling dophou hoe die
strategie gaan werk. Baie sukses met hierdie omkeerplan.

Binnelandse Sake het ’n bevolkingsregister waarin die name van alle
landsburgers geregistreer is. Wanneer iemand 18 jaar oud word, dan is so ’n
persoon geregtig om te stem. Alvorens so iemand kan stem, moet hy natuurlik
as sodanig geregistreer word by die Onafhaklike Verkiesingskommissie. Dit
is so dat die OVK wel registrasieveldtogte het, wat die mense geleentheid
gee om wel te gaan registreer. Dit is gedeeltelik suksesvol.

Die VF wil egter ‘n voorstel doen: Minister, wat is die moontlikheid dat
die bevolkingsregister gebruik kan word as basis waaruit die kieserslyste
saamgestel kan word? Nie alleen is dit makliker nie, ons is ook van mening
dat dit doeltreffender kan wees om die bevolkingsregister te gebruik om al
die landsburgers die geleentheid te gee om te kan stem.

Dit is tog so dat dit elke burger se reg is om te stem. Dit is nou
weliswaar so dat elkeen wat ouer as 18 is, wel kan stem, maar dan moet hy
eers registreer by die OVK. Gebruik van die bevolkingsregistrasieregister
kan tyd en geld spaar en dit kan meebring dat die grondwetlike reg om te
stem net makliker en meer toeganklik gemaak kan word. Dit is ’n praktiese
manier en dit sal in belang wees van almal, wat deelneem aan verkiesings.
Ek sal graag die agb Minister se antwoord hierop wil hê. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, all of us have to cross paths with the
Department of Home Affairs from time to time, and it is not always a
pleasure to go there. One has to stand in a long queue. Recently I had to
stand in a queue for an hour and a half to renew my passport and there were
only 20 people ahead of me. Be that as it may, the entire turnaround
strategy looks promising and we will follow its progress with keen
interest. Good luck with this turnaround plan.

Home Affairs has a population register in which the names of all citizens
are recorded. Upon turning 18 years of age, one has the right to vote. Of
course, before one can vote, one has to be registered with the Independent
Electoral Commission. It is true that the IEC does have registration
campaigns that afford the public the opportunity to register. This is
partially successful.

The FF Plus would, however, like to make the following proposal: Hon
Minister, what is the possibility of utilising the population register as
the basis from which voters’ lists could be compiled? This would not only
make things easier, but we are also of the opinion that it could be more
effective to utilise the population register to afford all citizens the
opportunity to vote.

It is, after all, a fact that every citizen has the right to vote. It is
true that a person who is older than 18 is entitled to vote, but then the
person should first be registered with the IEC. Using the population
register can save time and money, and it can only result in making the
constitutional right to vote simpler and more accessible. This is a
practical method, and it will be to the advantage of everybody who is
voting in elections. I would like the hon Minister to respond to this. I
thank you.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon members, the much-awaited
turnaround strategy to right-size, root out corruption and put systems in
place is long overdue. We hope to see speedy results by the next Budget
Vote.

Teething problems will still remain around the issuing of ID documents,
where corruption is rife and service is poor. We can only hope that the
Home Affairs National Identification System, the Hanis smart-card system
will come into operation soon. We thank you for your input this morning
and, please, get a high-ranking policeman to jail these corrupt people.

Refugees complain about poor handling, the long turnaround time for
documentation and incompetent, corrupt personnel who extort money for quick
processing of the documents. Given the influx of refugees and jobseekers
from Zimbabwe, we ask that more border control personnel be deployed to
handle the Zim crisis. The border area should be sufficiently staffed to
handle the number of refugees.

Immigration control has come in for criticism, given its handling of the
deportation of illegal refugees, the inhumane treatment and conditions
under which the refugees are held, and transported. However, we must
recognise the revolving-door case where those deported simply return weeks
later, as happens with Zimbabweans, for example.

The Independent Electoral Commission continues to do good work in expanding
its capacity-building role into Africa, in terms of system support and
administrative advice. The budget is inadequate, with regard to the Film
and Publication Board, given the monitoring role it must play over a large
industry.

The improvements in processing work permits for highly skilled foreigners
are noted, but some companies still complain about the administrative
burden it places on them.

Hon Minister, well, we note your explanation that poorly performing
employees will not be fired but will be retrained. This has to be done
within the context of a proper performance management system. I still think
that a structure such as the Immigration Advisory Board can offer useful
assistance on procedures and systems for quicker turnaround times for
foreigners to take up jobs in the country.
There must be timeous communication regarding the nonacceptance of
temporary passports by the United Kingdom and the European Union countries,
so that travellers are aware of the nonacceptance, given the long period
for processing normal passports.

Given that Foreign Affairs is opening up more representative offices and
high commissions in Africa and other regions, it is essential that Home
Affairs seconds competent visa personnel to such stations. I wish the
Minister and her team strength as she tackles this massive project.

I just want to ask the Minister, through the Chair, about something she
spoke about regarding granting work permits to people. My worry is just
that, around the world, people don’t get work permits unless they have
jobs. We see a lot of people coming here who don’t have jobs but have work
permits. Is that correct? That’s what worries us a little bit about this.

Through the Chair, Minister, we do appreciate that you acknowledge the
challenges, and we want to wish you well. We really support the budget.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, I just want to say that maybe Home Affairs needs to be
understood in its historical context, that is, Home Affairs used to be the
main department that was used by the apartheid regime to oppress and
subjugate our people. The culture of service and the culture of respect for
citizenry were very foreign in this department then. Therefore the problems
that are in Home Affairs are historical problems and deep-rooted. We may
not be able to solve them overnight. But, yes, as the ANC, we are doing our
best to sort out all those problems. Having said that, I then want to come
to my speech.

Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the new director-general, thanks
for the opportunity. Home Affairs is the nerve centre of the activities of
government and its citizens. It is responsible for issuing documents to all
citizens to enable them to obtain government and private sector benefits.
Without documents from Home Affairs, one may not be in a position to get a
job, a house or participate in any meaningful activities that ensure a
normal life for a person.

In order for this department to live up to its expectations and deliver
quality services to its people to better their lives and deepen democracy,
it must function like well-oiled machinery. It has to be sensitive to the
needs of the people in its daily operations. It must be a department that
is exemplary, when it comes to the principles of Batho Pele.

Hitherto, the department has not been very inspiring in many instances. It
is bedevilled with many problems which we think need to be addressed as a
matter of urgency. It is for this reason that the Minister has appointed a
support intervention team to identify the problems and suggest a strategy
that would help the department to get on its feet and discharge its
responsibilities in a manner that is acceptable to all. We commend the
Minister for that. We are aware that some of the recommendations of that
task team are already in the process of being implemented. We hope and
trust that this time around the corrective measures will work.

Four days ago, our committee met with the new HOD. We take this opportunity
to welcome him and express the hope that he will be equal to the task. We
can tell him that he can count on us as dependable allies. Your tasks, head
of department, are many and complicated. The acid test for your success
lies in dealing a decisive blow to the rampant corruption that is eroding
the integrity of your department in particular and government in general.

You must keep on improving the department’s ability to deliver quality
services to the citizens. To this end, you will have to take a fresh look
at your personnel and check if they have the requisite skills to perform
their tasks. If they are found wanting regarding the necessary skills, do
not hesitate to deploy and redeploy, for it is only when your foot soldiers
are properly skilled that you can succeed.

We hope that the department will see fit to establish at least one Home
Affairs office in each municipality. During the 2004 elections, my
organisation, the ANC, deployed me to work in a municipality called
Emakhazeni in Mpumalanga. The entire municipality is made up of three small
towns and farming areas. These small towns are Belfast, Machadodorp and
Watervaal Boven.

All these small towns do not have a single office of Home Affairs. Home
Affairs officials come once a week from Lydenburg to each of these small
towns. The challenge is that they arrive at about 10:30 to 11:00 and leave
at about 14:00 so that they are back at their offices in Lydenburg at
16:00, because this is their knock-off time. Officially these officials
work for only three hours. At the time they knock off they leave large
numbers of people unattended to – some of whom would have travelled very
long distances from farming areas. It is our considered view that these
officials would optimise their service if they operated in offices located
in the municipality.

In our interaction with the department this year we were heartened to learn
that the department has finally taken a decision to decentralise some of
its non-core functions that they are involved in. When we visited Garankuwa
offices last year, we found that pipes in the ablution blocks were blocked.
Upon enquiry as to why they were not repaired, we were told that the
problem was reported to the head office in Pretoria. We believe, as a
department, that there is no need to report this to head office and that
this can be done in-house - at the offices themselves.

Chair, if you go to any Home Affairs office you would find stacks and
stacks of IDs which are not collected notwithstanding the fact that the
department has also enlisted the services of post offices to distribute
these. Among other reasons for people not collecting their ID documents is
the fact that some people apply for IDs in different places and only fetch
one ID, because the systems do not talk to each other. Now that there is a
new strategy in the department and there is also an improvement in the IT
system, we are sure that the systems will be able to talk to each other.

The upgrading of border control could not have come at a better time. It is
done at a time when, as a country, we are preparing ourselves for the Fifa
World Cup to be held on our shores in three years’ time. It is to be
expected that over and above the soccer fans who will come into South
Africa legally, we will have those who may want to come in illegally and
attempt to see the matches having not come through the border posts. As a
department and a country, we need to be ready to deal with such
eventualities. You will need more detention centres, as somebody else has
already mentioned.

It is agreed that our economy has outgrown the skills bank in our country.
This shortage of skills has become a factor regarding further development
of our economy. We need to move with speed to develop those scarce skills.
In the meantime this department is at the core of facilitating the movement
of people from elsewhere in the world into our country. The amendment to
the immigration legislation is just what the doctor has ordered for us to
respond to the demands of Jipsa and Asgisa. We commend the department for
the quick response for us to import skills. That will go a long way towards
growing our economy and, by extension, expanding the frontiers of
prosperity.

In conclusion, we want to wish the department well in their turnaround
strategy to serve our people better. We have no doubt that this time around
we will indeed turn the corner. We want to thank the Minister and the
department that, during our Taking Parliament to the People sessions, they
have always deployed mobile units wherever we have gone. These units have
served our people very well and we want to thank them very much. We want to
support the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon members, thank you very much
for your inputs and constructive criticism. I also want to thank you
because all of you, without exception, have in your inputs appreciated the
deployment of a turnaround team to the Department of Home Affairs.

I am saying this because, in some quarters, questions have been raised
regarding the turnaround team, such as: How much are we going to pay this
team and why do we need another turnaround team, when we have heard over a
period of four or five years that there are turnaround teams which are
coming into the department? The truth of the matter is that, to have a
turnaround team intervening and assisting you turn things around in the
department, without conducting or having a proper diagnosis of the nature
of the problems and challenges you are confronted with in that department,
is indeed a futile exercise.

The difference this time around is that we invited a support intervention
task team, which conducted an in-depth analysis of the problems of the
department. On the basis of the observations, findings and recommendations
of that report we have now solicited the support of this particular team of
private sector experts to come into the department.

The other question that has been raised by some people in some quarters is:
Why a team of international experts from the private sector? It is because
of the experience they have of having assisted in restructuring and turning
around other departments of home affairs or departments of interior affairs
in other parts of the world such as the Netherlands, Belgium, New Zealand,
US and so forth. Therefore we have an opportunity to be properly
benchmarked according to international standards.

Mme Masilo, you have raised the issue of the immigration services and the
importance of declaring that particular directorate or branch an essential
service. We are in the process of doing that. You may also have noticed
that last week there was an interdict which was seeking to prevent
immigration officers from embarking on a strike. We had to do that because
we had not as yet received a response from the committee which is supposed
to take such decisions. We had made an application some time ago that this
particular service should be declared an essential service. We hope that by
the end of today we shall have clarity about what the way forward on this
matter should be.

Ntate Thetjeng, we will follow up on that old man in that part of Limpopo
to establish exactly what the nature of his problem is and, by the way, he
is not the only one. There are many other people in the country who have
come forward to say that their IDs refer to them as non-citizens of the
country. We are quite sensitive on that particular issue.

The biggest challenge is that when we have the Lokisa Ditokomane campaign,
people focus on the correctness or the incorrectness of their particulars
in the document. Those who had these particular kinds of challenges did not
come forward to rectify that and it is something that all of us have to
work on. I also believe that the Lokisa Ditokomane campaign should be
resuscitated.

I also want, colleagues, to mention a particular challenge which we are
currently confronted with, that of people wanting to access grants by hook
or by crook. A large number of people, some of them my age – it is amazing
- are coming forward to claim that the dates of birth in their IDs are
incorrect. The truth of the matter is: The poverty in the country is such
that it is driving people to lie about their age. It is a major challenge
for us, because you may not have the name of that particular person and,
obviously, we do have records. So you would have to go back and probe to
find out exactly what the position is.

When you come back to the person to show them the correct date of birth
which is reflected on their ID, they then go to public representatives and
solicit support and intervention. I just want to alert hon members that, as
we assist people in our constituencies, this is one issue that we need to
pay attention to, because it is beginning to create a big problem for us.

Hon Madlala-Magubane, you mentioned that the mobile units are not enough. I
agree with you. But I also need to remind hon members that the mobile units
are not a permanent solution to the problems and challenges that we have of
infrastructure in the country. A mobile unit is not even an investment. As
we all know, you cannot invest in buying a car; you invest in proper
immovable property. We have tried our best to secure as many mobile units
as possible. We now have a total of 109 mobile units. The truth of the
matter is that the challenge for us is to begin to ensure that there are
service points, and proper functioning offices and multipurpose community
centres that are built by government to ensure that services are rendered.

For now, we have been using the mobile units as a stop-gap measure, in view
of the crisis which we have been confronted with. The challenge again is
the role of the Members of Parliament. What should our role be as public
representatives in ensuring that the mobile units reach the most remote
areas of our country? When we took a decision to introduce these mobile
units we thought that we could actually deploy them to areas which are, for
example, 30 km away from the nearest office. Mme Vilakazi is correct when
she says you see them around in areas where there is a service point or an
office, because people do not want to go to remote areas.

The challenge to all of us is monitoring. As Minister and Deputy Minister
and director-general, we will not know that these mobile units are not
properly utilised for the purpose we had in mind. We are empowered to deal
with this particular issue. You are also empowered to go to all the offices
of the department, because you should also remember that we do not have the
MECs. So another challenge is the monitoring of managers in the provinces
regarding whether they are doing their work properly or not.

If I may say this about these mobile units: There is a very sad story about
these units. We had very good political will when we decided to have these
mobile units. Some of the challenges that we have been confronted with are
drivers who will drive a mobile unit into a tree, and in that way damage
the satellite dish. You will have a situation where the computers in the
mobile unit get damaged because the kind of person who is managing or
running that mobile unit is not well equipped to use the computer.

My view now, and I think the director-general will support this when we
discuss this particular matter, is that we probably need to have a manager
who will be dedicated to monitoring the utilisation of these mobile units,
because one of the biggest challenge that we have had was that when we took
a decision and started manufacturing these mobile units, provinces did not
work on a plan of how these mobile units would be distributed and deployed.
Also, our own management at head office did not even work out a plan on how
we would maintain those mobile units and even whether we have drivers for
those mobile units. These are some of the challenges.

You will find that you send a certain number of mobile units to a
particular area, but they get stuck there because there is no driver as
there was no plan. We probably need to have somebody who can start managing
and also monitor the log books of these mobile units so that they are not
abused.

Mrs Witbooi, I am very glad that you support the matter which I raised
regarding the media yesterday, because already, in the media, some children
activists are saying they are shocked about the priorities of government
and so on - total insensitivity. One of the reasons why I am saying we
should contemplate doing this is that it would assist people to trace
missing children, because the fingerprints do not change.

Ungakhula uze uguge, ngisho ube ngakanani, kodwa uma wanyatheliswa iminwe
useyingane lokho kuyohlala kunjalo. [You can grow as old as you can be, but
if your fingerprints were taken whilst you were still young, they do not
change, they stay the same.]

In the case of missing children and murdered children, at least we will
have a database of fingerprints for those children so that we are able to
trace those children again. It is not as if we do not have criminal
children. We do have children who have committed the worst kinds of crimes
– children who have raped, children who have murdered, as we have heard
from the Minister of Correctional Services.

I believe that it is important that as children enter schools we should
take their fingerprints to assist society to deal with some of the
challenges that we are confronted with. We will be happy at the point when
we come to hon members to say: “Please give us the support where you can,
because this is for genuine and good reasons regarding South Africans.” If
there is failure on the part of some people to appreciate the extent of the
challenges which we have in the country, then it is a major challenge to
our society.

Mrs Vilakazi also raised the fact that the resources from the National
Treasury are not enough. Resources cannot be enough, but I want to say, on
behalf of the department, that our appreciation goes to the Minister of
Finance for the support he has been giving to us as we are going through
this process, also regarding the amount of resources deployed to a point
where we even have money which is readily available to secure a new
passport machine.

We have had a passport machine which has not been able to deal with the
challenge of the number of passports which we have to produce. It’s a
machine that we have had to cease using for a certain number of hours so
that it could cool down. But now the kind of machine we are securing before
the end of this year will produce more or less 40 000 passports per day. We
have seen it in action and we are happy that what we are trying to do will
improve the quality of the services that we render.

Hon Van Heerden, at some point we launched what we used to call a permanent
registration campaign. It still remains permanent. I think all of us have a
challenge of going out to popularise this campaign of educating our people
about the importance of registration. It should be known that you exist in
the country. We should not wait until election time before we encourage
people to register. I have taken note of the proposal which you have made
that, perhaps, the voters’ roll should be derived from the population
register. I have noted that particular issue.

The hon Hendrickse raised the issue of the deportation processes - the
inhumane conditions under which illegal migrants are kept. I can only say,
and repeatedly, because I have said this before: I invite members to visit
Lindela. We are trying to demystify what is happening there. There was a
time when Lindela was not open to the public and media. It was only in 2005
that Lindela was opened to both the public and the media. Any time you let
us know, we will allow you to go to Lindela so that when you speak on these
matter you can say, “We have observed the following things.”

It should not only end there. I think it is also important for members of
the select committee to take a ride with the people as we are deporting
them to Zimbabwe, so that you can begin to appreciate the extent of the
challenges we are confronted with, namely that as you deport people to
Zimbabwe, already people are at the border working out ways of going back
into South Africa. As the train arrives back in South Africa, some of them
may already be back in the country ahead of that train. These are some of
the practical challenges that we are confronted with.

My view is that even to set up more repatriation centres in the country is
not going to help. There must come a time in the country when we have to
look into this particular issue and probably review the policy. A lot of
money is spent on accommodation, on maintenance and transportation of these
illegal immigrants. All that we have been preaching to them is, “Please,
find ways of legalising your stay in South Africa. Don’t come in
illegally.” The challenge of illegal migration is going to continue,
colleagues.

We do have asylum seekers from Zimbabwe. But, if you interact with some of
the illegal immigrants from Zimbabwe, you will find that they are in fact
economic migrants and all they want is a quick job to earn money and go
back to feed their families. We need to talk about those challenges,
because they cannot be challenges for the Department of Home Affairs. At
some point we need to do a lot of soul searching and we have to take
drastic decisions which are going to assist.

We are talking about economic integration in the region and free movement
of people. So, the attitude of the South African population must begin to
change to be in line with the challenges that this country is confronted
with. There is economic stability here and there is political stability. So
we are a pull factor on the continent. We are pulling people; we are a
magnet which attracts a lot of these economic migrants, obviously because
of our own economic stability. People just want to come in to seek jobs and
to them it does not matter how they secure the documents, they try their
best. I have seen many of them passing through Lindela. I recognised some
faces from the previous visits.

So it’s a challenge and I don’t think it is a challenge for the Department
of Home Affairs alone. It is a challenge about which we should engage in a
public discourse - a public debate which will focus on this specific
matter: How are we going to deal with this issue of illegal migration?

Lastly, I want to reply to Ntate Tolo, the commissar. By the way, when I
refer to him as the commissar, I mean “my commissar”. The commissar has
raised the issue of the hours of work. Even on this matter, it is you
colleagues, as the public representatives, who should be monitoring this.
We declared a policy in 2005 that our hours in our offices are extended to
18:00 to enable people who are workers to come back from work and still
access our services, but it is not happening in all the offices. I will not
know and the director-general will not know, unless somebody has his or her
ears to the ground to monitor what is happening in a particular area. We
have extended our opening days to include Saturdays.

As I am sitting here, as Minister, I rely on the report that I receive from
managers. It is the responsibility of all of us as public representatives
to establish wherever there is an office of the Department of Home Affairs,
whether that office does open on Saturdays. We take policy decisions, we
outline them and we give directives to top management. If there is no
implementation of this, please feel free to come back and let us know so
that we can deal with these challenges.

The last issue, which was also raised by the commissar, relates to the
distribution of IDs, where people have visited offices and discovered that
there is a stack of IDs. People then lie to you and say a certain number of
documents were distributed during that particular month, but when you walk
into the office and open the cupboards you will find some IDs. It is a
problem about the quality of people in our management as well as their
integrity. For me, dishonesty is just lack of integrity.

I think it is proper when you at least say, “We have not been able to
distribute these documents for the following reasons.” In that case, we can
deal with that situation, but when you say that you do not have backlogs
and you have distributed everything and then you discover later that in
fact there are IDs, that is not right. These are things that hon members
can assist us to deal with.

Hon members, you have heard me saying that one of the things we intend to
do is that this turnaround should look at service level agreements with
some of the contractors or service providers who are providing a service to
us. One of those should be the Post Office. We have an agreement with the
Post Office to conduct distribution and delivery of these IDs. My view is
that one of the service level agreements that we have to review is that
particular one, because one needs to ask this question: To what extent is
it helping us to get these IDs to our people? It could be that they reach
the people, but do they reach them timeously or does it take a month, in
which case we may as well have kept the IDs in our offices?

There are many offices that are collecting a lot of revenue. You hear one
day that there has been a robbery in an office in Pretoria, but when you
check the amount that has been taken, you find that the problem is money
not having been banked for a particular number of days. This happens while
we have service providers who are supposed to do that job, that is collect
the money and deposit it.

The importance of reviewing some of the service level agreements regarding
very critical institutions and companies has become one of our priorities.
My view is that we need Sars to come in and take the responsibility of
collecting money and doing the banking. It is not the core function of the
Department of Home Affairs to do those kinds of things.

These are challenges which are completely practical and tangible problems
that we have and we need collective wisdom in dealing with them. Such
problems can’t be the responsibility of a Minister, a Deputy Minister or a
director-general; they are about all of us engaging in a debate which will
take the department forward.
Somebody said, for instance, that some trucks are not searched at Beit
Bridge. It is the responsibility of Customs to do that, and not
immigration. But you know, everything, every ill you find at a port of
entry, can only be passed on to the Department of Home Affairs. Of course,
you cannot refuse to take responsibility. We work as a cluster in
government. You can only take responsibility and find ways of improving
this situation.

Hon members, I thank you very much. Maybe, hon Hendrickse, I should have
responded to this issue of quota lists which you are concerned about. These
quota lists that we publish yearly really allow people, as I said earlier
on, to apply for work permits without securing a job. It is about the
attraction of skills into the country. It may be possible that at some
point people may feel strongly that this must come under review, but it is
one way of dealing with the challenge of scarce and critical skills in the
country, that is we distribute, publicise and popularise these quota lists
so that people can then apply for the work permits.

The challenge to you is: Help us to do it. Maybe at some point we would
have to look at the merits and the demerits of having such a quota list and
whether it is indeed taking the county forward. But for now, the take-up
last year was not good. Even the previous year was not good. So, the
reasons why we are appealing to you to assist us in popularising these
quota lists is because we would want to attract many skilled foreigners to
come in and assist in the reconstruction of our country.

Ndiyabulela kakhulu koogxa bam. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Let me express my sincere
gratitude to my colleagues. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 11:34.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson


1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 7 June 2007 and transmitted
         for concurrence:


         (a)     Municipal Fiscal Powers and Functions Bill [B 9B – 2007]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
         the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Employment Equity Report of the Department of Home Affairs for
         2007-2008, in terms of section 21(2) of the Employment Equity Act,
         1998 (Act No 55 of 1998).


