---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 February 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-02-21
---

WEDNESDAY, 21 FEBRUARY 2007
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

 INTRODCUTION OF APPROPRIATION BILL AND TABLING OF DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, Mr President; Deputy President;
distinguished colleagues; hon members; Governor and Deputy Governors of the
SA Reserve Bank; Chair and commissioners of the Finance and Fiscal
Commission, MECs, ambassadors and high commissioners - there is a
delegation of parliamentarians from the European Parliament and we’d like
to welcome them into the House today as well; our dear friends in the
gallery here or wherever you may be joining us; whether at work or at home;
fellow South Africans, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. [Applause.]
In the introduction to his book on China and globalisation, Will Hutton
reminds us:

   The foundation of human association is the idea that human life has equal
   worth and human beings are equally entitled to political, economic and
   social rights, which allow them to choose a life they have reason to
   live.


Human life has equal worth.

Motho ke motho, ga a na bosehlana. [A human being is a human being, there
is no lesser human being.]

The idea, then, that human life has equal worth and that this is the core
value that unites us, invites us to ask whether we’ve done enough to give
practical effect in South Africa today to our shared humanity. Have we
acted in a manner that shows that human life has equal worth, or do we
still live in a society where the shadow of history dominates over the
opportunities of an open society?

As our young nation enters its 13th year, we have much to be proud of. We
are building a society founded on the principles of equality, nonracialism
and nonsexism. We’ve built institutions of democracy, creating an open
society founded on the rule of law. And after stabilising the economy and
public finances, we have created the conditions for rapid economic growth,
job creation and the broadening of opportunities.

Sound management of public finances and the improved tax compliance culture
on which it rests, provides us with the resources to invest in our public
services, to renew our infrastructure, reshape our residential areas,
provide water, electricity, housing, sanitation, schooling, health care and
access roads to millions who were previously denied these elementary
building blocks of modern society. The social grant system has expanded,
hunger is in retreat and vulnerable families have been lifted out of
poverty.

Yet the idea that human life has equal worth demands more of us. President
Mbeki, at the fourth Nelson Mandela lecture reminded us that-


   ... to achieve the social cohesion and human solidarity we seek, we must
   vigorously confront the legacy of poverty, racism and sexism.


The 2007 Budget strives to accelerate economic growth and work
opportunities, to modernise our public services and infrastructure and, of
course, to fight poverty and inequality, because we have a shared pledge to
work together in action. We do this, consciously, as a choice of this
government, because without a powerful countervailing force, that shadow of
history, that place from where we come, that luck of the draw, if you wish,
will forever determine the opportunities, entitlements and outcomes.

We need government to be strong, to be there, to be focused, to intervene
on behalf of the poor and to deal with these issues. That’s quite
fundamental to the kind of democracy that we want and need in South Africa.
[Applause.] And we do so because of a set of fundamental beliefs.

Izimpilo zabantu zinesisindo ngokufanayo. [People’s lives hold equal
value.] [Interjections.]

The economic gains of the past 10 years enable us to begin to fulfil other
key elements of our economic and social modernisation. Chief among these
are the systems we create to plan and prepare for the long term, to set in
place the policies and institutions that will help us to achieve prosperity
for all and social solidarity for future generations. As our economy adapts
to an ever-changing global environment, and as we recognise over time new
policy challenges and priorities, our public services must support
transition and transformation by providing rising income security and
protection to individuals, families and communities.

In the state of the nation address, from this podium, just 12 days ago,
President Mbeki indicated that the time is right to construct a broad-based
social security system embracing all South Africans, and I am pleased to
confirm that we are tabling the main proposals today.

We have had the good fortune, since 2001, to report on the healthy and
strengthening state of the economy. Once again, economic performance has
exceeded expectations.

The economy continued to expand at a robust pace of 4,9% last year,
generating new jobs, broadening the consumer base and providing impetus for
rapid growth in investment. Economic growth is projected to average just
over 5% a year over the next three years. For 2007, somewhat weaker growth
in the world economy and the interest rate increases of the past year are
expected to result in a growth rate of 4,8%.

While household spending is projected to slow from the lively growth rate
of over 7% last year, it is still expected to expand by close to 5% over
the medium term - indeed a robust trend reflecting good growth in household
income.

This expansion has been supported by a benign interest rate climate, with
exceptional growth in the construction, finance, transport and
communication sectors. The manufacturing sector has grown by more than 4% a
year since 2004. Conversely, poor performances by agriculture and mining
weighed on our growth performance last year.

Investment across the economy underpins a positive outlook for the period
ahead. Investments increased by 11,7% in the first nine months of last
year, and as a percentage of GDP rose to 18,4%. Investment by public
corporations, government and the private sector will remain central to
strengthening economic expansion over the medium term, as government
maintains its focus on the extension and improvement of transportation
links, increasing electricity supply and reshaping the built environment.

More rapid growth has meant more rapid job creation. According to the
December 2006 quarterly employment statistics, employment in the
nonagricultural parts of the economy rose by over 3% in the first nine
months of last year.

The global economy has remained supportive of our growth performance in
response to exceptional growth in China and India, healthy growth in G7
countries and, of course, high commodity prices. The commodity price rally
has now entered its sixth year. Sometimes we must pause and consider just
how big this rally has been. Between the end of 1999 and the end of last
year, the gold price rose by 121%. Well, unfortunately the oil price rose
by 144%, but the prices of both platinum and coal rose by more than 150%.

Our current account deficit has risen to levels close to 6% of GDP last
year and we expect the deficit to continue running at between 5% and 6%
over the medium term. This is a sign of robust economic growth. South
Africa is not alone in this regard. A number of fast-growing, oil-importing
and commodity-exporting markets such as Australia and New Zealand are also
running sizeable current account deficits.

Capital inflows are expected to cover the current account deficit as rand-
denominated assets remain attractive to foreign investors. Net capital
inflows reached R96,3 billion in the first nine months of last year. High
commodity prices, moderating household consumption trends and stronger
exports will tend to put downward pressure on the deficit in the next few
years.

At the same time, risks continue to arise from what economists call “global
imbalances” – the large surpluses and deficits on the current and capital
accounts of major world economies. The magnitudes involved are staggering.
The American and Chinese current account deficits and surpluses have
reached 6,6% and 7,2% of their respective GDPs. If measured in numbers, the
US deficit is equal to US$869 billion or nearly R6 trillion. That is the
gap between the imports and the exports, and it is staggering because so
often we tie ourselves into knots about what is happening in this economy.
But it’s important to understand some of these trends across the world.

Partly as a result of these deficits, liquidity in global markets is at
very high levels. The search for higher returns for those funds has led to
unprecedented flows of capital into emerging markets. Further, we are
seeing the use of low-interest G7 currencies for leveraged speculation. The
potential disorderly unwinding of these leveraged positions creates
enormous risks for emerging market economies, including our own. We must
raise this. But around the world, this matter was raised when the G7
finance Ministers met just over two weeks ago in Essen, Germany. For the
first time, they put on the agenda the need to consider matters relating to
both hedge funds and private equity funds, because these are large pools of
funds. And the issue was raised because finance Ministers of the G7
consider this to be one of the major risks to the global economy.

So, while our higher current account deficit mirrors stronger growth and
investment, we need to re-emphasise the importance of the more rapid and
diversified economic growth, and improving our export performance rather
than reliance on uncertain portfolio inflows.

In the first nine months of 2006 the volume of exports rose by 2,2%
compared to the same period in 2005, and by an average of 3,9% between 2000
and 2005. But a great expansion in the volume and value of exports and
export-related employment is needed to lift and sustain the economy’s
growth rate beyond 6% a year.

After several years of relative stability, the volatility of global
exchange rates increased in 2006, shifting the levels of many currencies as
commodity prices retreated from all-time highs and investor sentiment
towards emerging markets cooled. The exchange rate of the rand depreciated
by an average of 15% over the course of 2006.

Some volatility can be mitigated through a combination of increasing
foreign exchange reserves, reducing debt denominated in foreign currency,
promoting lower inflation, prudent fiscal decisions, and improving the
economy’s potential growth rate. In contrast, a more rigid approach to
exchange rates could stimulate larger capital inflows but make our exports
less competitive and overheat the domestic economy. The reserve bank has
continued its prudent accumulation of reserves. And I think, Governor, we
want to say thank you very much for that. [Applause.]

Further exchange control relaxation announced in this Budget will be
supportive of a greater two-way flow of capital and moderation in the
movement of the exchange rate.

Led by our Deputy President, the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative
of South Africa, Asgisa, lists clear areas where more work needs to be done
to raise our trend growth. It recognises, amongst other things, firstly,
that we will grow faster when we export more goods and services and
accelerate investment in areas of competitive advantage. Secondly, it
recognises that we will grow faster when our levels of productivity are
raised and our ability to generate more low-skilled jobs is enhanced.
Thirdly, it recognises that we will grow faster when the bureaucratic red
tape that hobbles business is tackled head-on. Fourthly, it recognises that
we will grow faster when the performance of the public sector is improved
so that the state can become an effective tool for reconstruction and
development. Fifthly, it recognises that we will grow faster when
infrastructure capacity is enhanced, especially in relation to
telecommunication, rail, roads, ports, electricity and water.

Hon members, we have much more work to do to ensure that economic expansion
can be sustained, and more importantly that the participation in the
economy be broadened. Part of the answer lies in our fiscal and investment
decisions and part in ensuring that our economy is able to adjust to global
risks and opportunities.

The CPIX inflation has remained within the inflation target band, averaging
4,6% in 2006, compared to 3,9% in 2005. Inflationary pressures in the short
term, including high food prices, should abate during this year. The CPIX
is projected to rise in the first half of the year, thereafter receding to
the middle of the target band but still remaining within the 3% to 6% range
over the medium term.

The increase in foreign exchange reserves and the present fiscal position
are considerable strengths. Mr President, when you took office in April
1999, gross foreign reserves stood at US$5,5 billion, the public debt to
GDP ratio stood at 49%, job creation was rising at about 200 000 a year and
economic growth was 2,5%. There is now US$25,9 billion in reserves; our
debt ratio is now 26% of the GDP – that would make us the envy of many
parts of the world; the economy is creating about 500 000 jobs a year and
we have economic growth of 5%. [Applause.] Under your stewardship, our
economic transformation is well and truly under way.

However, Mr President, it has not all been smooth sailing. Could I point
out that when you came into office, Bafana Bafana were ranked 25th in the
world, and today they rank 59th. [Laughter.] So, we should expand this
stewardship thing a bit more. [Applause.]

Madam Speaker, we are planning for a budget surplus in the coming fiscal
year. The fiscal stance creates space for our future social security
reforms and allows for rising funding levels for public sector
infrastructure, improvements to education and other government priorities,
while enhancing the competitiveness of the economy and sustaining the
current growth trajectory.

Tax revenue has grown by an average of 17% a year for the past three years,
much faster than the rate of economic growth. Hon members who passed
legislation will know that it’s not because we raised any of the rates; in
fact we reduced many of them. Alongside the new taxpayers created by a
growing economy, legislative, administrative and technological changes have
broadened the tax base significantly. All of these developments are
exceedingly positive and will benefit us long into the future.

Public spending – that’s the growth after inflation is taken into account -
has risen by over 9,2% a year in real terms over the past three years. The
strong revenue trend and declining debt service costs have provided us with
the room to invest in the modernisation of our services and infrastructure.
This allows us to add further to our spending plans, raising public
spending a further 7,7% a year over the next three years as government
ensures that effective programmes and promising new initiatives are funded
in line with government’s capacity to implement them. We are able to do
this without leaving a legacy of debt for future generations. [Applause.]
It is an ongoing battle that we have because debt is in fact a tax on
future generations.

What we will announce in the course of this Budget today are significant
changes to all of what we do. But we can do that by funding these from our
own resources, and not being entirely dependent on debt. This gives us the
independence of decision-making, but, more importantly, it places us in a
position where few countries have been in the world. [Applause.]

This is important because, in a country like ours with a low level of
savings, the planned fiscal surplus is in fact government’s contribution to
a national savings effort, and we would like our citizens to follow this
example.

In summary, our fiscal stance is a careful balance between increasing
spending on services and infrastructure, and providing moderate tax relief
to raise household income and savings and to lower the cost of doing
business, while increasing government savings. Furthermore, the fiscal
position helps to keep a check on emerging imbalances in the economy.

Despite generous tax relief and rate reductions, the tax to GDP ratio has
risen considerably in the past three years, reflecting both the economic
buoyancy and the broader tax base. For the fiscal year ending in March
2007, our revised estimate for revenue is R29 billion higher than the
original budget. [Applause.]

Company tax and value-added tax receipts have exceeded expectations due to
higher profits and strong domestic consumption. Personal income tax has
also surpassed our estimates, driven both by rising employment and real
gains in the income of persons. We are expecting the strong growth in
revenue to continue into the new fiscal year, leading to a revenue estimate
for the 2007-08 year of R545 billion or 28% of the gross domestic product.
As private sector investment increases and as household consumption
moderates slightly, we expect revenue as a share of GDP to decline to about
27% of GDP by the fiscal year that ends on 31 March 2010.
The revised estimate for spending in 2006-07, that is the year that ends on
31 March, is R470,6 billion, and that is R3,6 billion less than the
adjusted budget that we tabled at the end of October. As a result and
contrary to our initial expectations, the Budget balance for the present
year indicates a surplus of R5 billion. So, this is the unplanned one. The
next one is planned for.

We are budgeting to spend R534 billion in 2007-08, rising to R650 billion
in the 2009-10 fiscal year. Since tax revenues are likely to grow more
strongly than spending for at least another year, we are budgeting for a
fiscal surplus of around 0,6% of GDP in the first of these three years,
reverting to a moderate deficit by the end of the forecast period.

Debt interest costs continue to fall as a share of GDP and are set to reach
2,1% by 2010. The savings on interest that we have seen since 2001 provide
an additional R33 billion a year to spend on services and infrastructure,
money that we would not have had if we had kept borrowing at the level that
the country was borrowing in 1994.

In 1994 we had a choice to expand spending by borrowing or to reprioritise
while reducing the dependence on debt. The choices that we have made -
consciously made - provide us with the fiscal space to spend more on
education, on health and on public transport. It has also provided us with
the policy room to contemplate long-term reforms to our social security
system that will benefit all South Africans into successive generations.

Much of our economic and fiscal policies have been aimed at increasing
fiscal space and reducing our vulnerability to financial instability. These
questions, and how governments think about them in a global context, will
also be highlighted in the meetings of the G20 hosted in 2007 by South
Africa.

The G20 or Group of 20 finance Ministers and central bank governors,
includes seven industrialised and 13 of the most systematically significant
emerging market economies, whose main purpose is the pursuit of global
financial stability. This forum offers us a unique platform to identify
common objectives and common solutions to global financial and economic
challenges.

The theme for the G20 this year is, “Sharing – influence, responsibility,
knowledge”. South Africa has prepared a detailed work programme for the
year focused on three major areas. In addition to the area of fiscal space,
the G20 will look at the issue of increasing the voice of developing
countries on the global economic stage by giving impetus to efforts to
strengthen the voting power of emerging markets and low-income countries in
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

A final area of focus seeks to better understand the impact of high
commodity prices on macroeconomic management and the implications for
countries’ financial systems.

South Africa will also use the opportunity of its host year to improve and
strengthen knowledge, within the forum, of African economic and financial
policy challenges, and to facilitate a sharing of knowledge with African
countries, through a series of parallel discussions between the G20 and
African finance Ministers and governors.

The budget framework allows us to provide R89,5 billion in additional
spending over the next three years, in comparison with our spending plans
from what we had a year earlier. Our spending priorities are informed by
the overriding objective of accelerating growth, modernising our public
services and infrastructure, and reducing poverty and inequality.

Over the next three years, we are budgeting to spend almost R2 trillion –
that is a two followed by 12 zeros in rands. [Applause.] Now, we must use
these resources for the very purpose that democracy exists, that is, –
“iimpilo zabantu zixabiseke ngokulinganayo” [to ensure that human life can
indeed have equal worth] or, as we said earlier: Motho ke motho, ga ana
bosehlana. [A human being is a human being; there is no lesser human
being.]

If we truly want to create a society where human life has equal worth and
where every child has an equal opportunity to succeed, hon members, we must
improve the quality of our schools. This will not happen on its own. We
need concerted action to make things change.

Our teachers are the frontline of our education system. It is in their
hands that we place our 11 million children each and every school day. In
most cases, our teachers do a sterling job under difficult conditions. We
pay tribute to them and we ask no more than that they continue to serve
with dedication and integrity.

We also know of course, that a minority of teachers do not prepare their
lessons adequately, are frequently late and are unfit to be in the position
where they are asked to nurture our children. But we cannot let the
minority of teachers denigrate a profession based on love for children, a
desire for learning and a commitment to our collective future. [Applause.]

Over the next three years we are making available an additional
R8,1 billion to hire additional teachers, teaching assistants and support
staff in schools and districts and to improve remuneration levels of
teachers. [Applause.] The many people who submitted suggestions to the
“Tips for Trevor” campaign on this issue, I am sure, will be pleased to
hear of these developments.

The Minister of Education, who is unfortunately absent today, will lead the
process of determining how these resources should be used, focusing on the
need to reward good teachers, provide support to poor schools and improve
the quality of schooling in general. We are also setting aside R700 million
for bursaries for teachers to encourage young people to train as teachers
and to pursue careers in our public schooling system. [Applause.] This
amount should benefit about 13 000 teachers over the next three years.

Together with resources set aside in the provincial equitable share for the
implementation of no-fee schools, and a substantial increase in resources
for classroom building and providing water, electricity and sanitation in
schools, the investments announced in this Budget constitute a concerted
effort to improve the quality of schooling in our country. It is a step
change in resources going to schools, and of course we would like to see a
step change in the results as well. [Applause.]

The SA Schools Act recognises that the strength of our democracy is
dependent on the depth of involvement of our democratic institutions, such
as school governing bodies. We need committed parents to stand up and make
a contribution to the success of their children’s schools, so that we can
build a society where human life has equal worth.

The national Department of Education receives a further R850 million for a
step up in its adult basic education and training programmes, the Abet
programmes as we know them. [Applause.] The 2007 Budget also makes
available a further R2,2 billion to support our university sector to meet
its objectives of increasing enrolment and, for the ears of the Deputy
President, producing more science, engineering and technology graduates.
[Applause.] The further education and training sector, or FET sector,
receives R600 million for bursaries for deserving students. [Applause.]

Now, since the shifting of the social grants function to the Social
Security Agency, provinces have been able to focus on rebuilding their
welfare service capacity. A new bursary scheme for social workers is
established, with an initial allocation of R365 million. Together with
steps taken to increase social worker salaries, an initiative that we have
taken certainly since 2005, this initiative aims to revive interest in a
profession critical to the wellbeing of our communities and the development
of a more caring society. [Applause.]

The health sector receives a further R5,3 billion to spend on increased
remuneration for health workers and an increase in staffing levels.
[Applause.] We are budgeting to increase the number of health workers by
about 30 000 over the next five years. Our previous budget framework made
provision for the treatment and
care of about 250 000 people who are ill with Aids. We are likely to reach
that figure in the course of the next few months. Health receives a further
R1,7 billion for this programme, presently being delivered through 272
sites, allowing for a doubling of the uptake
over three years. [Applause.] Spending on dedicated HIV and Aids programmes
by health, education and social development departments will exceed R5
billion by 2009-10.

The hospital revitalisation programme, one of our more successful
infrastructure programmes, receives a further R1 billion, taking total
spending on this programme to R6,8 billion over the next three years. In
addition, the sector receives R1 billion for the modernisation of tertiary
services, with particular emphasis on diagnostic equipment.

One of the clearest ways in which we are able to act against poverty is
through our system of social grants. We presently have just under 12
million people receiving social grants, of whom over seven million are
beneficiaries of the child support grant. There is strong evidence that
South Africa’s social grants are well targeted and account for a
substantial share of the income of poor households. Grants are associated
with a greater share of household expenditure on food, and hence improved
nutrition, and the child support grant contributes measurably to the health
status of young children. Statistics SA data shows that the proportion of
households where children often or always went hungry decreased from 6,7%
in 2002 to 4,7% in 2005. I think we will all agree that it is still 4,7%
too many, but I think we can measure the trend, and improve this in the
nutrition of young children. This means that we can say to many more
children, ``Hunger is no longer knocking on the door.’’
Die lewe van alle mense is gelykwaardig. [The lives of all people are
equal.]

Three years ago, the Department of Social Development initiated measures to
curb fraud in our social grants system. With the help of the Special
Investigating Unit, over 130 000 people have been removed from the system
and about 2 500 have thus far been charged with fraud – tragic, but real.
This has contributed significantly to the stability of the overall system.
Ensuring that we eliminate fraud and corruption from the social grants
system is critically important. As we deal with this issue on a continuous
basis, there are, in fact, additional resources to provide for people who
really need them.

The state old age pension, disability and care dependency grants will rise
by R50 to a maximum of R870 a month, providing a strong signal that money
released from the reduction of corruption will be given back to those who
deserve it. [Applause.] Child support grants increase by R10 to R200 a
month, and foster care grants rise to R620 a month. [Applause.]

Let me turn, then, to our criminal justice sector. To quote President
Mbeki:


   While we have already surpassed that targeted figure of 152 000 police
   officers ... and while we have improved the training programme, we
   recognise the fact that the impact of this is not yet high enough.


There has been a significant increase in the resources going to the fight
against crime. Since the 2003-04 fiscal year, allocations to the Safety and
Security Ministry have increased by 43% already. Over the next three years,
resources going to the police will rise by a
further 34% from R33 billion in the current year, that’s 2006-07, to R44
billion in 2009-10. [Applause.] The budget for the Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development increased by 41% in the past three years and
will rise by 52% over the next three years.

In this year’s Budget, we are allocating an extra R2,4 billion to the
police to further expand police numbers and invest in technology and
forensic equipment. [Applause.] As the President advised last week, by 2010
we will have close to 190 000 police officers on our streets. I hope they
are going to be on the streets and not in the stations, but we will have
190 000 police officers. [Interjections.] Electronic fingerprints and
dockets will become the norm. The 2007 Budget also allows for the
implementation of the salary upgrade programme for police that started in
2005.
The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development receives a further
R1,5 billion over the next three years to improve court capacity, reduce
case backlogs and modernise the administration of justice. I think they all
heard the hon Buthelezi on this issue last week.

Our government recognises the seriousness of the crime situation, and will
continue to provide leadership in the fight against crime, but effective
crime fighting depends on partnerships between our law-enforcement agencies
and the communities they serve. Through community police forums, all
citizens have the opportunity to contribute towards making their
communities safer. In this way, each person can and should help in the
construction of a society where, truly, human life has equal worth.

Even as we step up the fight against crime, we must ask ourselves: What
cultural, social and economic conditions give rise to crime? We have spoken
in the past about the destructive effects of the relentless pursuit of
individual self-enrichment at the expense of the broader development and
progress of society. We cannot escape the fact that the culture of greed
plays a role in driving crime. Long-term, sustainable solutions lie in
addressing the causes of crime and the conditions that give rise to the
alienation of some in our communities. Only a stronger sense of society, of
community, of family; a sense of responsibility to each other – “umuntu
ngumuntu ngabantu”. [a person is a person through other people.] - can heal
the fractures that give rise to crime.

We also need to insist that honesty and integrity are core values of our
economic and financial institutions. We continue to see instances of
flagrant abuse of this principle, often involving hundreds of millions of
rands. In addition, we continue to see the extraordinary methods used to
evade tax and the legal obligations relating to anti-money-laundering
legislation.

I want to make it clear that we will not tolerate a situation where
individuals pillage and plunder millions from the companies they run or
from ordinary South Africans who are poor and humble people – here I am
also including the widows and orphans - whose entire life savings get
destroyed in the process by these rapacious doings. [Applause.]

Mr President, I have asked the Financial Intelligence Centre, the Financial
Services Board and the SA Revenue Service to work collaboratively with the
SA Police and prosecutors in dealing with financial crime and its proceeds.
I have also asked that fiduciary and trusteeship responsibilities receive
the highest priority in the oversight activities of our regulators. We must
ensure that neither organised crime nor the abuse of stewardship
obligations is allowed to violate our hard-earned democracy and the
integrity of our country.
Since 2001, we have channelled an ever-greater share of our resources into
capital spending. Our investment in infrastructure has been focused on two
major areas: the built environment and then economic infrastructure. The
built environment refers to a
cluster of activities and services that centre on building viable, secure
residential communities that include housing, water, electrification,
sanitation, roads, sports facilities, community halls, police stations,
schools, clinics and so on. These programmes seek to change the landscape
across both urban and rural areas, to turn barren, dusty land into places
where houses are frequently built that people feel proud to live in, those
places where people can find the comfort and security to raise their
children.

In the past two years, we have added considerably to our public transport
budget. In 2005, we created the Public Transport Infrastructure Systems
Grant, aimed mainly at putting in place passenger transport services that
would facilitate the
movement of people for the Fifa World Cup.

This, together with the impetus that the World Cup provided, has resulted
in something of a revolution in municipal planning for public transport
and, healthily, forward thinking about urban development. The bids that we
have seen are impressive, in terms of knitting together communities with
places of work, recreation and leisure. In particular, the development of
the Bus Rapid Transit Schemes offers exciting opportunities to improve
municipal public transport systems. To ensure that the World Cup leaves us
with a legacy of better public transport, we are also adding a further R2,3
billion to this programme. [Applause.] Again, it’s worth emphasising that
it’s not just about stadiums; it’s about what improves in the lives of all
South Africans. That is why a developed public transport system that allows
people to interact between residential, recreational and places of work
becomes exceedingly important for us in the way in which we approach 2010.

Our housing budget receives a further R2,7 billion, taking the total
allocation over the next three years to R32 billion. [Applause.] To give a
sense of the scale of increase in our housing budget, in 2003-04 we spent
R4,6 billion on housing. By 2009-10, the end of our present budgeting
period, the budget rises to R12,5 billion. I don’t know, my friend and
colleague, the Minister of Housing, clearly lacks ambition. She has been
pleading for the doubling of the housing budget; we’ve tripled it!
[Applause.] In fact, what we have available for the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework is about equal to what we spent on housing in the first decade of
democracy. [Applause.]

Allocations for water, sanitation, electrification and municipal roads all
rise in a complementary fashion. Our government is determined to meet the
target set by the President in 2004 in relation to water, sanitation,
electrification and housing.
Motho ke motho, ga a na bosehlana. [A human being is a human being, there
is no lesser human being.]

The Neighbourhood Developmental Partnership Grant, a new innovative funding
model, encourages private participation in the rejuvenation of our
townships. The urban landscape is often described as dysfunctional, with
large townships far from city centres, far from places of work and leisure.
This landscape will not change of its own accord. We will not be able to
reshape our cities, integrate our townships and create residential
communities unless we intervene and act decisively. The Neighbourhood
Developmental Partnership Grant has already allocated money for technical
assistance to upgrade Bara Central in Soweto, Njoli Square in KwaZakhele
and Ngangelizwe in Mthatha. Planned interventions include the eThekwini
Bridge City and the KwaMashu Town Centre.

Many of the programmes outlined are labour-intensive and form a part of the
Expanded Public Works Programme aimed at drawing in marginalised
communities in the second economy. Since its inception, this programme has
created about 300 000 work opportunities already, mainly in rural areas and
mainly for women. But, taking our cue from the state of the nation address,
together with the Minister for Public Works we will review this programme
to see how it can be amended and further ramped up to increase a number of
work opportunities that it can create. We believe that the 300 000 is just
in fact the beginning of the potential that we should be able to deliver. A
further R125 million is allocated to the Department of Public Works, not
for the programme itself but to improve co-ordination and the oversight in
this programme.

Turning then to the 2010 Fifa World Cup, I’m happy to announce that the
Local Organising Committee for the World Cup has reached an agreement with
municipalities in the budgets for construction and the upgrading of
stadiums and that these agreements are within the R8,4 billion set aside
for stadiums. These agreements set a firm precedent that we must go out of
our way to ensure a successful tournament and a lasting legacy beyond 2010
- the hon Rev K R J Meshoe. [Interjections.] But fiscal prudence and sound
budgeting principles must be adhered to at all times.

The SA National Roads Agency and the SA Rail Commuter Corporation receive a
further R1,7 billion to upgrade roads and stations in and areas critical to
the World Cup. In total, over R9 billion will be allocated by national
government for municipal transport, roads and precinct upgrading relating
to the 2010 World Cup. So, it’s R8,4 billion on stadiums and R9 billion on
the transport infrastructure. [Applause.]

Turning, then, to the economic services, agencies and entities falling
under the Department of Trade and Industry receive an additional R1,7
billion to promote industrial development, black economic empowerment and
small business development. [Applause.] To support the process of
broadening participation in the economy, the National Empowerment Fund
receives a further R380 million as capital injection. The critical
infrastructure programme is allocated a further R300 million to leverage
private sector investment, especially into our industrial development
zones, and the film and television production incentive gets another R300
million to encourage local and international filmmakers to film here in
South Africa. [Applause.] I’ve been very encouraged to see the long list of
movies that have benefited from this incentive scheme, and I’m sure that it
has created many thousands of jobs in the production of these movies - and
these are seriously big films.

Our research and development capacity has been strengthened in the past
five years with targeted investments to our science councils and
universities. This year we are setting aside a further R1,2 billion for
science and technology, of which R500 million is for government’s
contribution to the Square Kilometre Array, contingent of course on the
success of our bid. But I’m sure I can say that the Minister of Science and
Technology and I are exceedingly confident that we will get the Square
Kilometre Array to the Northern Cape. [Applause.]

The SA Research Network, a joint project of the Department of Public
Enterprises and the Department of Science and Technology aimed at providing
a low-cost broadband link for the local academic community, receives R95
million, and R60 million is allocated to set up science research chairs at
our major universities.

The budget framework includes a contingency reserve of R3 billion for the
first year, that is 2007-08. This allows for unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure that may need to be accommodated in the adjustments budget this
year and allocations to several state-owned enterprises that are not yet
finalised. [Laughter.] Our commitment to finance 51% of capital
requirements of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor project over the next three
years amounts to R6 billion. An allocation to settle the land claim and
other obligations relating to the Alexkor mine has yet to be finalised and
will be provided for in the adjustments budget, which will also include
further equity contributions for the InfraCo telecommunications initiative
and Sentech’s investment requirements, contingent of course on the approval
of business plans and the outstanding regulatory requirements.

Turning to general government, administration and international affairs,
South Africa’s foreign policy objective seeks to achieve greater unity and
solidarity between African countries to accelerate political and
socioeconomic integration and, of course, to promote peace, security and
stability. Support for key institutions of the African Union remains a
priority. The African Renaissance Fund, through which most of our
initiatives are funded, is given a further R275 million. That will make
peace between my bench mates and I. [Applause.] Our commitments to host the
Pan-African Parliament also require a further R113 million.

In a short period of time, our Defence Force has already assisted
significantly in helping reduce a number of conflicts on the continent. We
now have peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi and Sudan. I’m told that others are in the offing and we have
technical advisers in a number of other countries. The SA National Defence
Force receives additional allocations to acquire airlift capacity, for
exchange rate adjustments to the strategic defence package and for the
military skills development programme, an innovative programme aimed at
introducing young people into the military.

Improving service delivery in the Department of Home Affairs has positive
benefits for government, for the economy and all citizens. The Minister of
Home Affairs is working with colleagues to finalise a plan to turn this
department around. I think we want to, again, this afternoon, pledge our
full support to her in this endeavour. [Applause.] A further R900 million
is allocated to the department to support its turnaround, to fill critical
posts, purchase a new passport printer and modernise IT and back-office
operations. [Laughter.] Is it too much or too little?

Following considerable tax policy changes in the 1990s, the past five years
have been characterised by better services to taxpayers, improved
compliance and, of course, a broader tax base. The 2007 Budget provides a
further R1,3 billion to upgrade core IT systems in the SA Revenue Service.
The modernisation of Sars will enable it to manage increased administration
volumes. A single customer view, automation, e-business and improved walk-
in services will be supported by enhanced risk management.

Priority is also given to modernising customs administration to cope with
significant increases in volumes at all our land, sea and air border posts.
The acquisition of cargo and container scanning equipment will enable Sars
to perform nonintrusive inspections on goods going through our ports.

I now turn to the intergovernmental transfers for the MECs for finance. Our
budget allocations must reflect the priorities that government sets. In
recognition of the critical role that provinces and municipalities play in
the delivery of social and household services, these two spheres receive
64% of the additional R89,5 billion allocated in this budget.

Transfers to local government grow by 19% a year. In addition,
municipalities receive the bulk of the allocations for stadiums and related
infrastructure for the 2010 Fifa World Cup. The local government equitable
share receives a further R5 billion for the delivery of free basic
services, which now reach an average of about 80% of households.
[Applause.]
The municipal infrastructure grant receives R400 million more for a final
push to eradicate the bucket system; a further R600 million for the
electrification programme; R1,4 billion for bulk water and sanitation
infrastructure; and R950 million to deliver water and electricity to
schools and clinics. [Applause.] Total infrastructure transfers to
municipalities now total R52 billion over the next three years.

Ubujamo bethu busho siyalingana empilweni. [Our situation means our life is
equal.]

Transfers to provinces grow by 12,7% a year with the major additions going
to education and health personnel, social welfare services and for
provincial infrastructure. This year we introduce a new conditional grant
called the community library services grant to develop the infrastructure
and stock of books in local libraries to spread the joy of books to
millions more children – or all readers, I should say – and to provide
access to information to teachers and parents. [Applause.] The grant starts
off with an initial allocation of just under R1 billion over the next three
years. The provincial equitable share, through which 86% of provincial
transfers flow, is updated to reflect changes to provincial boundaries.
This is so that the Minister of Defence doesn’t have to have such a
difficult time any more.

Preliminary assessments of provincial budgets indicate that allocations are
broadly in line with the priorities outlined in last year’s Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement. Spending on both education and health at a
provincial level is projected to grow by 10,5% a year, and on welfare
services it grows rapidly from R5,3 billion in the present year to
R8,8 billion in the third year of the new Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
period.

Over the next three years, provincial capital spending totals R65 billion.
I wish to commend the provinces for the steady progress being made in
rolling out their infrastructure programmes. In 2005-06, only 8% of
infrastructure funds were unspent as opposed to 14% in the previous year.
This year, spending for the first nine months is 35% higher than in the
same period last year.

Over the past decade we have created a tax policy regime which is
internationally competitive. We have broadened South Africa’s tax base
while, at the same time, providing billions of rands in tax cuts to improve
the equity of the system.

Mr A S Smit submitted a tip for Trevor, in which he suggested the
following.

“Kan u in u begrotingsrede belastingbetalers bedank vir hul bydrae?”  Meneer
Smit is heeltemaal korrek, so  ek  vra  om  verskoning  indien  ek  dit  nie
genoegsaam in die  verlede  gedoen  het  nie,  en  spreek  ons  gesamentlike
dankbaarheid uit aan  alle  belastingbetalers.  [Applous.]  (Translation  of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[“Can you thank taxpayers in your Budget speech for their contribution?”
Mister Smit is completely correct, and so I ask forgiveness in case I did
not do so satisfactorily in the past, and express our joint gratitude to
all taxpayers. [Applause.]]

So, admonished by Mr Smit, I thank all South African taxpayers for their
diligence in contributing to our revenue pool.

Ndo livhuwa nga maanda! [Thank you very much.] [Applause.]

Is that okay, Minister Mufamadi? [Laughter.] This year, individuals benefit
from moderate personal income tax cuts and the elimination of the
retirement fund tax. Business benefits from reforms to the secondary tax on
companies. We extend accelerated depreciation allowances to certain
infrastructure, and the cost of corporate reorganisation is reduced.

The 2007 Budget provides personal income tax relief amounting to
R8,4 billion, increasing the level below which no income tax is levied for
people under the age of 65 to R43 000. It’s a big number. A few years ago
people earning R16 000 had to pay tax. Now we’ve been able to lift that
threshold to R43 000. [Applause.]
Changes to the personal income tax brackets provide relief to compensate
for the negative effects of inflation on taxpayers, and to partially offset
the effects of changes to the taxation of medical aid contributions and car
allowances. This is more money in the pockets of taxpayers, and I want to
appeal to taxpayers to use this relief to first settle their debts or save,
rather than for consumption. The Governor said I should say that if they
don’t listen to my pleading, he’ll have to report them to the Monetary
Policy Committee. [Laughter.]

The monthly monetary caps for tax-free medical aid contributions are
increased from R500 to R530 for each of the first two members and from R300
to R320 for each additional beneficiary. This measure is aimed at further
incentivising people to join low-cost medical schemes and for the market to
respond to the demand in this area.

Public-benefit organisations play an important part in the social fabric of
our society. During the past few years the tax regime applicable to these
organisations has been reformed to give due recognition to their
contributions to society. I’m pleased to announce that tax-deductible
contributions by both individuals and companies to specific public-benefit
activities will be increased from 5% to 10% of taxable income.

In addition, the tax-free income threshold from trading activities by
public-benefit organisations will be doubled from R50 000 to R100 000.
Arising from discussion with Cricket South Africa recently, amendments are
also proposed to ease the tax liabilities on professional sports bodies
that contribute meaningfully to the development of amateur sport.
[Applause.] Now, since we had that discussion, our one-day cricket team has
been rated number one. I should just announce that the same terms are
likely to be available to all the codes, so perhaps the others will follow
suit. [Laughter.]

In order to promote saving for retirement, we propose to this House the
abolition of the retirement fund tax from 1 March this year. [Applause.]
However, I would like to add a very important point. This is an appeal to
trustees of these pension funds to ensure that the benefits of this reform
accrue to the contributors and beneficiaries of retirement funds.
[Applause.] There is no point in granting relief that then sits in layers
with new fund managers who arrive on the scene while the pensioners and
beneficiaries are poorer than they were before. The cost to the fiscus of
this measure is R3 billion a year, and it is part of a number of related
measures aimed at encouraging household savings. With the same objective in
mind, the interest income exemption is raised from R16 500 to R18 000 for
those under 65 years of age and from R24 500 to R26 000 for those who are
65 years of age and over. In addition, the annual exclusion threshold for
capital gains or losses will be increased from R12 500 to R15 000.

Most countries have a dividend tax at the shareholder level. We have a
secondary tax on companies collected directly from a few thousand
companies, as opposed to millions of shareholders. To further improve the
transparency and equity of the tax system, we are proposing that it be
phased out and replaced with a dividend tax at shareholder level. This
reform would consist of two phases. We propose reducing the rate from 12,5%
to 10% and that the base be redefined to apply to all distributions.
Thisslr will come into effect on 1 October 2007, except for standard anti-
avoidance measures that will commence, of course, at the conclusion of the
speech here today. [Laughter.]

The conversion to a dividend tax collected at the shareholder level will be
completed by the end of 2008, subject to the renegotiation of a number of
international tax treaties. The taxation of gains realised from the sale of
shares is presently subject to ambiguous procedural treatment. In order to
provide equitable treatment and certainty for both taxpayers and for Sars,
all shares disposed of after three years will trigger a capital gains tax
event.

Our tax laws provide for the depreciation of buildings used in
manufacturing but not for commercial purposes. We are proposing that tax
depreciation allowances for the economic wear and tear of newly constructed
or upgraded commercial buildings be implemented. A 20-year write-off period
will be envisaged.

The Income Tax Act has also not kept pace with changes to the local and
international environmental regulatory regime. It is proposed that
environmental capital structures such as dams and tanks, which are
presently not depreciable, qualify for depreciation allowances. I am hoping
that the Budget next year will be much greener than this one is. We need to
look at these issues with the necessary attention.

Consideration is being given to facilitating investments in high-risk
investment areas such as mining exploration by junior mining companies. The
introduction of flow-through shares will be investigated, and a final
decision in this regard will be made next year.

Now, for the excise tax increase: Tax on a packet of 20 cigarettes goes up
by 60 cents; [Applause.] tax on a 340 ml can of beer goes up by five cents;
[Laughter.] tax on a 750 ml bottle of wine goes up by 10 cents; tax on a
750 ml bottle of spirits goes up by R1,88. [Applause.] These changes to
excise taxes will raise an additional R1,5 billion.

The general fuel levy is increased by five cents a litre and the Road
Accident Fund levy also by five cents a litre.

Entrepreneurship remains a vital ingredient in the growth of our economy.
In this regard, we have previously announced measures to assist and
encourage small businesses, including a tax amnesty for small businesses
announced last year. This amnesty offers those outside the system a fresh
opportunity to become compliant and to benefit from the myriad of support
measures offered by the government. For instance, with the Ministry of
Transport, we have a close collaboration on the Taxi Recapitalisation
Programme to ensure that we aren’t giving scrapping allowances to those who
have never bothered to even register for the payment of tax.

The amnesty ends in May this year, and over the coming weeks Sars will be
intensifying its efforts to ensure that all businesses with a turnover of
R10 million or less are offered the opportunity to apply. So far, about 12
000 have come forward to apply for the amnesty.

The task team appointed to investigate the fiscal regime applicable to
windfall profits in the liquid fuel sector submitted its final report to me
on 9 February 2007. The task team has exhaustively inquired into the fiscal
and regulatory aspects of the industry. I would like to thank the team led
by Dr Zav Rustomjee for their efforts in completing their work in such a
short space of time.

In responding to the report, I have referred the regulatory matters to the
Minister of Minerals and Energy for further consideration. The task team
has made two substantial fiscal recommendations, involving a possible tax
on windfall profits and an incentive arrangement for new investment in
liquid fuel production capacity. I believe that there is merit in these
proposals. However, we will consult the industry before we finalise this
matter. The task team’s report will be released for public and stakeholder
comment by the end of this week.

Turning to exchange control changes, the gradual process of exchange
control relaxation has focused on enabling an ordinary process of global
reintegration, encouraging South African firms to expand from a domestic
base and allowing South African residents to diversify the portfolios
through domestic channels. The continued strength of the South African
economy and financial markets supports further steps in this regard,
including, firstly, the lowering of the current shareholding threshold for
foreign direct investment outside of Africa from 50% to 25%, to further
enable South African companies to engage in strategic international
partnerships; secondly, simplifying customer foreign currency accounts,
which exist for trade and services-related payments, and expanding the
range of permissible transactions; and thirdly, further developing South
Africa’s financial markets by increasing liquidity in the currency market
by permitting the Johannesburg Securities Exchange to establish a rand
futures market. The South African Reserve Bank has today published the
details of the three measures announced.

As has become a bit of tradition, I have received hundreds of “Tips for
Trevor”. So let me thank all of those South Africans who’ve taken the time
and effort to write to me about the issues they would like to see in the
Budget. The strength of our democracy will be measured by the depth of
involvement of ordinary people in the affairs that affect them.

The overwhelming sense I get from reading these tips is that almost all
South Africans recognise that the challenges we face will only be overcome
through a full-on frontal assault on poverty, and that the best way to
achieve this is through a combination of faster economic growth and active
intervention by government on the side of the poor. I think that they do so
because all South Africans share in this value system, that human life has
equal worth.

Magoshu Motau wrote to us to say that the tax-free lump sum portion of the
retirement funds be increased, since it’s been at R120 000 for some time
now. Mr Motau is very perceptive and correct. It could also be added that
the formula required to calculate this tax-free lump sum is
incomprehensible to the average person. We are, accordingly, proposing an
increase in this threshold and will simplify the whole calculation.

Last year I received the suggestion that we should make lobola tax-
deductible. [Laughter.] This year I’ve been given a suggestion that I
should impose VAT, or that I must tax the lobola trusts since some people
are making money out of them. I declare that these issues are too complex
for me and I will consult elders in this House and elsewhere to help me
crack this problem. [Laughter.] I don’t know if we can get involved in
these matters through Sars in the way suggested by the writers.

Of course, there have been other contributors. There is a young man in the
gallery there who wrote to me and asked me to increase all of these taxes
on alcohol. He said that underage drinking is a problem in the circles that
he moves in, and we must deal with this issue by tax. Now, if only we
could! But we’ve to recognise and deal with the issues, and I think we must
ensure that community participation will deal with these kinds of issues.
We would like to tax it more heavily, but it’s not going to work just yet.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.]

In concert with the task of growing the economy and creating new
opportunities for work, we have been working at pushing back the frontiers
of poverty since 1994, recognising that no people can be truly free until
they have cast aside the shackles of poverty and underdevelopment. It is
for this reason that the eradication of poverty has been at the centre of
our policies and programmes since the first democratic elections.

To help measure progress in the fight against poverty, Statistics South
Africa will pilot a poverty line for an initial period to allow for public
comment and consultations before its design is finalised. Alongside the
Budget, we are publishing a discussion document that sets out our proposal
for a national poverty line. I appeal to, especially, members of this House
to continue to advise us on the appropriateness and usefulness of this
measure.

I will now turn to the issue of social security reforms. Ubuntu
acknowledges that all people are an integral part of broader society and
humankind, and our individual fortunes are intimately connected to the
fortunes of the whole. In the past decade we’ve gradually expanded our
system of social grants, providing income support to vulnerable groups,
children, the disabled and the elderly. Our social assistance grants
provide an effective income safety net for the poor, and about 3,5% of the
gross domestic product, GDP, is spent on this redistributive budget
programme.

However, it’s also important to encourage savings and self-reliance. The
tax system contains a retirement savings incentive that particularly
benefits higher-income individuals. But for working people who fall below
the tax threshold, there is effectively no incentive, and indeed there is a
perverse effect that if you save enough you might lose the old-age pension
because of the way the means test works.

So, although we have a well-developed retirement industry, and most
employees are covered by pension or provident fund arrangements, in
practice too many people surrender their policies or cash in their benefits
when they change jobs. It slris estimated that more than half of those who
contribute to retirement funds reach retirement age with a pension that is
less than 28% of their final wage or salary. Over two-thirds of people are
dependent on the state old age pension.

The time has come to put in place a new arrangement in which all South
Africans will share and that provides a basic saving and social protection
service that meets the needs of low-income employees. We are therefore
proposing a mandatory earnings-related social security scheme to provide
improved unemployment insurance, disability and death benefits targeted at
the income needs of dependants and a standard retirement savings
arrangement. This will be financed by a social security tax administered by
Sars and collected in individual accounts in the name of every contributor.
Significant capacity-building and institutional reforms are needed on both
the tax side and to administer benefits. This work has begun, with a view
to implementation by 2010.

To offset the cost of the social security tax for low-income workers and to
lower the cost of creating employment, we are proposing the introduction of
a wage subsidy for those whose earnings fall below the income tax
threshold. [Applause.]

Madam Speaker, these proposals are bold and ambitious. Much work still
needs to be done. The principles that will underpin these reforms are,
firstly, equity, since there must be fair and uniform rates of contribution
and benefits for all; secondly, regarding the pooling of risk, collective
funding arrangements and non-discriminatory rules and entitlements must
apply; thirdly, concerning mandatory participation, there will be
compulsory participation of employees and inclusion of self-employed
individuals on reasonable terms; fourthly, regarding administrative
efficiency, the streamlined use of payroll-based contributions, modern
information systems and efficient payment arrangements are essential;
fifthly, there must be solidarity and minimum benefits will be assured
through continued social assistance grant programmes financed through the
Budget.

Alongside the phasing in of social security arrangements, several reforms
to the regulation, governance and tax treatment of occupational and
individual retirement funds will be implemented over the period ahead.

These are far-reaching reforms and, as President Mbeki has indicated,
consultation will be needed before the finalisation of legislation,
administrative systems and transition arrangements. We aim to conclude
these discussions with trade unions and employers during the second half of
this year. I’d like to commit to trying to ensure that, in the legislation,
at least, some ideas would have been tested so that we can go forward, and
2008 must look very different, and we will need the participation of
unions. In discussion with one of the union leaders on this – who happens
to be in the House, and that is Mr George – he said it is not negotiations
but it is about joint problem solving. I hope that would be the spirit that
does obtain as we deal with this exceedingly difficult issue, going
forward. [Applause.]

We do this, Madam Speaker, to proclaim loudly that human life has equal
worth. Our sense of community, our sense of humanity is dependent both on
our well-being and the well-being of those around us.

Members of this House should be advised that, following steady improvements
in the financial position of the Government Employees’ Pension Fund over
the past decade, it has been possible to award increases to civil pensions
this year that fully compensate for inflation and that also correct for
past erosions of real values. This substantially improves the position of
many elderly pensioners and spouses.

I am pleased to introduce to the House Mr Phineas Tjie, who has been
appointed head of the administration of the Government Employees’ Pension
Fund, and I am grateful for the wise counsel that Martin Kuscus gives to
the board of trustees. He is the chairperson of this board. [Applause.]

We should also pay tribute to the work of the Public Investment commissar
... I mean Corporation, ably managed by CEO Brian Molefe.
[Laughter.][Applause.] Under their expert investment management, the GEPF
has again recorded excellent financial results.

The Budget is a culmination of a full year of preparation involving
literally thousands of people in national, provincial and local government,
and many of our public entities. The preparation of the Budget relies on
the hard work of many.

Under the stewardship of President Mbeki and the drive and determination of
Deputy President Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Cabinet has been instrumental in
shaping this Budget. I’d like to thank, especially, the members of the
Ministers’ Committee on the Budget for the long hours and thousands of
pages of documentation they’ve had to endure to craft this Budget.
[Applause.]

Deputy Minister Jabu Moleketi continues to bring his sharp analysis and
intellectual insight to the Budget process. [Applause.] I’d like to thank
him, but also the MECs for finance – who are all seated over there and who
are in the midst of finalising their own budgets and budget speeches – for
the work that they have done in strengthening discussions in the Budget
Council. I would also want to express appreciation to Salga for their
efforts in guiding our understanding on the issues relevant to local
government. [Applause.]

I’d also like to express a word of gratitude to Governor Tito Mboweni and
the staff of the Reserve Bank for their support and assistance; the
Financial and Fiscal Commission Chairperson, Dr Bethuel Setai, and the
other commissioners and staff for their sound advice and considered
contributions to our intergovernmental framework. I’d like to express our
appreciation to the Development Bank of Southern Africa that hosts, amongst
others, Siyenza Manje – I am going to be corrected for pronunciation on
this again. The chairperson, Jay Naidoo, and the CEO, Mr Paul Baloyi, are
with us. I’d like to express appreciation to them.

I would also like to express a word of gratitude to Mr Herbert Mkhize, who
has skilfully steered our discussions with business, labour and community
representatives in Nedlac, and to Mr Pali Lehohla, who continues to drive
ongoing improvements in the extent and quality of government statistics,
supported by the Statistics Council Chair, Mr Howard Gabriels.

Thanks also to the chairpersons of the four committees who look after us:
the Portfolio Committee on Finance chaired by the hon Nhlanhla Nene; Mr
Tutu Ralane, who chairs the Select Committee on Finance in the NCOP, and
the joint Chairs of the Budget Committee, Ms Louisa Mabe and Mr Buti
Mkhaliphi, for diligently working on holding government to account.
[Applause.] Thank you very much for the stewardship and leadership that you
offer us and the way in which you hold us to account.
Madam Speaker, could I beg your indulgence and ask that the House joins me
in wishing Sars a happy 10th birthday. [Applause.] It is remarkable that an
organisation so young can do so much for the good of our country and our
people. So, congratulations to you, Commissioner Gordhan, and your
dedicated band of 15 000 staff members. [Applause.]

Lesetja Kganyago continues to lead an inspired group of professional staff
at the National Treasury, always striving to do better and in the result
driving everybody crazy. [Applause.] Thanks, too, to the officials in the
Ministry who give their all, especially at the time of the Budget.

Lastly, thanks to my family, who continue to inspire me to build a society
that values our shared humanity. [Applause.]

President Mbeki has also advised:

   What this means is that when we talk of a better life for all, within the
   context of a shared sense of national unity and national reconciliation,
   we must look beyond the undoubtedly correct economic objectives our
   nation has set itself.

When our forebears formed the ANC in 1912, in response to being excluded
from the formation of the Union of South Africa, they were driven by the
single-minded belief that human life has equal worth. When, 90 years ago to
the day, the SS Mendi sank with 649 South African men on board, brave
hearts in drowning said: We are here because we believe that human life has
equal worth.

When Nelson Mandela and Walter Sisulu tabled the 1949 programme of action
to spur more active resistance to discrimination, they believed that human
life has equal worth.

In 1955, when our parents came together at Kliptown at the Congress of the
People to proclaim loudly that South Africa belongs to all who live in it,
black and white, they were united by the belief that human life has equal
worth.

In 1983, when we launched the United Democratic Front in Mitchell’s Plain,
hundreds of community organisations said with one voice: human life has
equal worth. [Applause.]

In 1994, when we stood in line and voted as equals in our first democratic
elections, we could feel the mood, and the mood said: Human life has equal
worth. [Applause.]

When our Constitution was unanimously adopted in this House in 1996, our
declaration to the world was loud and clear: Human life has equal worth.
[Applause.]

And today, again, we proclaim loudly that human life has equal worth and we
will be unwavering in our dedication to the social cohesion and human
solidarity that we seek in order to deliver that human life of equal worth.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

I knew I wouldn’t get it right, Madam Speaker. This pile is made up of a
series of Budget documents: the Budget Speech, the Estimates of National
Revenue, the Taxation Proposals, the Budget Review, the Appropriation Bill,
the Division of Revenue Bill and the Estimates of National Expenditure. My
job is to table them before this House for consideration. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Thank you, hon Minister. The Appropriation Bill,
together with the introductory speech and the papers tabled, will be
referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
report, and to the Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its
mandate.

The House adjourned at 15:30.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Division of Revenue Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the
         Select Committee on Finance.

      2) Banks Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of Finance.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance.

      3) Pension Funds Amendment Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the
         Select Committee on Finance.


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Introduction of Bills


     1.     The Minister of Finance


           a) Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2007] (National Assembly – proposed
              sec 77)

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly for consideration and report and to the
         Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its mandate, as
         well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 21 February 2007.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

        b) Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2007] (National Assembly –
           proposed sec 76)


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly for consideration and report and to the
         Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its mandate, as
         well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 21 February 2007.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

      Please note: The announcement below replaces item 13 under “Referrals
      to Committees of papers tabled” on page 167 of the Announcements,
      Tablings and Committee Reports of 20 February 2007.

      (13)  The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        (a)      Proclamation No R49 published in Government Gazette No
             29456 dated 7 December 2006: Amendment of Proclamation, in
             terms of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals
             Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


        (b)      Proclamation No R50 published in Government Gazette No
             29456 dated 7 December 2006: Referral of matter to existing
             Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of
             the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).


        (c)      Government Notice No R990 published in Government Gazette
             No 29278 dated 13 October 2006: Regulations regarding the
             Promotion of Access to Information, made in terms of the
             Promotion of Access to Information Act, 1996 (Act No 2 of
             2000).


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance - 21 February 2007
         [RP 03-2007].

     (b)    Estimate of National Revenue for 2007 [RP 04-2007].

     (c)    Taxation Proposals in respect of Income Tax.

     (d)    Budget Review 2007 [RP 02-2007], including:


                 • Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise
                   duties; and

            • "Annexure E: Memorandum to accompany the Division of Revenue
              Bill", tabled in terms of section 10(5) of the
              Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
              1997).


    (e)    Appropriation Bill [B 2– 2007].


    (f)    Division of Revenue Bill [B 3– 2007], tabled in terms of section
         10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No
         97 of 1997).


     (g)    Estimates of National Expenditure 2007 [RP 01 - 2007], which
         includes:


         1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Main Estimates,
              2007-2008;

         2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2007-
              2008;

         3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2007-2008;

         4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2007-
              2008;

         5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local Government",
              Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2007-
              2008;
         7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
              Information System", Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
              2007-2008;

         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service and Administration",
              Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         10.     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service Commission",
              Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         11.     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         12.     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         13.     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Arts and Culture", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         14.     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Education", Main Estimates,
              2007-2008;

         15.     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2007-
              2008;

         16.     Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2007-
              2008;

         17.     Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Social Development", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         18.     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Sport and Recreation South
              Africa", Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         19.     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Correctional Services", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         20.     Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2007-
              2008;

         21.     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         22.     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         23.     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Safety and Security", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         24.     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
              2007-2008;

         25.     Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Communications", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         26.     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism", Main Estimates, 2007-2008;

         27.     Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2007-
              2008;
         28.     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2007-2008;


         29.     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         30.     Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         31.     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         32.     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main
              Estimates, 2007-2008;

         33.     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates,
              2007-2008;.

         34.     Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
              Main Estimates, 2007-2008.

         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
         and report.


