---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 07 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2007-06-07
---

THURSDAY, 7 JUNE 2007
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the NCOP, I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with sadness that an eleven-year-old boy, Moloantoa Mokoena,
         was killed after the vehicle that he was travelling in, along the
         Bapsfontein-Bronkhorstpruit road, was shot at by the occupants of
         another vehicle;


      2) further notes that the family of the deceased boy claim that the
         attack was unprovoked and racially motivated;


      3) realises that the two men charged with the murder are also facing
         charges, from a different incident, for the shooting of two men in
         the Boschkop area near Pretoria;


      4) hopes that the perpetrators of these crimes feel the might of the
         law; and


      5) extends its sincerest condolences to the family of young Moloantoa
         Mokoena.

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag sal voorstel:

   Dat die Raad kennis neem dat -


      1) die stasiebevelvoerder van die Kampsbaai polisiekantoor nie in
         besit van ’n geldige rybewys is nie;


      2) ’n senior polisiebeampte nie sy pligte effektief sonder ’n rybewys
         kan uitvoer nie;


      3) ’n sekerheidsonderneming gebruik word om die stasiebevelvoerder te
         vervoer wanneer dit nodig is;
   (4)      tydens ’n ernstige misdaad dit die stasiebevelvoerder twee uur
         geneem het om die misdaadtoneel te bereik aangesien sy moes wag vir
         ’n bestuurder om haar te vervoer; en


     4) die publiek rede het om ernstig bekommerd te wees oor die
        werksaamhede van die SAPD.
   (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next  sitting
 day I shall move:

   That the Council notes that -


   (1)      the station commander of the Camps Bay police station is not  in
         possession of a valid driver’s licence;


   (2)      a senior police  official  without  a  driver’s  licence  cannot
         effectively exercise his or her duties;


   (3)      a security enterprise is used to transport the station commander
         when necessary;


   (4)      during a serious crime it took the station commander  two  hours
         to reach the crime scene as  she  had  to  wait  for  a  driver  to
         transport her; and


   (5)      the public has  reason  to  be  seriously  concerned  about  the
         activities of the SAPS.]

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day:

   That the Council notes -


     1) the walk-out of the DA this week during an important debate in the
        Western Cape Provincial;

     2) that these boycott tactics of the not-so-democratic alliance under
        the leadership of its provincial leader, Theuns Botha, are
        reminiscent of the stay-away politics of the erstwhile Conservative
        Party under Dr Andries Treurnicht;

     3) that no liberal-minded party would stay away from an opportunity to
        debate a matter such as the occupation and violence in Israel and
        Palestine, which impact globally on peace and democracy;

      4) that the DA proved to be an unreliable party, as it had earlier
         formally agreed to the debate in the programming authority;

     5) that this intolerant DA again proved that it is not a democratic
        party that engages on important issues, but opts to cop out of a
        constitutional institution and public forum where all of the people
        of the Western Cape are represented; and

     6) that the irresponsible DA betrayed and failed its voters, while
        they are in fact paid by those very same taxpaying DA members to
        represent them and their views in that House, and that the DA MPLs
        have added no value at all.

Mr A WATSON: On a point of order: The Chief Whip shut us up the other day
because a motion containing political content was not circulated.
[Interjections.] It is still a motion; a motion with political content was
circulated. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Can I request you, please, in the
Whippery, to resolve this matter once and for all. It is not the job of the
Chairperson to be ruling on those things. Please, if you have discussed
these things and you have agreed, can you do that and keep your promises so
that you don’t bring this to the House?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, we must put it on record that
the agreement relates to motions without notice which have political
connotations for other parties. It has nothing to do with a notice of
motion. We have on several occasions heard the DA passing notices of motion
in reference to other political parties.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 26 – Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, it is a
pleasure for me to present the 2007-08 Budget Vote for Environmental
Affairs and Tourism in the NCOP today. The year 2007 marks the 20th
anniversary of the Brundtland report, entitled Our Common Future, which was
released by the United Nations World Commission on Environment and
Development and which redefined the notion of sustainable development.

Enshrined in this notion are three equally important pillars of sustainable
development: environmental protection, economic development and social
development. These three elements are balanced and work in synergy to
eradicate poverty and foster social and economic development goals that are
perfectly aligned with our own Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
South Africa.

The results of the National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment, the first ever
comprehensive spatial evaluation of biodiversity throughout the country,
are a warning to us all. Thirty-four per cent of our terrestrial ecosystems
are threatened, with 5% critically endangered; 82% of our 120 rivers are
threatened, with 44% critically endangered; three of our 13 groups of
estuarine biodiversity are in critical danger, with 12% of marine biozones
under serious threat.

This report places us for the first time in a sound scientific position to
identify which areas of the country need the most urgent attention and
protection. This assessment also informs our expansion and consolidation of
protected areas. Last year I announced that we would be focusing on
expanding and consolidating our national parks. We have made considerable
progress towards this goal.

A graphic information system, GIS, exercise between the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism and SA National Parks revealed that 32
000 hectares of outstanding land parcels needed to be incorporated into our
parks. In the past year, we have spent just over R48 million of DEAT
SANParks and donor funds to acquire more than 24 000 hectares of land for
the Namaqua, Tankwa-Karoo, Addo Elephant, West Coast, Mapungubwe, Camdeboo
and Bontebok National Parks. On the whole, negotiations for the purchase of
the remaining land parcels are progressing well and we are grateful for co-
operation from National Treasury, the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry and the Department of Public Works in this regard.

Our partnerships with other government initiatives and civil society
organisations are critical in implementing social responsibility policies
and projects, and amplify the social development impact of projects. Social
responsibility and poverty relief programmes run by our department in all
nine provinces have created 13 887 job opportunities in the past year, well
exceeding the target of 12 500. We also exceeded our permanent job creation
target by almost 15%. Though we did not achieve our target for training
days, our plans for 2007-08 take into account the previous year’s
shortcomings. We have, therefore, increased our targets for all measures
and we fully expect to achieve them.

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism will continue to
strengthen its regulatory muscle through the development of legislation. A
key Bill that will be tabled in Parliament this year will be the waste Bill
that will be piloted by the Deputy Minister. Can I apologise on her behalf
for not being here? A member of her family passed away and she is
responsible for the funeral arrangements. She was in the National Assembly
this week but had to leave at short notice.

It is estimated that 45% of South Africans, mainly living in informal
settlements and rural areas, do not have access to domestic waste
collection services. In addition, the country has 1 321 landfill sites, of
which 629 are unauthorised, many of which must be formally closed. Included
in these are 58 hazardous landfill sites which are not permitted. This
situation clearly has a significant negative effect on human health and the
environment.

Furthermore, preliminary results from a study currently in progress
indicate that in many municipalities around the country there are serious
problems with the waste management system, including lack of finance,
operational equipment and capacity. Within the municipal infrastructure
grant system, waste has an allocation of 5% in a category termed “other”
which also includes streetlights and other smaller infrastructure. Clearly,
this is not adequate to address the challenges we face as a country.

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism is at present doing
work to assess the waste service delivery system across the country and to
develop an approach to managing it, including recommendations on financing,
capacity and management issues.

Government bodies, business, civil society and communities in our country
remain committed to working together in ensuring compliance with our
environmental laws. There are currently 816 environmental management
inspectors, whom we refer to as EMIs or the “Green Scorpions”, on the EMI
register. Out of those 816, there are 46 in KwaZulu-Natal, 10 in
Mpumalanga, 18 in Gauteng, 17 in Limpopo and the Eastern Cape, 14 in the
Northern Cape, 11 in the Free State, eight in North West and six in the
Western Cape, with the remaining 669 in SANParks, iSimangaliso Wetlands
Park – which is the new name for St Lucia Wetlands Park as at 1 November,
as many colleagues will know – and with our own national Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism.

The department's partnership with the Justice College has also resulted in
awareness-raising workshops attended by more than 200 prosecutors and
magistrates to date. In the previous year, 2006-07, more than 898 people
were arrested and more than 134 convicted in court for environmental
crimes. More than R1,5 million was paid in admission of guilt fines with
many other criminal cases pending. The inspectors issued 235 notices
instructing companies to comply with permits and undertake rehabilitation,
and several civil court applications were launched to enforce notices.

For the first time, and in collaboration with provinces and municipalities,
EMIs have started proactive, comprehensive compliance inspections at some
of the most polluting facilities and industry sectors in the country.

Our sense of pride in our nation will undoubtedly increase even further as
we progress towards meeting our Asgisa targets of reducing poverty and
boosting economic growth. Integral to this process are measures to assess
how well we are doing at bringing previously disadvantaged South Africans
from the margins to the mainstream of our economy.

In order to fulfil the seasonal requirements related to the revenue,
distribution, length of stay and transformation requirements of our tourism
industry, DEAT is funding, inter alia, the Open Africa Route initiative.
The development of these routes will focus on the packaging of second
economy products into tourism experiences. Twenty-three existing routes are
being revised to include second economy operators and three new routes are
being developed. On average, each route will assist 30 second economy
operators.

Rest assured, Chairperson, that we are providing a comprehensive range of
support measures to ensure that second economy operators are well equipped
to meet the high expectations of both local and international travellers.
Two thousand and twenty-five small, medium and micro enterprises will be
trained on tourism awareness and 810 will be trained through business
management, human resource management, marketing and financial management
courses.

Two thousand five hundred rooms belonging to SMMEs will be graded by 2009.
Last year this issue was raised in this House, so I can report progress on
this matter and if colleagues would like to raise it, I will respond to it
when I reply.

The tourism industry has, for several successive years, justified its
designation as one of Asgisa's top priority sectors. The year 2006 was no
exception to this, with the tourism sector’s total GDP contribution
estimated at 8,3%. A challenge that has been identified is that of brand
alignment, ensuring that the national tourism brand of our country has a
consistent look and feel with the brands of our provinces.

I am very encouraged by our progress towards resolving the specific
challenges related to the upcoming 2010 Soccer World Cup. A national 2010
accommodation workshop was held in October last year, followed by 17
workshops in the provinces. These workshops have resulted in the official
accommodation and ticketing company Match, signing contracts to secure 23
000 rooms for the tournament. These include, for the first time in Fifa
history, non-hotel accommodation such as national parks facilities,
guesthouses and lodges.

Some members last year raised the issue of our definition of contracted
rooms. I supplied that but if members want to raise that again and get a
progress report on that, I will deal with that when I reply as well.

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism is committed to
ensuring that smaller companies remain an integral part of the 2010
planning process. I am certain that our second round of workshops planned
for June will lead to more accommodation contracts being signed and it will
finally silence those who have doubts about our country's capacity to host
the tournament.

The development of the web-based booking system will further assist SMMEs
to access opportunities. The South African tourism call centre is now open
24 hours a day, providing information in several languages. SA Tourism has
also established a 2010 tourism unit. Furthermore, at a provincial level,
funds have been secured for the establishment of tourism information
centres in host cities other than Cape Town, Durban and Johannesburg that
already have structures in place.

Colleagues, these are just a few highlights of the many achievements
attributable to the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism over
the past year. I dealt with a number of other issues in the National
Assembly two days ago and if there are issues which colleagues would care
to raise regarding other sectors of the department, they are welcome to do
so, and I will deal with that later.

I would like to thank the staff of our department, under the capable
leadership of our director-general, Pam Yako, the chief executive officers
and the boards of all our statutory bodies. The commitment and dedication
of these exceptional people have been the driving force behind the
achievements that I have listed today.

I would also like to express my thanks to our MECs, and there are quite a
number of them here, as well as to Rev Peter Moatshe, the chairperson of
our select committee, and to every member of the committee for their
dedicated work over the past year. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Modulasetulo, Tona ya Lefapha la Merero ya Tikologo le
Bojanala, badiri ba lefapha, Balekgotla-Khuduthamaga ba ba leng teng fa,
baemedi ba ba kgethegileng le badiri ka nna, dumelang. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, Minister of Tourism and Environmental Affairs,
departmental employees, members of the executive council present here
today, special delegates and my colleagues, I greet you all.]

We are in fact debating, once more, a very important subject that takes its
authenticity from the Book of books. Humanity has been created in God’s
image and in God’s likeness, and humanity is co-creator with God because of
the need to see to it that the environment is protected and sustained.
Because of that, it is therefore imperative that we should look after our
environment.

What is the position today? Are we succeeding in protecting our
environment? The very humanity that is created in God’s image to become co-
creators is a danger to the environment. I’m saying this because, just to
cite a few examples, we have mining companies in our country and there are
laws and policies that have to regulate what they are doing. They have to
rehabilitate the environment after engaging in any mining activity. But it
seems as if these laws are not being abided by.

I was in Soweto three weeks back, in the area of Dobsonville. I could not
believe what my eyes were seeing, because of the polluted air. It was dust
all over; it was white. I said to myself: Are the people of Soweto living
under such circumstances? What laws protect these people? Therefore, I
said, something is seriously wrong.

If our laws say mining dumps have to be rehabilitated so that our air
remains pure, something has to be done. I immediately thought of the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. I asked myself: What is
happening? And when I spoke to the department, when they were giving us a
briefing, they said: “No, but it is the mining companies that have to
rehabilitate.”

However, the question of who is doing oversight to ensure that the law is
complied with remains a question in my mind. I said then that the Select
Committee on Minerals and Energy would have to know about that, and that I
would love to have my committee and Minerals and Energy meeting to look at
the matter. We will have to engage the Department of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism as well as the Department of Minerals and Energy to look at
this danger facing the people of Soweto. I ask myself: How long has this
been happening? We have this question: Have the people of Soweto become an
endangered species?
The other issue I can also mention is the quarries in my constituency.
Mountains are under attack! At a particular time, mountains will be
levelled to the ground as if there had been no mountain. There is no
rehabilitation whatsoever. The environment has become so ugly that you
cannot see what these mountains look like when you look at them.

Chairperson, the Minister has also alluded to the high level of water
pollution. He said 82% of our 120 rivers are threatened, with 44%
critically endangered. I once attended a World Conference on Water in The
Hague, Holland, where it was said that 3% of the worlds’ water is clean and
97% is polluted, which implies that we are escalating towards 100% of the
water of the world being polluted. This implies that if pollution happens,
it cannot be reversed and it is true that prevention is better than cure.
Therefore these are the dangers facing the human species and the
environment. We need to turn this around and avoid looking for
opportunities to make more money at the expense of our environment.

There is this question of the few white lions in our country which have
become a critically endangered species. There are those hunters who want to
wipe them off the face of this earth. It is for us as government and as
Parliament to protect these endangered species. It is us who have to see to
it that we sustain these lions in the future. Unless we are prepared to do
that, we will be failing to protect our environment.
The overarching vision of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism is to see to it that we have a prosperous and equitable society,
living in harmony with its natural resources. The department manages the
development and implementation of policies that govern three interrelated
components of South Africa’s socioeconomic development: tourism; the
fishing industry; conservation and environmental management, and
sustainable development.

Agb Voorsitter, die departement gee die versekering dat hierdie sektor die
potensiaal het om die ekonomie maksimaal te kan laat groei en dat die
omgewing en die ontwikkeling wat daarmee gepaard gaan effektief bestuur sal
word.

Verder gee die departement die versekering dat ontwikkeling en tourisme,
visserye en omgewingsbustuur mekaar kan aanvul en sodoende ekonomiese groei
transformeer en stimuleer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the department gives the assurance that this sector has the
potential to ensure maximum economic growth and that the environment and
the accompanying development will be managed effectively.

The department further gives the assurance that development and tourism,
fishing and environmental management will be able to augment each other and
in so doing transform and stimulate economic growth.]

Tourism is already a key growth sector for South Africa, with potential for
even greater growth in both the international and domestic markets. The
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, has
identified tourism as an immediate priority sector. The department’s
strategic and policy approach has been to develop the sector by stimulating
domestic and international tourism demand, removing blockages to and
supporting tourism growth and broadening participation in order to
alleviate poverty. Some of the department’s initiatives have included the
following:

Belê in die bemarking van Suid-Afrika vir binnelandse en buitelandse
toerisme met die fokus op voorkeurmark met hoë groei-potensiaal; [Invest in
marketing South Africa for domestic and foreign tourism with the focus on
priority markets that have high growth potential.]

Spatial development initiatives and frontier conservation area programmes
aimed at unlocking the economic potential of places across South Africa and
Southern Africa.

Die skep van gunstige toestande vir klein, medium- en mikro-ondernemings
met die oog op toerisme-geleenthede. [The creation of favourable conditions
for small, medium and micro enterprises with a view to tourism
opportunities.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I thank the Minister and I thank the
department; let us co-operate and turn things around. I thank my committee
and this House. We support this Budget Vote, positively. Thank you, Chair.
[Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, I must admit that it is always a great
pleasure to listen to Rev Moatshe. Yesterday he even started reading from
the Bible for us and today he made the most beautiful speech. I think next
time you can really give him a little bit more time. [Laughter.]

Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, agb LUR’e en agb kollegas, ek en die agb
Minister is nou in verskillende politieke partye en daar het baie water in
die see geloop sedert ons politieke paaie geskei het. Ons verskil sekerlik
polities, maar wat bewaring betref, is ek seker dat ons absoluut dieselfde
beginsels deel.

Suid-Afrika is ŉ pragtige land en ons is geseënd met bates van onskatbare
waarde. Dit is dan ook ons plig as trotse burgers om hierdie bates met al
die middele tot ons beskikking te beskerm. Suid-Afrika en Afrika mag nooit
toelaat dat gewetenlose buitelandse maatskappye ondernemings hier vestig
wat nie in hul eie lande toegelaat word nie.
Ek wil in dié verband vir die Minister vra om tog nooit toe te laat dat die
pragtige Pondolandkus deur mynbou vernietig word nie. Almal van ons wat
hierdie kus ken, sal saamstem dat as die Pondolandkus vernietig word, dit ŉ
skande en ŉ tragedie sal wees.

Wat bewaring betref is dit ongelukkig so dat daar ander groot uitdagings
soos armoede, werkloosheid, misdaad en vigs is wat ons aandag nodig het, en
bewaring kry nie altyd die nodige voorkeurbehandeling of die nodige gelde
nie. Ek wil graag stilstaan by ŉ paar besondere bewaringsprestasies van die
afgelope tyd.

Die verklaring van die Pondoland-gebied as ŉ nasionale park, die
uitbreiding van die Addo-park wat nou ook Voëleiland insluit, en die
vestiging van oorgrensparke is werklik iets om op trots te wees. Die
bewaring van die Baviaanskloof-wildernisgebied, die bewaring van die Karoo
en veral die pragtige Graaff-Reinet-gebied wat by die groter Addo-gebied
aansluit, is werklik iets besonders. Mense soos Ewald Loock, Theuns
Eksteen, Johann Rupert en Ton Vosloo het reuse-bewaringswerk in hierdie
gebiede gedoen en behoort groter erkenning daarvoor te kry.

Dit mag vir die lede interessant wees om te weet dat daar vandag meer wild
in die Oos-Kaap is as ŉ 100 jaar gelede. Dít net omdat die gemeenskap besef
het dat dit die moeite werd is om dit te bewaar. Dit is geen wonder dat
toeriste in groot getalle dié gebiede besoek nie. U sal verbaas wees om te
sien hoe die ekonomie in hierdie gebiede groei. Veral die jagbedryf het
geweldig gebaat by bewaring. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs and hon colleagues, the hon
Minister and I are now in different political parties and much water has
passed under the bridge since the parting of our political ways. We
certainly disagree politically, but when it comes to conservation I am
absolutely certain that we share the same principles.

South Africa is a beautiful country and we are blessed with assets of
immeasurable value. It is also our duty as proud citizens to protect these
assets with all the means at our disposal. South Africa and Africa should
never allow unscrupulous foreign companies to establish ventures here that
are not allowed in their own countries.

In this regard I would like to plead with the Minister never to allow the
beautiful Pondoland coast to be destroyed by mining. All of us who know
this coast will agree that, should the Pondoland coast be destroyed, it
would be a shame and a tragedy.

With regard to conservation, it is unfortunately so that there are other
big challenges like poverty, unemployment, crime and Aids that require our
attention, and conservation does not always enjoy the necessary priority
treatment or the necessary funding. I would like to dwell briefly on a few
exceptional conservation achievements of recent times.

The declaration of Pondoland as a national park, the extension of the Addo
Park to now include Bird Island, and the establishment of cross-border
parks, are truly things to be proud of. The conservation of the
Baviaanskloof-Wilderness area, the conservation of the Karoo and especially
the beautiful Graaff-Reinet area that joins the greater Addo area, is truly
something special. People like Ewald Loock, Theuns Eksteen, Johann Rupert
and Ton Vosloo have done a huge amount of conservation work in these areas
and should receive greater recognition for it.

Members might find it interesting to know that there is more wildlife in
the Eastern Cape today than there was 100 years ago. This is only because
the community realised that conservation was worth the effort. It is no
wonder that tourists visit these areas in their droves. You will be
surprised to see the economic growth in these areas. The hunting industry,
especially, has benefited tremendously from conservation.]

They should just not shoot the white lions, Reverend.

Agb Voorsitter, dit is egter tragies dat wat die bewaring van ons
marienebronne betref, ons grootliks misluk het. Wat ons perlemoenbron
betref, wil ek die Minister gelukwens met sy jongste plan en ek is bly dat
hy nou met nuwe ywer die probleem aanpak. Die bron is feitlik vernietig en
veral in die Oos-Kaap is daar so min perlemoen oor dat die stropers nou
ander bronne soek om te plunder.

Lede van die publiek het hul eie veiligheid opgeoffer om die stropers te
vang, maar daar was nie naastenby genoeg ondersteuning van die staat se
kant nie. Korrupsie binne die polisie, sowel as staatsdepartemente, het dit
vir stropers maklik gemaak om hierdie nasionale bate te vernietig.

Die perlemoentragedie sal vir baie jare nog by ons spook, en die Minister
sal nie onthou word vir die goeie dinge wat hy gedoen het nie, maar wel vir
die feit dat die bron gedurende sy termyn feitlik vernietig is.

Australië het presies dieselfde probleem as ons met sy perlemoen gehad; die
perlemoenbronne in Australië is deur stropers van Oosterse lande bedreig.
Australië het, eerstens, die bron gesluit en, tweedens, sy vloot opdrag
gegee om enige boot wat sonder magtiging naby sy bron kom, net eenvoudig te
verwyder of te skiet. Binne drie maande was die probleem daar opgelos.
Voorts pas Australië die beleid van oud-minister Wiley toe, naamlik om
gedeeltes van die kus geheel en al toe te maak en ander gedeeltes oop te
laat vir die publiek om te geniet.

Wat ons visbronne betref is daar nou die gevaar dat globale verhitting vir
alles die skuld kry. Dit is so dat ons nooit die gevare van globale
verhitting buite rekening moet laat nie, maar dit is baie waarskynliker dat
oorbenutting die werklike probleem is. Wat die migrasie van kreef betref,
is dit nogal snaaks dat die kreef na gebiede migreer wat eens baie ryk aan
perlemoen was.

ŉ Baie belangrike en sensitiewe kwessie is die moontlike oopstel van die
Tsitsikamma Mariene Park. Eerstens wil ek dit baie duidelik stel dat daar
arm mense in dié gebied woon wat werklik hulp nodig het. Ek ken die gebied
al vir meer as 40 jaar en kan u die versekering gee dat daar baie beter
maniere is om arm mense te help as om hulle visvangregte in die park te
gee.

Die park het twee baie belangrike funksies: Eerstens dien dit as ŉ
voedingsbron vir die totale kusgebied vanaf Port Elizabeth in die ooste tot
by Mosselbaai in die weste, veral ook vir bedreigde spesies. Tweedens is
dit ŉ belangrike toeristebestemming en almal wat al die Otter-pad gestap
het, sal weet hoe fataal dit sal wees om hengelaars in hierdie gebied toe
te laat.

Die departement erken self dat talle visspesies op die rand van uitwissing
is. Hierdie spesies word reeds in die park beskerm. Hoe is dit dan moontlik
dat dieselfde instansie wat teen die uitwissing van spesies waarsku, nou
die gebied wat hierdie spesies beskerm wil vernietig? Dit maak net nie sin
nie.
Daar is uitstekende amptenare in die departement wat goeie werk doen, maar
ongelukkig word alles ongedaan gemaak deur ondeurdagte besluite van
amptenare. Die verkoop van die Eagle Star-vaartuig is maar een van talle
voorbeelde van swak besluitneming. Ek wonder of ons ooit sal weet wat
werklik hier gebeur het. Wat seker is, is dat die belastingbetalers die
prys betaal vir swak bestuur.

Laastens, die sukses van ons toeristebedryf is nou oral sigbaar. Die
publiek besef al meer dat die bewaring van ons erfenis ook heelwat
ekonomiese voordele bied. Die DA ondersteun graag die begroting. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, it is however tragic that, as far as the conservation of
our marine resources is concerned, we have largely failed. With regard to
our abalone resources, I would like to congratulate the Minister on his
latest plan and am happy that he is tackling the problem with renewed
enthusiasm. This resource has practically been destroyed and, especially in
the Eastern Cape, the abalone is so scarce that poachers have to find other
sources to plunder.

Members of the public have sacrificed their own safety in order to
apprehend the poachers, but there was not nearly enough support from the
state. Corruption within the police, as well as state departments, have
made it easy for poachers to destroy this national asset.
For many years to come we will be haunted by the abalone tragedy, and the
Minister will not be remembered for the good things that he did, but more
for the fact that this resource was practically destroyed during his term
of office.

Australia had exactly the same problem with their abalone as we have; their
abalone resources were threatened by poachers from Eastern countries.
Australia, firstly, closed off the resource and, secondly, instructed its
navy to simply remove or shoot any boat that approached its resource
without permission. The problem was solved in three months. Furthermore,
Australia applies the policy of former Minister Wiley, which involves
completely closing down sections of the coast while leaving other sections
open for the public to enjoy.

With regard to our fish resources, there is now the danger that global
warming will be blamed for everything. It is true that we should never
leave the dangers of global warming out of our reckoning, but it is for
more likely that the real problem is overuse. As to crayfish migration, it
is quite strange that crayfish are migrating to areas that were once very
rich in abalone.

A very important and sensitive issue is the possible opening up of the
Tsitsikamma Marine Park. Firstly, I want to state very clearly that there
are very poor people living in this area who are truly in need of support.
I have been acquainted with the area for more than 40 years and can assure
you that there are many better ways to help poor people than giving them
fishing rights in the park.

The park has two very important functions: Firstly, it serves as a  source
of nutrition for the entire coastal area from Port Elizabeth in the east to
Mossel Bay in the west, especially for endangered species. Secondly, it is
an important tourist destination, and everyone who has already done the
Otter Trail will know how fatal it would be to allow anglers in this area.

The department itself admits that many species of fish are on the brink of
extinction. These species are already protected in the park. How is it
possible that the same institution that warns against the extinction of
species, now wants to destroy the area that protects these species? It just
does not make sense.

There are excellent officials in the department who do good work, but
unfortunately, everything is nullified by officials’ ill-considered
decisions. The sale of the vessel, Eagle Star, is but one of many examples
of poor decision-making. I wonder if we will ever know what really happened
here. What is certain is that the taxpayers are paying the price for poor
management.

Lastly, the success of our tourism industry is now visible everywhere.
Increasingly, the public realises that the conservation of our heritage
also offers many economic advantages. The DA readily supports the budget. I
thank you.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, it is very much unparliamentary
for people to completely close their eyes in the House. [Laughter.] If it
is too hot, please tell me and I will get them to switch on the air
conditioner. But I have seen a lot of people dozing off - it’s
unparliamentary.

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Modulasetulo [Chairperson], Minister, members, comrades
...

... ka Sepedi ba re: Šago la moeng le bewa ke mong gae. Se se ra gore bjalo
ka Afrika Borwa, ... [... in Sepedi they say: When you are a guest at
someone’s house, you need someone to make you feel at home. This means that
as South Africa ...]

... hon Minister, we are on track to ensure that the world sees the best
Soccer World Cup, come 2010. We are on track to ensure that all the people
that will be coming to South Africa and all the tourists that will be
coming to watch the wonderful games will feel more at home; they will feel
like they belong in South Africa.

Afrika-Borwa, ka go hwetša e le setšhaba seo se fapafapanego ka setšo,
maleme le mekgwa - ka morago ga mengwagangwaga ya kgatelelo, e dira gore
mafase a ka ntle a ikhwetše a nyaka go ba mo go yona le go etela lefase le
la mehlolo. Ge ba fihla go yona ba hwetša lefase la maswi le dinosi; lefase
le le tala la meboto le dinoka; le batho ba bonolo, ba lethabo, ba go
myemyela. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[South Africa, being a country with diverse cultures, languages and creeds
- after years of oppression - attracts outside countries who have an
interest in visiting this land of miracles. When they arrive in this
country, they find a land of milk and honey; a green land with hills and
rivers, the people are friendly, with happy and smiling.]

Tourism is a key growth sector for South Africa, with the potential for
greater growth in both international and domestic markets. Asgisa has
identified tourism as an immediate priority sector. The department’s
strategic and policy approach has been to develop the sector by stimulating
the demand for domestic and international tourism, removing blockages to
support tourism growth and broadening participation in order to alleviate
poverty.

The tourism branch in the department aims to create the right conditions
for responsible tourism growth and development, increasing job and
entrepreneurship opportunities and encouraging the participation of
previously disadvantaged individuals. It focuses on facilitating the growth
of the tourism industry by providing support to the public and private
sector and the broader community as a whole.

The White Paper on tourism policy provides a policy framework for tourism
development and entails the following: empowerment and capacity-building;
focus on tourism infrastructure investment; marketing South Africa to
international markets aggressively as a tourism destination; and a domestic
tourism and travel campaign.

The department, in conjunction with SA Tourism, developed a domestic
tourism growth strategy which was launched in 2004 to do the following:
promote the domestic tourism brand, promote a set of experiences that
relate to South African consumers; distribute appropriate information;
facilitate the development of co-operative product packages; develop
marketing and distribution channels; and, lastly, promote repeat visitation
by tourists.

The Sho’t Left campaign, in partnership with the tourism industry and with
an initial investment of R20 million, has generated R40 billion, which
shows the successful campaign that South Africa and the department have
initiated. The campaign promotes affordability, increasing the number of
South Africans accessing tourism products and services. The campaign also
focuses on converting interest to the actual booking of accommodation and
inspiring people to discover their beautiful country.

The international tourism strategy aims to increase arrivals; increase the
duration of tourists’ visits; increase spending by tourists; ensure that
tourists travel the whole country, and not only in Gauteng, the Western
Cape and a few provinces ...

... mo re re re nyaka go bona Limpopo, ka Mapungubwe le ka “baobab tree”,
le yona e etelwa kgafetšakgafetša gore batho ba ka ntle le ba ka mo gae ba
kgone go bona se se botse seo Limpopo e se fago baeng; (Translation of
Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[... what we are saying here is that we want to see Limpopo, Mapungubwe and
the baobab tree being visited frequently so that people from outside and
here at home are able to see the beauty that Limpopo presents to visitors;]

... and also facilitate transformation and BEE in the local tourism
industry.

The BEE tourism charter was launched in May 2006. All companies involved in
the tourism industry are affected. Its aim is to include blacks in the
industry. It also includes management tools to help participants identify
their current BEE levels, gaps in their BEE profiles and ways to improve
their ratings on a balanced scorecard.

A council for the implementation of the charter was established in
accordance with the legislative framework and has been operational since
2005. The charter also allows all citizens to access economic opportunities
in tourism. The department is indeed on course.

The department has, in partnership with organisations such as the Business
Trust, established initiatives such as the Tourism Enterprise Programme to
create links and working relationships between small firms and established
businesses. This initiative has assisted 3 100 SMMEs within six years to
grow their revenue by more than R2,1 billion, creating more than 30 500
jobs. Hon Minister, this says exactly that the department is committed to
ensuring that we deal with poverty, unemployment, people who are on street
corners and unemployed.

Other initiatives by the department in support of tourism SMMEs include
establishing a business training package for entrepreneurs, developing a
tourism SMME funding and support handbook and an introduction to the
Department of Trade and Industry’s incentives for tourism entrepreneurs.

Ka Sepedi ba re: Moeng tla ka gešo re je ka wena. Se se ra gore bjalo ka
batho ba Afrika-Borwa; bjalo ka badudi bao ba rego ge ba bona baeng ba
myemyela, baeng bao ba tlago mo Afrika-Borwa kamoka ga bona, go thoma gona
bjale go fihlela ge go tlo tla ba ba ntši ka 2010, ga re ba amogeleng ka
myemyelo yela re phelago re na le yona.

Bjalo ka ANC re re ... (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)
[When we have visitors, we put our best foot forward. This means that as
South African citizens who always smile when they meet tourists, from now
on until we will be having many of them in 2010. Let us give them a warm
welcome.

As the ANC we say ...]

... hon Minister, we support your Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A R WINDE (Western Cape): Chairperson, it is indeed an honour for me to
be in this House today representing my province, the Western Cape. I would
like to apologise on behalf of the MEC, Tasneem Essop. She is busy with
workshops on global warming and environmental change and she unfortunately
could not be here today, but for me it is an absolute honour, specifically
as I come from an opposition party and I think that really makes it special
and one wonders whether it is, perhaps, a sign of things to come.
[Laughter.]

In representing the province today, I would like to start with some matters
pertaining to tourism and bring to the attention of the Minister a few
matters within our province that I feel need to be looked at and I call
these “icons in the province that are under threat”.

We have a few icons. The first one that I’m going to deal with is the Cango
Caves – management of the caves themselves. I’m sure hon members have seen
stories about the caves in the press over the last while. Because this is a
tourist attraction, an icon, I think that we need to ask the Minister to
really use his position to get involved and see to it that we actually
bring together heritage as well under the tourism banner, because it is a
major icon that is marketed within our province. We need to look at that
management. I think there is certainly something lacking there.

The next point that I want to bring up is also about an icon that is
specifically close to me, because it comes from my constituency: the
Outeniqua Choo-Choo. The hon chairperson mentioned that he was in Soweto.
The last time I was in Soweto, as I drove out there was a massive billboard
that showed a picture of the Outeniqua Choo-Choo. That goes to show what an
icon it is in the tourism industry.

Following the floods in the Southern Cape last year, that specific train
has now been stopped and it’s going to cost a large amount to get it back
on track again. I know that both the MEC for finance in the province as
well as the MEC for economic development are looking at that issue.
However, I think that is also something that I need to bring to the
attention of the national Minister. That is definitely something that we
need to look at.

Just about every single brochure that you open that has to do with the
Southern Cape has a photograph of the Outeniqua Choo-Choo. It is on the
itinerary of just about every single tour operator in the region and while
it does not work, I’m worried that it’s going to fall off those itineraries
and it is no longer going to be marketed by the local businesses. I don’t
think we can afford to lose that icon either.

The third icon I would like to mention, I think, specifically falls under
the national realm, but it is one that is within the Western Cape and that
is Robben Island. We also have seen a lot of tension around the ferry
access to the island and it seems to me things are being done. However,
that is also an icon under threat and we need to make sure that its
management is in place, as well.

The fourth icon that I would like to deal with is the Langebaan Lagoon. I
think the Minister mentioned protected areas and I think that it is one of
the protected areas on the listing - it is a Ramsar site. It is one of 19
such sites in South Africa. I think most members are aware that the sand is
being washed out of that lagoon at the moment and what that is doing to the
area. It is both, I think, a natural environmental concern and also a
concern to the West Coast National Park. It is a major attraction to the
area and it is also one of the prime kite-surfing areas of the world. When
you look on the Internet, you’ll see how that area is marketed throughout
the world, but it is also something that is under dire threat.

I know that there has been an intervention with the building of a groyne
into the lagoon. I presume that over the next year or two we will see how
effective that has been. But up until now, during the times that I have
visited the area, I have observed that it is not working as well as we’d
hoped. I think we need to have some strong intervention in that area as
well.

I would like to move on to the environment and, as I mentioned, the MEC is
busy with a global warming conference in the Western Cape. The Western Cape
is an area that is being affected by global warming more than a lot of
other parts of the world. We in the Western Cape are taking it very
seriously.

Global warming is something that every one of us in the country needs to be
aware of - we need to work towards making and finding solutions as part of
South Africa. While we know that not every single country in the world is
getting behind the problem, we need to make sure that that pressure is kept
up and, where we can, get other countries to come on board. We need to do
so.

One thing that has been launched in the province - as I’m representing the
province and reporting to the provinces - is that we have initiated some
school curriculum adjustment to do with global warming, because we need to
educate our children in what the effects of global warming are, and how it
is going to affect not really us but our children and grandchildren. So, it
is really of grave concern to the province.

I’d like to read some of the reports that are coming out of the joint
initiative. I know that the province is also involved at a national level
with the programme on global warming, but in the Western Cape the province
and the City of Cape Town are working quite hard. The recent energy crisis
in the Western Cape has placed renewed energy as an important item on the
agenda. We are really looking at finding other sustainable methods of
creating energy.

According to the draft Western Cape integrated energy strategy, which was
released in January 2007, in 2004 the province consumed more than 250
gigajoules of energy. The city’s municipal buildings – this is in Cape Town
city – accounted for 16% of the total carbon emissions of the city. As part
of the city’s energy awareness campaign regarding its municipal buildings,
it took the Tygerberg administration building and refitted it with compact
fluorescent lights, and it also got involved with employee wellness
campaigns and education campaigns.

This campaign resulted in the draft integrated energy strategy, which
speculated that if all of the commercial and government sectors replaced
their lighting with CFLs, by 2024 it would result in close to a R600
million saving in the commercial sector and a R60 million saving in the
government sector.

That just goes to show that we think global warming is something that’s
going to cost us a lot of money when we address it. In actual fact, by
addressing global warming we are not only going to fix the problem but at
the same time, if we do it properly, we are going to save money.

I would like to move on to something that the Minister said. He spoke about
consolidation of our national parks. That is something that the MEC in the
province has been talking about to our standing committee on a regular
basis. We feel that, in the Western Cape, there is duplication because we
have national parks looking after certain of our heritage facilities. We
also have a provincial authority, the Cape Nature organisation that looks
after certain of our entities.

We want to know whether there is a possibility of getting involved in joint
ventures so that we can start to save more on the administrative costs,
because the administrative costs are taking away a lot of money that could
be used to preserve and look after many hectares of our land that need
preservation, specifically in this province. I look forward to hearing what
the Minister can come up with.

The chairperson spoke about quarries and that brings me to another point on
mining and quarries in our province. There seems to be a lot of issues with
mining prospecting licences in the Western Cape, specifically on quarries
...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Your speaking time has expired, hon member.

Mr A R WINDE (Western Cape): Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe kazwelonke noNgqongqoshe bezifundazwe
... [Chairperson, national Minister and provincial MECs ...]

... ke le rolela kgaebane, ke re: “Dikgomo tseo, le manamane a tsona”. [...
hats off to you, I say: Greetings to each and every one of you.]

Chairperson, the work of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism is very important and is capable of affecting the economy and
social circumstances of many people in our country. We are therefore
pleased that there has been an increase in allocations to the department.

The work of this department is very wide-ranging and covers a variety of
important issues that have their own set of challenges and obstacles.
Environmental issues such as climate change, poaching and illegal fishing
are just some of the many concerns that demand the immediate attention of
this department because they have a bearing on the lives of many. The
department must rise to these challenges and find a solution that will be
sustainable.

The tourism sector continues to grow at record rates and will continue to
do so for some time, considering that we will be hosting the Fifa Soccer
World Cup in 2010. This sector brings much-needed foreign currency to our
country and provides employment and opportunities to many people.

An unfortunate reality, however, is that the increased popularity of South
Africa as a tourist destination has resulted in an increase in the prices
needed to gain access to the many attractions that our country has to
offer. We are now faced with a situation where ordinary South Africans
cannot afford to explore or enjoy the beauty within their own country,
since prices are now geared towards the foreign tourists and their foreign
currencies.

More should be done to encourage locals to travel within their own country
before they start exploring and travelling abroad. The department has
attempted to encourage locals to travel within South Africa and they should
be commended for such an effort. We hope that more intensive and innovative
ways will be explored to encourage local travel.
The Sho’t Left Campaign, which was launched with much fanfare, seems to
have lost momentum. We hardly hear about it anymore. The distribution of
the benefits gained from tourism is not spread equally among all South
Africans as they should be; they are still too concentrated amongst a
minority of people. This must be corrected so that the gains of tourism can
be felt by, and benefit, as many people as possible.

The many rural communities seem to be forgotten, and do not seem to be
gaining as much as they should from tourism. The level of ownership that
black people are involved in needs attention, as they should be involved in
all levels from workers to owners of business in the industry.

Although I have highlighted the challenges that this department has to
overcome, together with all the relevant role-players in the industry, they
should be congratulated on the many achievements and advancements that have
been made.

Kule mizuzwana nje esasele ngifuna ukusho ukuthi kuyangithokozisa ukuthi
uNgqongqoshe uke wavakashela laphaya eSoweto. Siye sabona nokulala kwakhe
laphayana ezindaweni zabampisholo. Siye sakwamukela lokho, sathi sengathi
kungaqhubeka. Kodwa sifisa kungabi seSoweto kuphela, ake kubonakale
nakwezinye izindawo. Sifuna ukumbona uNgqongqoshe eya nakwezinye izindawo.

Sihlalo, i-IFP ikwesekela konke lokhu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[In these few minutes that I still have, I would like to say I am happy
that the Minister visited Soweto. We also noted that he spent the night in
a black residential area. We welcomed that and said that it should
continue. However, this should not happen only in Soweto, but in other
places as well. We want to see the Minister visiting other places as well.

Chairperson, the IFP supports all this.]

Mrs W THUSI (KwaZulu-Natal): Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, my
colleagues - the MECs, hon members, sanibonani [greetings] from the Kingdom
of the Zulus!

Tourism is one of the four key pillars of KwaZulu-Natal’s economy and is
included in our economic development strategy. We have committed ourselves
to reduce unemployment by half by 2014. Tourism is therefore identified as
one of the industries that will assist to this effect. We will be able to
achieve this through skills development, SMME development and also by
providing resources to encourage self-employment.

Studies that have been conducted and programmes that have been put in
place, such as Asgisa and Jipsa, clearly indicate the challenges and what
needs to be done to address them. In KwaZulu-Natal we have decided to face
these challenges by coming up with aggressive programmes that respond to
these challenges. At times we will request the national level of government
to assist.

The most pertinent challenges that one needs to address are the following:
accelerating transformation in the tourism industry, particularly around
the issue of ownership; addressing the skills gap; and the empowerment of
our society so that they see the benefit of tourism.

I want to highlight the programmes we have in the province. But before I do
so, I want this honourable House to note that KwaZulu-Natal is the leading
domestic tourism destination and we are increasing our numbers of
international visitors. International air access has always been a
challenge for the province, with interconnecting flights from other cities.
However, that is set to change with the new airport that is going to be
built and which will be ready by 2009. This is set to bolster both
international leisure and business tourism visitor numbers to KwaZulu-
Natal.

Our first important programme was the successful hosting of the tourism
indaba for the 19th year in KwaZulu-Natal. The Tourism Indaba 2007 was
quite a success, with more than 12 000 exhibitors. This has good economic
spin-offs for the province. The participation of our SMME exhibitors from
the province in the tourism indaba has dramatically increased. Two of our
SMME tour operators won the shuttle service tender to ferry exhibitors to
and from the indaba venue. It was an incident-free event with very minor
incidents and this means we are ready for 2010.

This time around, women and young people won the welcome awards - an
improvement on the previous winners. We still need to increase the
participation of the previously disadvantaged. Our wish is that Durban
stays the permanent venue for the tourism indaba.

We are in the process of developing a White Paper on tourism development,
which will result in the creation of an even more conducive environment and
also ensure that we retain our hold as the first tourism destination.

We have established a provincial tourism committee which comprises all
district municipalities, the metro and all the stakeholders, and we meet
quarterly. There is a provincial tourism forum which gives technical
support to the provincial tourism committee.

Regarding skills development programmes, we have introduced a number of
skills development programmes targeting communities and emerging businesses
from previously disadvantaged backgrounds, which are aimed at closing the
existing gap in so far as skills are concerned.
As I speak, we are on the second intake of learners for our tourism
mentorship programme, a programme we stole, in good faith though, from our
colleagues in the Western Cape. It is working well and we will soon be
starting the process for the third intake.

The beauty of this programme is that it is characterised by practical
experience accumulated through the mentoring process and takes place over a
six-month period, where the “mentee” and mentor sit down and engage each
other on the various aspects of business development such as customer care,
human resource management, financial management, bookings etc.

At the moment, the mentees are bed-and-breakfast accommodation owners and
tour operators. Our selection criteria are such that we appoint mentors who
are very experienced and have the skills to transfer to our emerging
businesses. It is indeed worthwhile for business owners to participate in
this programme.

Another interesting programme is the training of B & B owners and,
sometimes, managers and tour operators. This, I would say, takes the
tourism mentorship programme to the next level through intensive training
on, again, various business development aspects, at the International Hotel
School.

Most of the participants here are the people who have completed tourism
mentorship programmes. The curriculum offerings here also include practical
experience. The completion of the programme is marked by the awarding of
the certificates to students.
We welcome the information that was given by the hon Minister, that there
is going to be progress in the grading of second economy establishments. My
department is excited about the Adopt-a-Guesthouse Programme and is in
discussion with one of the conglomerates of the tourism industry in this
country, with a view to partnering them in their Adopt-a-Guesthouse
Programme.

The programme entails adopting a certain number of emerging bed-and-
breakfast accommodation establishments and guesthouses and putting them
under the leadership of these conglomerates so that their businesses can
grow. This helps them on a number of aspects which are a challenge to
emerging businesses. Issues such as marketing are definitely addressed.

The department has a career support programme which offers bursaries,
learnerships and career exhibitions. This year we awarded 45 bursaries and
we aim to grow the numbers gradually, with time. We have decided to
introduce a learnership programme that targets learners with no
qualifications and experience in tourism.

We’re organising a career exhibition to take place around September,
whereby we invite learners from schools, tourism business people and
financial institutions and put them under one roof to share information on
tourism. This gives learners an invaluable opportunity for networking. It
also gives them first-hand information on the opportunities available in
the tourism industry and how to tap into them.

The organisers of the national tourism organising plan have indicated that
there is a challenge in the grading of tourism establishments. My
department, together with Tourism KwaZulu-Natal, has started a programme
that begins to vigorously address this issue. We are in discussion with the
Tourism Enterprise Programme to facilitate a process that will ensure that
these establishments are graded.

Tour guide training is another area which needs drastic intervention from
government because, as it stands, it does not reflect the racial
demographics of our country. We have also included training in foreign
languages where we target the youth.

Regarding tourism BEE, the department has appointed a focal person to
champion the implementation of BEE in the province. We are in the process
of setting up a provincial forum which is going to drive the process, where
municipalities and other structures will be able to advise each other on
the issues of the charter. This forum is going to work closely with the
Tourism Black Economic Empowerment Charter Council that was set up by the
national Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.

Chairperson, hon members, we are getting ready for 2010. We have a
provincial tourism plan for 2010 in place. These were but a few of our
programmes. I wish to thank the national department for the support they
give to the province with regard to such programmes as, for example, the
social responsibility programmes, assistance with our mentorship programme
and many other initiatives. KwaZulu-Natal supports the budget. Thank you.

Mr K BATYI (Gauteng): Chairperson, hon Mahlangu, hon Minister, Deputy
Chairperson, MECs, hon members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, maybe the
reason why I was sent by the MEC of the very same party from which I come,
was to avoid a situation where a person would come here from the opposition
and start smelling power.

Friends and colleagues, environmental issues have long stopped being
matters for environmentalists and “greens” alone. Indeed, it has dawned on
enlightened humanity that the environment is the main source of our
civilisation, and undeniably the source of life itself as we know it today.


Elaborating on this factual reality, the millennium assessment report
presented to the United Nations during 2005 contended that everyone in the
world depends completely on the earth’s ecosystems and the services they
provide such as food, water, disease management, climate regulation,
spiritual fulfilment and aesthetic enjoyment.
Indeed, without trees, forests and grass, some of our recreational needs
would extensively be limited. Without fertile ground and with deforestation
accelerating at the present rate, our source of food and energy would be
depleted. The millennium goal and our own country’s objective of fighting
poverty would actually come to nought. This is the importance that we
attach to the budget policy of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism. It is with this sober understanding of environmental issues that I
venture to make my input into the budget policy discussion presented to us
in this sitting.

In contributing to the policy Budget Vote presented to us, I first wish to
refer to the UN report that I spoke of earlier. The millennium assessment
report informs us that the damage to our ecosystem has become more intense
in the past 50 years. It further informs us that urgent and farsighted
actions are imperative, if we are to survive and ensure that the next
generation also benefits positively from the environment. In doing this,
the report efficiently articulates the fact that biodiversity provides
essential services without which life on earth, as we know it, is not
possible.

The budget policy document presented to us, in this sitting, focuses on
elements that will assist us in averting this catastrophe. Among others,
the budget policy document focuses on the issue of long-term climate
change. It addresses what is termed “the long-term mitigation scenario
processes”. In doing this, it seeks to present realistic scenarios
regarding future climate action, notably long-term emission scenarios and
their cost implications. This, in turn, will further guide the national
climate change responsibility strategy. I do believe that we all should
unequivocally align ourselves with this foresight.

The Gauteng provincial government is conscious of the fact that
environmental regulations and the environmental impact assessment processes
include effective developmental tools. During the past five years, 95% of
all environmental impact assessment applications submitted were finalised,
with 70% of these being finalised within stipulated timeframes. The
efficient processing of these applications facilitated socioeconomic
development, especially in the industrial and residential sectors.

It is on these grounds that we want to align ourselves with the proposed
Bills, as suggested in the budget policy. The purpose of the Bills is to
further enhance efficiency and eliminate unnecessary logjams in the
processing of environmental impact assessment applications. The envisaged
Bills also suggest a need for amendments to the National Environmental
Management Act to strengthen the environmental management inspectorate.

Gauteng is a small province, constituting only about 1,4% of the country’s
land surface. It also happens to be the economic hub of the country. It is
densely populated. The province utilises 28% of the nation’s fuel sources.
It is also the most industrialised province in the country.

These blessings are, however, tinged with negative opportunities.
Environmental criminals continuously plan on how to beat the system, and on
how to smuggle protected plant and animal species out of the country. We
therefore would welcome the strengthening of the National Environmental
Management Act to the extent that the environmental management inspectors,
the famed Green Scorpions, are further empowered to deal with these forces.


In conclusion, I wish to observe that the budget policy Vote presented
takes away nothing from our collective efforts to build a better life for
all our communities. It, in fact, significantly contributes to these
objectives. In moving for the endorsement of the budget policy Vote, I wish
to ask the hon Minister to, amongst others, accelerate the process of
developing better methods to deal with the scale of pollution caused by
vehicle tyres. I thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Dankie, Mevrou die Voorsitter. Die agb Minister het
hierdie week, ‘n dag of twee gelede, oor Radio Sonder Grense, in sy
onderhoud heeltemal tereg gesê dat die besoedeling van die riviere en die
waterbronne eintlik ‘n saak vir die Ministerie en Departement van Waterwese
is.

Meurou die Voorsitter, ten spyte van duidelike verbodsbepalings in die
Nasionale Waterwet, gaan die besoedeling van die waterbronne, en spesifiek
die riviere, onverpoosd voort en van die grootste oortreders, helaas, is
die munisipaliteite wat ongesuiwerde, of ten minste ondoeltreffend
gesuiwerde water, in die stelsels terugvoer.

Mevrou die Voorsitter, sonder twyfel sal só iets ook ‘n invloed op die
vleilande hê. Ek meen, dit is voor die hand liggend. So, wat ons hier mee
te doen het, lyk dit vir my, is twee departemente, Waterwese en
Omgewingsake, wat eintlik ‘n gesamentlike verantwoordelikheid het. Dis soos
ek dit verstaan. Ek mag verkeerd wees.

Nou, Mevrou die Voorsitter, as die een departement, en dit is my kommer,
wag vir die ander departement om te reageer op ‘n bepaalde aspek, dan is
dit net moontlik dat daar uiteindelik niks, of dan weinig, gedoen word of
dalk teenstrydige aksies geneem word. Kan die agb Minister in sy repliek
dalk net verwys in hoeverre dié twee departemente hierdie aangeleentheid
kan koördineer.

‘n Tweede aspek – ek het drie minute, ‘n minuut per aspek, en ek gaan dit
nie maak nie – is afvalstorting. Die agb Minister het ook daarna verwys.
Mevrou die Voorsitter, die syfers wat ek uit die jaarverslag gehaal het, is
effe minder as dit wat die Minister geopper het, maar ek glo dat die
Minister se syfers inderdaad korrek is, naamlik dat daar ‘n hele aantal
stortingsterreine is wat nie permitte het nie en dat die aansoeke vir
stortingspermitte baie lank vertraag word en dat dit onnodig is. Iewers is
daar ‘n haakplek.

Dit is verblydend dat die verantwoordelikheid vir sodanige permitte,
volgens die jaarverslag, nou van Waterwese na Omgewingsake oorgedra is. Dit
maak baie sin, want die vraag is nou: Waarom dan ook nie hierdie hele
aangeleentheid ten opsigte van die besoedeling van die waterbronne nie?

In die laaste instansie, Mevrou die Voorsitter, die agb Minister het
inderdaad daarna verwys in die Nasionale Vergadering, en dit gaan oor
klimaatsverandering. Wat opmerklik is, is dat daar betreklik onlangs
toestemming aan ‘n Kanadese maatskappy in Richardsbaai gegee is om ‘n
aluminiumfabriek op te rig.

Ek verstaan dat dit moeilik is om ‘n balans te vestig tussen ekonomiese
ontwikkeling en die kwessie van klimaatsverandering. Dis ‘n moeilike toer
en die Vryheidsfront Plus het geen twyfel aan die agb Minister of die
departement se verbintenis om by te dra tot Suid-Afrika se vermindering van
aardverwarming nie. Die verkryging van ‘n balans is egter ‘n baie moeilike
taak. Baie dankie. My tyd is verstreke. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The hon Minister said
this week, a day or two ago, quite correctly in his interview on Radio
Sonder Grense that the pollution of rivers and water resources is actually
a Ministry and Department of Water Affairs matter.

Madam Chairperson, despite clear prohibitive regulations in the national
Water Act, the pollution of water resources, and rivers in particular is
continuing unabated and among the biggest perpetrators, unfortunately, are
the municipalities which feed untreated water, or at least inadequately
treated water, back into the systems.

Madam Chairperson, this will without doubt have an influence on the
marshlands. I mean, this goes without saying. So, in my opinion, we are
dealing with two departments here, Water Affairs and Environmental Affairs,
that actually have a joint responsibility. This is how I understand it. I
may be wrong.

Now, Madam Chairperson, if the one department – and this is my concern –
waits for the other department to react on a particular aspect, then it is
just possible that nothing or very little will be done or contradictory
actions will be taken. Can the hon Minister, in his reply, possibly
indicate to what extent these two departments can co-ordinate this matter.

The second aspect - I have three minutes, one minute per aspect, I am not
going to make it - is dumping. The hon Minister also referred to it. Madam
Chairperson, the figures I took from the annual report are slightly lower
than those which the Minister mentioned, but I believe that the Minister’s
figures are indeed correct, namely that there are a considerable number of
dumping areas without permits and that the applications for dumping permits
are also delayed for quite a long time and unnecessarily so. There is a
hitch somewhere.

It is gratifying to know that the responsibility for such permits,
according to the annual report, has now been transferred from Water Affairs
to Environmental Affairs. This really makes sense because the question now
is: Why not also this entire matter concerning the pollution of water
resources?

Lastly, Madam Chairperson, the hon Minister has indeed referred to this
matter in the National Assembly, namely climate change. It is remarkable
that permission was given fairly recently to a Canadian company in Richards
Bay to build an aluminium factory.

I understand that it is difficult to strike a balance between economic
development and the matter of climate change. It is a difficult trick and
the FF Plus does not doubt the hon Minister’s or the department’s
commitment to contributing to South Africa’s contribution towards reducing
global warming. However, it is very difficult to maintain a balance. Thank
you very much. My time has expired. Thank you.]

Mr P W SAAIMAN (Northern Cape): Madam Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon
members of the NCOP, colleagues, the officials of the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism and our Director-General, Mrs Pam Yako,
it is always an honour to participate in this debate because we, in the
Northern Cape, are acutely aware of our environment and our heritage, and
the need to be constantly vigilant at protecting these resources. We also
agree with the Minister that this can also be done through partnerships and
protection for prosperity.

We, in the Northern Cape, also foster a closer partnership between the past
and the present, as our rich history, vast untouched scenery, ancient
cultures and traditions, and unique flora and fauna are the essence of what
our tourism product is all about, and we want to ensure that this product
remains relevant, accessible and competitive. It is therefore in that
context that we listened attentively to the debate surrounding climate
change in Parliament during the past few days and wish to concur with the
Minister that, in the Northern Cape, the succulent Karoo, which is the
international hot spot, is in danger. If something is not done urgently,
our children and their children might not know about some of these
indigenous plant species and even animal species.

They say in some areas in the Karoo, nearer to Namaqualand, in one square
kilometre there are more new species and plant species than in the whole of
Britain. That is why we are presently planning a conference for climate
change in the next year, in the Northern Cape. We are talking to donor
organisations and we will invite the Department of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism and the relevant officials to the planning of this conference
so that we can plan together.

We will invite our neighbours such as Namibia, because we know that, in
South Africa, provinces such as the Northern Cape and others, which are
specifically on the western side of the country, are the most vulnerable
and are in the forefront of climate change that is causing severe
desertification because of devastating droughts and freak weather.

We are looking forward to having a conference of international status in
which we can change the emphasis and empower our people. When the President
was there during izimbizo and also during the outreach programmes that we
as a provincial Cabinet conduct in different areas of the province, the
question was raised that we should also empower our people regarding the
new emphasis on how to combat desertification, and how to combat the ills
of climate change so that those people that are at the forefront can get
the necessary tools and know what to do. So we are looking forward to
having this conference which will have an international emphasis.

Now, we also agree with the Minister; we are committed and have pledged our
support to entrench and enforce the right of all South Africans to a clean,
safe and secure environment. But, if we say this, we cannot ignore the
scourge of asbestos contamination in the Northern Cape any longer. Its
danger is second only to nuclear contamination.

I am not here to blame anybody; the department is not to blame. The
unscrupulous people of the past, as Rev Moatshe said, mined and knew that
these things are dangerous. They just left these mines open, contaminated
the whole place and went away. But what should we do? We should approach
this issue in a very serious manner.

First of all, Minister, it’s more than a year now since we completed our
secondary pollution study commissioned by you and the department. The
implications are huge and I do not think that the province has that
capability to rehabilitate ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon member, will you
please speak to the Minister through the Chair.

Mr P W SAAIMAN (Northern Cape): Thank you, Madam Chair. Provinces have
funds to rehabilitate so many houses and so many streets. Therefore, we
call on the Minister to help us regarding the status of the document. Does
the Cabinet know about it? Is it a Cabinet document? Must we inform our
Cabinet about it? We do not know how we can inform them.

We should join hands with the affected provinces and possibly confront
Treasury with these facts so that we can try to get the necessary funds for
rehabilitation. The primary rehabilitation through the mines is moving
well. We received R40 million last year from the Department of Minerals and
Energy, and it is going to spend R68 million to rehabilitate all those
ownerless, derelict mines. So, that one is going well.

We have completed a micro study in the area surrounding Prieska, one of the
areas that is contaminated. The initial findings are devastating. We asked
the department for R2,8 million to do the same micro study in Kuruman. We
also asked the Minister’s department to ring-fence a few million rand for
us from the social responsibility programme fund so that we can, in the
meantime, rehabilitate those areas that we are able to.

While we are joining hands to find money, through the establishment of the
cross-border municipalities we have now inherited from North West a great
number of areas that are contaminated. I think by now the secondary
contaminated areas in total about 80% in the Northern Cape.

We had a visit in the area of Kuruman from the Deputy Minister, who did
very well, because pressure groups are now up in arms and they are
threatening to bring this up against the 2010 Soccer World Cup. We cannot
allow them to say that we are doing nothing.
We visited the area and found that roads are built with this contaminated
material. Schools are built with the same material while small children
play in the houses that people built. This contamination takes years to
cause cancer. It takes 30 to 40 years and some of the people in Kuruman die
at 21 years of age. Those are people who were contaminated in their first
year of life.

We who live in that area, when we sleep we inhale this thing; we drink it
and we never knew that it was dangerous. People are dying around us and you
can safely say I am a dead man walking. That is serious, because people are
dying. My counterparts are dying - they get mesothelioma and we bury them
every week. We can safely say that all of us are dead men walking because
we do not know.

I have raised this issue with the Minister in all seriouseness, because we
cannot ignore it anylonger. This will haunt us as a country. We know that
it is not the department’s fault and not the officials’ fault. We must join
hands. My plea here is: Let us join hands and let us get funds. Give us
some money in the meantime to rehabilitate and the money to conduct a micro
study. Let us join hands and try to get the funds. The Minister and all the
affected provinces can then make an announcement before long so that we can
do that.

We were forced to embrace mariculture long ago as a viable, profitable
alternative because of the impact of the depletion of our marine stock on
the West Coast. As a provincial government, we are totally committed to the
development of the mariculture sector, both as a source of employment and a
contributor to our provincial gross domestic product but also as an answer
to the demand for scarce and fast-vanishing marine resources. What we have
already done as a committed province is that we have financed the
completion of a mariculture park and we pumped in R26 million.

We completed a study on abalone farming with the University of
Stellenbosch, the Department of Science and Technology and Hondeklip Bay
and it has been proved that it works very well. There is something in our
water there that helps the abalone grow faster than anywhere else.

In Kleinsee, the trials regarding mines have been successful. They are
going to come on board substantially, concerning non-core business, in
order to create work to cater for downscaling of mines and the loss of
employment. Alexandra Bay is already exporting and we are in the forefront
and looking forward to being one of the Department of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism’s projects in the province. The Northern Cape supports the
Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I want to caution
the MEC that when he addresses this House he has to address it through the
Chair, and not address the Minister directly. Thank you.

Mr O C CHABANE (Limpopo): Chairperson, hon Minister, my colleagues, the
MECs, hon members, staff of the department led by the director-general, I
would like to congratulate the Minister on the good budget speech both in
the National Assembly and here.

We would firstly like to state that we support the sentiments expressed by
MEC Saaiman from the Northern Cape with regard to the issues around
asbestos and we would want him to know that we are also affected. However,
I would invite MEC Saaiman and the people of the Northern Cape to Limpopo.
Until we get a solution to the problem, they can migrate to Limpopo.
[Laughter.] We can accommodate them for that time.

Chairperson, I will focus on broad challenges that we face in our portfolio
and I will not focus much on what the province is all about and what it
does. Firstly, I would like us to seriously consider the issue of
determining the norm of what would be admissible as a percentage of the
landmarks we have with regard to areas which should be under conservation.
That is in response to the issue raised about the expansion of the
conservation areas, particularly with regard to the national parks. That
may assist us, at least, to reach some sort of targets on what it is that
needs to be done.
Secondly, there is a challenge with regard to the facilities run by NGOs or
private persons that are dealing with the rehabilitation of animals. They
are turning them into animal exhibition centres, partial zoos or some sort
of facilities which are meant for tourism purposes. In our view, one finds
that, in those areas, most of the practices are not generally those which
are acceptable in the context of animal management. There is a need to have
co-ordination between ourselves, yourselves and other stakeholders in
dealing with that area.

Thirdly, as members would know, Limpopo has two large areas of the province
which have been declared biospheres: the Waterberg and Kruger 2 Canyon. We
are currently processing the issue of declaring Soutpansberg as a birding
route biosphere. We believe this places a responsibility on us and the
communities who live around these areas.

However, we are facing a challenge of bioprospecting and deforestation,
particularly with regard to medicinal plants. Therefore the co-ordination
between ourselves and yourselves, and probably with Water Affairs and
Forestry, may be important in order for us to see how we can manage and
create more resources to cope with the demand for medicinal plants in the
area.

The other challenge, Minister, is the possible existence of an organised
crime syndicate related to poaching. Therefore, we think it is important
for us to co-ordinate efforts, particularly with regard to the
translocation of animals across provincial boundaries. There is a need for
us to co-ordinate those efforts to ensure that we deal with these criminal
activities.

The other concern is the rehabilitation and management of wetlands. You
would know, hon Minister that ... [Interjections.] [Laughter.] You would
know, hon members, that, concerning the issue of wetlands and its
management, there are grey areas between us and Water Affairs and Forestry.
Therefore, those issues need to be resolved for a better management of our
water resources.

On the issue of global warming and climate change, hon members would know
that Limpopo is the only province through which a tropical line passes –
the Tropic of Capricorn. For those who have never seen it, please, you are
welcome to come to Limpopo and see it. [Interjections.]

One of its consequences is that in our region we suffer intermittent
droughts and floods, jointly with our SADC neighbours. Therefore, for us,
environmental management is crucial, though we know that Africa contributes
very little with regard to the emission of greenhouse gases and at the same
time it becomes one of the most serious victims affected by global warming.
We are therefore saying it is important for us to co-ordinate efforts to
mitigate the effects of global warming, especially in the rural areas and
in our neighbouring states that are mostly affected by droughts and floods.


We believe that the only way for us to have sustainable development is for
us to have sustainable environmental management. It may be important, hon
members, that, for us to deal with environmental management, we need
particularly to co-ordinate with local municipalities. The issue of land
use needs to be finalised so that we can, at least, have a database for all
the areas where development has to take place to ensure that the
environmental impact assessments are done in advance in order not to delay
the development process.

On the tourism side, members would know that in Limpopo we do not talk
about the big five, but the big six. If you don’t believe me you may come
and see for yourself. The most important thing for us is that our tourism
strategy is totally integrated with our neighbouring countries, such as
Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Zambia and Namibia.

We hope the discussions that are taking place within SADC regarding the
single visa system and the relaxation of the visa requirements amongst SADC
citizens are going to help us a lot to strengthen the tourism strategy. The
existence of the transfrontier conservation areas is very important to us.
However, we hope that the national government will assist us, especially
with regard to the Greater Limpopo Transfrontier Park, to manage the issue
of costs, because people have to move through the Kruger park and through
the Giriyondo border post to the coastal areas of Mozambique and also the
improvement of infrastructure on the other side. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, I would
like to bring this to your attention: According to Rule 43, a member must
address the Chair when speaking, and if possible must stand while doing so
and not directly address another member in the House. Thank you.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, the hon Minister has rightly placed
emphasis on greening issues, whether it be Green Scorpions, environmental
inspectors, climate change, ecosystems or biodiversity management. In
essence, the policy direction is right, except when it comes to fisheries
management and providing a just and fair allocation to our artisanal
fishermen in poor coastal fishing communities.

The hardship caused to coastal fishing communities is enormous. These
fishermen have no other source of income and have no transferable skills,
leaving them destitute with no sustainable means of livelihood. More
disconcerting is that government has no safety net for these fishing
communities as poverty alleviation programmes have reaped marginal success,
if any, in some communities.

We need to look at a fair dispensation for artisanal subsistence fishermen.
The irony of the latest allocation of fishing rights is that politically
connected fishing companies – and I will not mention the political party -
have received substantial increases in hake trawl quotas and some other
species. The patronage has marred the allocation process. People who have
never been to sea or depended on the resource for a living have received
rights. The issue with regard to resource management around abalone is
understood.

Through the Chair, I would like to say that the quota system needs a
relook. These people are suffering on our coast from Hout Bay upwards and
from Kalk Bay towards this side – all over. You go to any of the
communities and you find that they are sitting there and can’t put a little
dinghy into the sea because they are not allowed to put their lines into
the water. They have been doing that for centuries and it’s actually a
shame that we are ignoring these people whilst we look at other
environmental matters, but not at these poor people.

The poaching of resources in protected areas and adequate interagency
combative policing have shown mixed results. Given the levels of poaching
and government’s inability to stem the tide, the abalone sector must be
closed. I would agree with some other members here that we need to use the
navy. We have a crack naval force that could do that.

It is heartening to see environmental inspections concerning large
corporates who pollute the air in the process of production, without any
regard for air pollution legislation and emission levels. This campaign is
supported and those guilty companies must face stiff fines for air
pollution.

Approval of developments in sensitive ecosystems has slowed and government
must take credit for this initiative. Black economic empowerment in the
tourism industry is occurring at a slow pace. Some progress has been made
with the training of black tour guides but transformation in the tourism
industry has been slow.

Right here, in Cape Town, as a tour operator, one cannot get into the
hotels because it is a closed shop. We need to look at that. Given the
Soccer World Cup 2010 that is fast approaching, the grading of hospitality
establishments is progressing well.

The UIF supports the budget. [Time expired.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Voorsitter, Minister, “MECs” [LUR’e], kollegas, amptenary, wat
betref die vorige spreker - ek dink dis hoekom hulle sy politieke party op
die Kaapse Vlakte “the uninsured, uninformative, independent front” noem -
as hy die nuusblaaie die afgelope tyd gelees het of TV gekyk het of net
gevolg het wat in die politiek aangaan, dan sou hy geweet het dat die
departement tot uiterstes gegaan het om mense behulpsaam te wees. Ek dink
daar is ’n duisend kwotas wat addisioneel bygesit was vir ons mense en nou
die dag in die komitee het ons gehoor dat daar ’n twee jaar
hersieningsproses gaan wees met die uitdeel van die kwotas en dit gaan
hersien word.

Baie van ons wat in Suid-Afrika woon, trap in die strik dat ons vergeet hoe
wonderlik die lewe in ons land eintlik is. Ons vergeet dat die invloei van
mense uit alle dele vanoor die wêreld dien as bewys van voortgaande
suskses. Ons vergeet dat ons met reg trots kan wees op Suid-Afrika en dat
ons daarop trots moet wees om hier te leef en te werk. Bygesê, ons moet
altyd onthou dat daar nog baie werk voorlê aan die verbetering van die
lewenspeil van miljoene in ons armste gemeenskappe.

By geleentheid van ons eerste dekade van demokrasie en gedagtig aan ons
eerste vrygebore geslag kinders moet ons ook in gedagte hou dat die
uitdagings waarvoor ons nog te staan sal kom, te bowe gekom sal word deur
dieselfde sterk vennootskappe wat ons tot hiertoe gebring het. In die
woorde van een van die Wes-Kaap se mees gerespekteerde seuns, Dr Franklin
Sonn, “die beste lê nog voor. Watch this space.”

Wanneer alle Suid-Afrikaners hande vat en koppe bymekaar sit, het ons die
beste kans op sukses met die verbetering van almal se lewens. Laat ons
hande vat om ‘n land van wêreldgehalte te bou. Saam moet ons vir ons seuns
en dogters in Suid-Afrika ’n regverdige deel verseker.

Om te sê almal moet toegang hê tot die natuurlike bronne van ons land is ’n
ware uitdaging vir die regering. Om seker te maak, end-uit, dat almal in
Suid-Afrika kan deel in die vreugdes en opbou van ons bronne, soos
byvoorbeeld die genot van die Tafelberg Nasionale Park, is deel van hierdie
uitdaging. So ook is om te sorg dat die vroutjie wat moeilik loop vanweë
ouderdom, die familie met min geld in die huis en die gestremde kind en sy
vriende uiteindelik kan geniet wat hierdie regering vir ons bied.

Dertien jaar gelede het die regering en mense van Suid-Afrika gelyke
toegang tot regeringsdienste amptelik begin vooropstel en oor hierdie
dekade is reeds baie gedoen om die mense van die land toegang te gee tot
basiese dienste en ontwikkelings- en groeimoontlikhede.

Die ANC-regering weet dat daar nog baie gedoen moet word oor die volgende
dekades om voort te bou op hierdie suksesse, veral in gemeenskappe waar
voortdurende menswaardigheid nog gevestig moet word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, Minister, MECs, colleagues and dignitaries, the
previous speaker – I think that is why they call his political party “the
uninsured, uninformative, independent front” on the Cape Flats - if he had
read the newspapers, watched television or simply followed what has
happened in politics in recent times, would have known that the department
has gone to extreme lengths to be of assistance to the people. I think
there was an additional 1 000 quotas added for our people and the other day
we heard in the committee that there is going to be a two-year review
period regarding the handing out of quotas, and this is going to be
revised.

Many of us living in South Africa are caught in the trap of forgetting how
wonderful life in this country actually is. We forget that the influx of
people from all corners of the world serves as a reminder of ongoing
success. We forget that we should rightly be proud of South Africa and the
fact that we can live and work in this country. However, we should always
remember that there is still a lot of work to be done to improve the
standard of living of millions in our poorest communities.

After a decade of democracy and looking at the first generation of children
to be born free we must also keep in mind the challenges we will be faced
with and we will overcome these by means of the same strong partnerships
that have brought us this far. In the words of Dr Franklin Sonn, one of the
Western Cape’s most respected sons: “The best is yet to come. Watch this
space.”

We have the best chance for success in improving everybody’s standard of
living when all South Africans join hands and put our heads together. Let
us join hands in order to build a country of high quality. Together we must
ensure a fair share for the sons and daughters of South Africa.

The biggest challenge for the government is to say that everybody should
have access to the natural resources of this country. To ensure that
everybody shares in the joys and edification of our natural resources until
the end, for example the joys of the Table Mountain National Park, is part
of this challenge. So too is ensuring that the woman who struggles to walk
as a result of old age, the family that is poverty-stricken, and the
disabled child and his friends, can finally enjoy all that this government
has to offer us.

Thirteen years ago the government and people of South Africa officially
began to prioritise equal access for all to public services and over the
last decade plenty has already been done to give the people of this country
access to basic services, as well as development and growth opportunities.

The ANC government is aware of the fact that much still has to be done over
the following decades in order to build on these successes, especially in
communities where ongoing human dignity still has to be instilled.]

In a work called Hope: New Philosophies for Change, Belgian philosopher,
Isabelle Stengers, in reply to the challenge of where hope exists for the
world, says:


   I would say that the adventure of thinking is the adventure of hope. What
   I mean by ‘adventure’ is adventure as creative enterprise, in spite of
   the many reasons we have to despair. We have all the reasons we wish to
   despair - to think is to succeed in not following those reasons one way
   or another. Thus I would say that hope is the difference between
   probability and possibility. If we follow probability there is no hope,
   just the calculated anticipation authorised by the world as it is. But to
   think is to create possibility against probability ... to try and feel
   and put into words a meaning, a possibility for becoming.

This budget, as I see it, is based on enforcement and empowerment, and is
also unapologetically a budget of hope, because it refuses to succumb to
despair, as many of the prophets of doom would have liked it to be. It
operates in the realm of shaping our possibility and avoids the hopeless
fatalism of probability. It holds out a vision of what we are becoming as a
nation, a people, a country. Put differently, and using the words of Nobel
Prize winner, Ilya Prigogine, “We cannot predict the future, but we can
prepare it.” These words are reason enough to believe in the future and to
construct it.

I am reminded of the challenge thrown out by Martin Luther King Junior:


   Every man must decide whether he will walk in the creative light of
   altruism or the darkness of destructive selfishness. This is the
   judgement. Life’s persistent and most urgent question is: What are you
   doing for others?

I want to ask the DA that question, because ...

... die DA het dit goed gedink om R45 miljoen te bewillig vir die Tafelberg
Nasionale Parkeraad. Op ’n vergadering van die Portefeuljekomitee van
Finansies in die Kaapse Stadsraad het die DA ’n stokkie gesteek daarvoor om
R45 miljoen te bewillig wat oor vier jaar strek om die Tafelberg Nasionale
Park toeganklik te maak vir ons mense. Tog sê die DA dat hierdie nasionale
park ... [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[... the DA has seen fit to grant R45 million to the Table Mountain
National Park Board. During a meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Finance
in the Cape Town City Council, the DA put a stop to the idea of granting
R45 million to the Table Mountain National Park over a period of four
years, which would have contributed to making the Table Mountain National
Park more accessible to our people. However, the DA says that this national
park... [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!

Mnr F ADAMS: ... ’n bate vir die stad is, maar dan weier hulle om die geld
te bewillig. Minister, ek wil ’n beroep doen, deur die Voorsitter, aan u en
u departement om te kyk na hierdie selfsugtigheid van die DA, om te kyk na
die “haves” en die “have nots” [Dié wat het en dié wat nie het nie.] Want
die DA kyk net na die “haves”. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Deur u, Voorsitter, vra ek vir die Minister, die LUR in die Weskaap – nie
hierdie LUR nie, Voorsitter, hy is nog nie ’n LUR nie [Gelag.] – om te kyk.
Ek wil graag vra dat daar moet deursiggewend ingegryp word om armoede te
bekamp – wat die regering en die departement reeds besig is om te doen. Die
lewe is moeilik vir ons mense daar buite, spesifiek hier in die stad,
Kaapstad, waar die DA regeer. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ek wil staatmaak en graag die Minister se aandag daarop klem. Op Uys Krige
se ... [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: ... is an asset to the city, but then they refuse to grant
money. Minister, I want to appeal, through the Chairperson, to you and your
department to take note of the selfishness of the DA; to look at the haves
and the have nots, because the DA is only looking at the haves.
[Interjections.]

Through you, Chairperson, I ask the Minister, the MEC in the Western Cape –
not this MEC, Chairperson, as he isn’t a MEC yet [Laughter.] - to look into
this. I would like to ask that decisive action be taken to alleviate
poverty – something that the government and the department are already
doing. Life is hard for the people out there and specifically here, in the
city of Cape Town, where the DA is governing. [Interjections.]

I want to rely on and draw the Minister’s attention to Uys Krige’s ...
[Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!

Mr F ADAMS: Hy vra: [He asks:]


   Ken jy die see, Meneer, ken jy die see?
   Hy lyk nou soos jou voorstoep blinkgeskuur
   en kalm soos min dinge hier benee
   maar hy’s gevaarliker as vlam of vuur.
   Dan sê jy nog, Meneer, die vis is duur ...
   Wat van die storms wat nooit ophou raas?
   Jy sit pal in jou kliphuis, klam en guur,
   en hoor die wind al woester, wreder blaas.
   En daar’s geen ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Can I just call you
members to order. Members, I would like to remind you again: Rule 33 says
that no member may interrupt another member who is addressing the Chair,
except to call attention to a point of order or a question of privilege.
You may continue, hon member.

Mr F ADAMS: Dankie, Voorsitter. [Thank you, Chairperson]:


   ... hoor die wind al woester, wreder blaas.
    En daar’s geen sprokkel hout meer vir jou vuur.
    Dan sê jy nog, meneer, die vis is duur ...
    Sien jy die krom ou vroutjie daar, mevrou Mathee,
    wat telkens ver, vér oor die golwe tuur?
    Sy dink dié briese bring haar seuns betyds vir tee.
    Hul slaap al drie agter die kerkhofmuur.
    Dan sê jy nog, Meneer, die vis is duur ...


Environmental Affairs and Tourism must take the lead in developing a
balanced and predictable development framework to assist our poor fishermen
and women.

Digter Pieter Snyders illustreer die sieldodende effek van sosiale
afhanklikheid in sy gedig Dis-ability [Poet Pieter Snyders illustrates the
soul-destroying effect of social dependency in his poem Dis-ability]:


      Ek sit hiesa elke dag
      Onder die boem
      Met my doppie,
      Ek henner niemand nie.
      Elke end van die maand
      Trek ek disability-nei,
      War veterans-
      Dit betaal meerderer
      Ma kry nog maintenance grant vir Kettie,
      sy’s mos nog altyd onder Valkenburg
      Maar ek is specially bly
      dat Ma oek nou Old Age trek-
      dis darem ietsie meerder.
      Ja, ek is heeltemal hêppie
      hier tussen die groente;
      die goewerment sorg:
      hy moét.

Minister, u departement moet nie net die ekonomie maak groei nie, maar ook
die waardigheid van ons mense herstel, spesifiek in die stad Kaapstad, waar
die DA besig is om dit af te breek. Om hierdie rede moet ons die mense die
geleentheid gee om aan die ekonomie deel te neem waar hulle kan.
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Minister, the responsibility of your department is not only economic
growth, but also to repair the human dignity of the people, specifically in
Cape Town where the DA is in the process of destroying it. For this reason,
we must afford the people the opportunity to participate in the economy as
far as possible. [Interjections.]]

In his state of the nation address the President asked us to believe in our
ability to shape the future of this country and this continent through
enforcement and empowerment of our people.

In conclusion, let me reiterate what the great Martin Luther King Junior
said:


   I have the audacity to believe that peoples everywhere can have three
   meals a day for their bodies, education and culture for their minds, and
   dignity, equality, and freedom for their spirits. I believe that what
   self-centred men have torn down ...

like the DA, Chairperson,

   ... other-centred men ...
like the ANC,

   ... can build up.

The ANC supports the budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, I would
like to thank all the hon members for their contributions, questions and
issues that they have raised within their allocated time. It is not
possible to deal with all the issues raised but I will try my utmost to
deal with as many of them as possible.

I would like to thank all the parties for supporting the budget. It is
appreciated and it shows that there are some issues that are more important
than differences between us. The department and I appreciate and support
the sentiments expressed.

The MECs raised certain issues and we will engage them later on those. One
of the issues raised was the issue of secondary asbestosis by MEC Saaiman
and MEC Chabane. The study has been completed. Of course, as MEC Saaiman
said, we need substantial financial resources to make sure that we support
what we say and that we make it a reality.

We are currently in discussions with the Department of Minerals and Energy,
and that is the Budget Vote that’s coming up right after mine. Maybe you
can ask that hon Minister the same question and see if she will give you
the same answer. We are working on the joint presentation with Treasury and
we hope we will be able to assist you with the money for that.

With regard to the asbestos regulations, our two departments are also
working on that. However, there are still some unresolved issues. We are
sitting with the legal advisers and we hope that it will not take too long
to finalise that.

We have had a very civilised debate up to now. I would like to start off
with Mr Hendrickse, from the UIF. He raised the issue of fishing
communities here. He made a statement which I wrote down, which said,
“People who have never been to sea received quotas.” Chair, I would like to
say, through you, to this House that that is absolute nonsense and absolute
hogwash.

I would like to ask the hon member, if he has a list of the names, to stand
up and provide me with those names. You see, Chairperson, that’s the
problem with this thing around fisheries, people convey this populist
rhetoric which has nothing to do with the concerns of the fishermen and
fisherwomen but is all about politics and votes – no concern for the
fishermen and fisherwomen.

What we did was to publish the list before we allocated the quotas. We
asked the community and political parties and said, “Please come forward
and show us on this list - because we intend to give quotas to these people
- who of them are not fishermen and fisherwomen.” The hon member and his
party didn’t come forward to object to that. We only gave quotas to those
people whom we were absolutely sure are fishermen and fisherwomen.

But, what is the issue here, Chairperson? We care as much as anybody else
about those people. It is because we care about them, their children and
grandchildren that we have the policy that we have. Colleagues who know
this industry know that worldwide, the fishing industry is in a crisis
because of collapsing stocks and migrating stocks. This is partly due to
climatic conditions but there are other reasons which the scientists in the
world don’t yet understand.

If we want something to be left for generations to come, we have to be
responsible in allocating those rights. We must also say to ourselves as
the government and political parties: Maybe, over the years we have done
too little to revitalise those communities and to ensure other forms of
economic activity. Instead, we have all sat back and have always thought
that there will be enough fish in the sea, forever. Now, we must do more to
ensure that we really get people to understand that they must look at
alternatives for their livelihood, and we are doing our best.

Because of that compassion, we have reached an agreement with Masifundise
regarding temporary relief for 1 000 fishers while we finalise the policy
on subsistence fishermen and fisherwomen. We must distinguish between that
kind of populist nonsense and what the truth is, with regard to the fishing
communities.

Then, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, hon Moatshe.
I would like to thank him for his support and the way that he leads and
chairs this committee. It is a joy to work with the committee and the
members of all political parties in that committee.

I would also like to thank the chairperson and MEC Mr Chabane for their
support regarding the threatened or protected species regulations, the so-
called Tops. This is an issue that is very important in our country. There
are some practices that the MEC from Limpopo referred to that we must deal
with as the government, if we want to clean up this industry and ensure
that we have an ethical conservation, hunting and wildlife industry in this
country for the long term.

We are absolutely committed, as a department and as government, to deal
with the issue of canned lion hunting. I would like to thank the MECs for
their support regarding this matter, especially MEC Chabane and MEC
Saaiman. It is a problem in their provinces; while it may not be so much of
a problem in KwaZulu-Natal because they are faced with other realities
there. It was a difficult decision to make or opt for, but we all
understand that sometimes tough decisions are needed. If we want the
hunting industry - which is a very important industry - to survive over the
long term, it must be a credible industry, based on ethical practices that
are defensible.

I would now like to come to the hon Le Roux who raised a number of issues.
The member has good conservation credentials but he is in the DA. He is a
good man and I have known him for years. The first issue that the hon
member raised is about mining on the Wild Coast. Once again there are
different points of view on this issue, and you will be able to put the
same question to the hon Minister of Minerals and Energy in the next
debate.

My predecessor’s view, my view and that of the department have always been
that we should develop the Wild Coast as an
ecotourism destination, because over the long term, we believe that it is
sustainable. The Department of Minerals and Energy, DME, has received an
application for a mining licence. But when you look at where that area is
on the map, you will find that it is in one corner there - colleagues who
know that area know that it is in one corner of the Wild Coast.

In government, there are some tough choices that are made. If the decision
is that there will be mining, what we would like to agree on is that we
must find a balance between that kind of economic activity and
conservation, because the decision on mining is not our decision but a
decision by the Department of Minerals and Energy.

We have made our view known. But then we must make sure that we find a
balance in that area between conservation and that kind of economic
development. No matter what our view is on that matter, we have some very
difficult choices to make - some members referred to them.

In this department, for instance, sometimes we get applications for new
power stations. Yes, some of these power stations cause pollution but what
do you do? Do you say to the people of Cape Town: “We are sorry, we are not
going to build power lines to Cape Town. You can live with your power
failures. You can now stop economic growth in your province because we are
not going to bring you any more electricity because we are concerned about
this or that conservation issue,” or do we apply our minds and find a
balance?

Colleagues, one thing I can assure you is that, the poorer the people are,
the less difficult it is to convince them of the value of conservation and
that that can provide them with a life.

So you need economic activity and you need conservation. However, you need
to increase the standard of living of people so that they can accept the
fact that they can have a good life and there can be conservation. Those
are the trade-offs that we have to make in government.

The hon member also referred to the fact that there is more game in the
Eastern Cape now than 100 years ago. It is true. The other day, when we
announced the draft elephant management policy, we said that in 1900 this
country had 200 elephants but now we have around 18 000 elephants. This is
because we are so extremely successful in our conservation practices.

However, that in itself brings new headaches, because you have less land,
you have fenced-off game parks and you have more developments. Therefore,
how do you deal with your own success? Sometimes you run the risk of
becoming a victim of your own success. As South Africans, we are privileged
that we can say that is the case in our country.

The hon Le Roux also raised the issue of Tsitsikamma. He said that we have
to close parts of our coastline. That is exactly what we did: Eighteen per
cent of our coastline is under protection, the so-called marine protected
areas. We are one of the leaders in the world; we have taken the lead. The
global objective is 20% and we are almost there.

Let me deal with the issue of Tsitsikamma specifically. Tsitsikamma is a
very difficult issue. The department came to me and said, “Minister, we
want you to consider opening that part of Tsitsikamma for fishing for local
people only, not for recreational fishing across the board.” I said to the
department, “I am not convinced. I want you to do some ground work and come
back with a report so that I can apply my mind.”

The reason I said that is because I would like to convey to this House and
to members who have raised the issue that we are the custodians of these
national assets. You cannot just take a decision like that lightly, because
of the reasons that members advanced here and in the other House as well.
That is exactly what you would like to protect and ensure that there are
areas where fish can replenish, and there are other considerations as well.


I would also like to ask the DA, not just this hon member because he has
not raised the issue in this fashion: In the other House, when the issue of
4x4s was discussed we had one member of the DA after another getting up and
saying, “Minister, in St Lucia, you must open the beaches for socioeconomic
reasons. You must open the beaches because it is good for the local
economy. It’s good for people to have access because they can make a living
and enjoy the coast. Give them an opportunity to drive their 4x4s on the
beaches.” But when it comes to Tsitsikamma, where it is not the wealthy 4x4
drivers, then suddenly the DA says, “No, keep those beaches closed.”

We must argue and debate these issues on principle, not based on who we
think our supporters are. If they want us to open the beaches and they have
4x4s, then we would open the beaches because they vote for us; and if we
know it is poor people, who will probably vote for the ANC, then we say,
“No, close those beaches.” [Interjections.]

So, my decision will be based on what is good for conservation and the
area. It will not be based on the 4x4 owners threatening that they will
march to Parliament. They can march as much as they want, if we have taken
a decision, we have taken a decision. We will always take a decision in the
interests of what is good for conservation, no matter which party people
vote for or what they threaten us with.

Now, regarding the hon Winde, I must say, Chairperson, that he is a much
nicer speaker when he delivers a speech on behalf of an MEC who belongs to
the ANC than when he does it on behalf of the DA. [Interjections.] He
raised a number of issues that we have taken note of.

One of the issues that he raised was the Langebaan rehabilitation project,
concerning the erosion there. The first of the two groynes has been
completed and the second one is being constructed. Sand is being dredged to
supplement the eroded beach. We have dedicated R50 million to this
rehabilitation project; R43 million will come from National Treasury and R7
million from the province. We have an intergovernmental committee
comprising DEAT, the province and the municipality of Langebaan.

But it was interesting to listen to the member. He said the fact that he is
here today is a sign of things to come, so, I thought, well, let me
interpret the sign.

I have listened to what other members and hon Adams have said. Sometimes in
victory there is the seed of defeat. The victory of the hon Winde’s liberal
faction in the DA contains the seed of defeat. You can see it when you sit
there in the National Assembly. I have sat here this afternoon and looked
at people whom I know very well - they are not happy in that party, because
they know what is happening. [Interjections.]

The majority of voters who voted for the DA are not liberals; they are
good, hard-working people. They are actually social democrats. But you find
a party which has, through very clever manoeuvring, manoeuvred out the
other people so that only one faction has control of the party.
[Interjections.]

The difference between the ANC and the DA is the following ...
[Interjections.] Yes, the ANC also has its differences, but you know what,
in the ANC we debate publicly. We never have closed conferences like the DA
does. [Interjections.] When we elect leaders, leaders from all the
different strands of thinking are there. But if you are in the DA, you have
to belong to that one faction otherwise you will not survive.
[Interjections.] So I would like to say to those hon members ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Minister, unfortunately your
time has expired.

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: My time has expired!
Thank you, Chairperson. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order please! [Interjections.]
Order, hon members! [Interjections.] Order!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, the Minister did make a request
to the Chief Whip of the Council to have an additional five minutes. I sent
a note to the Presiding Officer before you took over the Chair. I thought
you were informed about that arrangement.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): No, unfortunately, Chief Whip, I
was not informed. But ... [Interjections.] Order, please! [Interjections.]
Hon members, order please!

I want to take this opportunity to thank the hon Minister, the MECs,
special delegates and also the officials from the department for
participating in this debate. Secondly, I want to welcome the Minister of
Minerals and Energy.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 29 – Minerals and Energy:

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, I’m so worried because
there is nothing liberal, nor is there anything fishy about my Budget Vote.
[Laughter.]

Chairperson, colleagues, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, the
programmes of the Department of Minerals and Energy are geared towards the
upliftment of vulnerable groups, which include women and youth. Being the
month of June, in which we celebrate the contribution made by our youth, we
would like to strengthen our endeavours to uplift them and integrate them
more meaningfully into our society and economy. In so doing, they will be
able to carry the baton, continue to alleviate poverty and create a better
life for all in our country, beyond our time.

It is through the vibrancy, energy and enthusiasm of our youth as well as
the compassion and perseverance of our women that we will achieve our
objectives of transforming and empowering all communities in our country.
This is why it is important for us to ensure that these groups have access
to opportunities in two of the sectors that are central to South Africa’s
economy, namely the mining and the energy sectors.

The Department of Minerals and Energy is well placed to heed the call made
by President Mbeki of a South Africa that has a sustainable energy supply
and minerals, in other words a South Africa that will have a sustainable
energy supply and mineral wealth that is shared by all her people,
including our vulnerable groups.

The budget that we are tabling responds to the challenges and government
priorities that have been articulated. I therefore would like to table the
department's 2007-08 budget of R2,96 billion of which 63% is allocated to
the electrification programme, which includes transfers to Eskom and
municipalities. The department only receives 21% of this amount. In the
2006-07 financial year the department was allocated R2,6 billion and
members will be pleased to note that we spent 99% of that budget.

Energy - both electricity and liquid fuels - is a necessity in the lives of
all our people, and one of the tools through which we can achieve
sustainable development in the country. As a result, capacity challenges
that have manifested themselves in frequent blackouts and fuel shortages
have been a concern for me as a Minister responsible for security of energy
supply in the country. These are as a consequence of infrastructure
constraints as well as the inadequacy of some of the demand and supply
plans that were put in place years ago.

In addressing these challenges, we will present an energy masterplan which
incorporates a detailed energy infrastructure plan covering the next five
years, including 2010. We will submit that masterplan to the Cabinet by
June this year. Following this, we will develop an integrated energy
modelling system that will inform integrated energy planning. This
modelling system, which will be in place by 2009, will allow for data
capturing and the development of a long-term energy plan.

In support of renewable energy, energy efficiency and planning, by the end
of October 2007 we will have introduced a piece of legislation that will
mandate the provision of energy data and the use of healthy, safe, energy-
efficient and energy-friendly appliances. [Interjections.] I hope the hon
members will have read the Rule that says they must not converse when the
Minister is presenting a Budget Vote.

Energy efficiency will be key in our comprehensive strategy aimed at
ensuring security of energy supply. This morning I launched an intensive
multimedia energy-efficiency campaign in partnership with the Department of
Public Enterprises, Eskom and other state organs. The campaign targets
ordinary households and industrial consumers with a view to influencing
prudent consumer behavioural patterns, without negatively impacting on the
economy.

A few weeks ago the National Energy Regulator of South Africa released an
audit report conducted in 11 electricity distribution utilities in the
country. The report showed that the distribution industry's operations are
suboptimal, with an infrastructure maintenance backlog of approximately R7
billion. This scenario poses a serious challenge to the restructuring of
the electricity industry in the country and calls for the acceleration of
the electricity distribution industry, EDI, restructuring process.

To this end, I will be presenting the electricity distribution industry
restructuring Bill to Parliament before the end of this year. This will be
in line with the Cabinet decision taken on 25 October 2006 in terms of
which the EDI will be restructured into six wall-to-wall regional
electricity distributors, REDs, as public entities managed through the
Public Finance Management Act and regulated by the National Energy
Regulator of South Africa, Nersa.

Within the implementation of the Integrated National Electrification
Programme, the absence of bulk infrastructure, especially in rural areas,
has put a strain on the performance of the programme. Last year an amount
of R282 million had to be channelled from electricity connections to bulk
infrastructure, resulting in a reduced number of connections planned for
that year.
This year, out of a total of R1,4 billion allocated for household
electrification, a further R380 million has been set aside for the building
of 10 substations. This year, we will electrify 150 000 households and 700
schools and we will also improve the quality of supply in preparation for
the 2010 Fifa World Cup and beyond. We will eradicate the backlog of all
clinics by the end of this financial year and all schools within three
years. So, in three years’ time we shall be saying all schools and clinics
have been electrified in our country.

A challenge which continues to confront us is that most of our people,
especially the vulnerable groups, have limited access to energy to meet
their thermal needs. Even when they have electricity, they continue to use
low-grade coal and paraffin for heating and cooking. In studying the ways
to uplift the vulnerable groups through efficient energy resources, we have
launched a pilot project in partnership with municipalities in Tshwane and
Thembisile to provide 30 000 households with liquefied petroleum gas.

This pilot will allow us to review our regulatory framework on two counts:
firstly, the promotion of a more energy-efficient carrier such as gas as an
electricity demand-side management initiative - so, you could also buy
yourselves gas heaters so that you can manage your electricity consumption;
secondly, the development of an appropriate pricing mechanism for liquefied
petroleum gas. We have over the years made noises that we thought would
trigger an appropriate market solution to the high LPG prices but it has
remained unacceptably high. We now have no choice but to regulate the LPG
industry.

The President, in his state of the nation address, indicated that
government would be accelerating preparatory work to ensure greater
reliance on nuclear energy and renewable energy. With regard to nuclear
energy, the department recently tabled a draft nuclear energy policy and
strategy in Cabinet. The policy will guide the expanded nuclear build
programme and address the issue of investment in uranium beneficiation. The
policy will ensure that uranium output from our mines shall always be used
to first satisfy our own beneficiation needs.

In keeping with the empowerment of women, we will, as we have in the past,
continue to support their participation in the nuclear programme through
the Women in Nuclear South Africa.

In response to the Moerane Commission’s recommendations, the department,
together with the oil industry, has established a fuel strategic supply
task team. The task team identified short and long-term constraints and
made proposals on how the identified constraints could be eliminated.

The initial indications pointed at a need for investment by state-owned
entities and that they should be investing in pipelines, storage and
handling facilities. But further analysis has also pointed to
inefficiencies emanating from current industry practices, especially in
port and railway operations which will have to be corrected for security of
fuel supply to be guaranteed. The fuel strategic supply task team is
finalising plans, which are part of the energy masterplan, to take the
recommendations forward.

Last year we started with the licensing of petroleum activities. Before the
end of the financial year we will be rolling out petroleum licensing and
inspection services to our regional offices. We have received 12 500
applications to date. We expect to issue all licences by the end of this
financial year.

Regarding the transformation of the petroleum sector, I must say this is a
matter that concerns me, because transformation in that area has been very
slow. Licensing under the Petroleum Products Amendment Act provides us with
an invaluable tool to effect transformation in this sector. I think it is
your responsibility as this House, during your oversight visits or in the
context of your oversight responsibility, to ensure that, together, we
monitor transformation of this sector.

The draft biofuels strategy served before Cabinet last year and was
published for public comment early this year. We have just completed an
extensive public consultation process and the final strategy will be
concluded before the end of the financial year, after all issues that were
raised during the consultation process have been extensively debated and
addressed.

As part of our efforts to ensure access to energy by all South Africans,
the department, in collaboration with municipalities and some oil
companies, has committed itself to increase the number of integrated energy
centres, IECs, countrywide. The main objective is to bring affordable and
sustainable energy services and information closer to the poor communities.
A strategy and roll-out plan to establish more IECs until 2015 has been
approved.

Previously, the role played by energy globally was underestimated, but
recent geopolitical and technological developments have shown beyond doubt
that the significance of energy in shaping economies and foreign policies
of many countries in the world is very important. To this end, I will
convene a stakeholder summit in September, during which these issues will
be discussed.

In mining, hon members, the commodities boom of 2005 continued into 2006.
Sadly, this did not translate into investment in our country. However,
recently we have noted a marked improvement in this area. We have also seen
new black economic empowerment-compliant mines opening, especially in
Limpopo and North West. Last week, near Brits, in the North West,
International Ferro Metals South Africa was officially opened. This is a
further sign of confidence in our regulatory environment.
Reports about lack of direct investment in the sector resulted in our
conducting international road shows to understand the obstacles to
investment. In addition we, together with the Chamber of Mines and the
National Union of Mineworkers, conducted a study that helped provide us
with an indication of what some of the causes of this lack of investment
were. We are also organising an all-inclusive indaba for 11 June 2007,
where we will discuss all the aspects of the industry in order to come up
with concrete strategies. All players are expected and are urged to attend
this important indaba.

We will be profiling the small-scale mining industry and, for the first
time this year, we are giving it full support and we are training people
for jewellery fabrication. In China, we have already trained 15 children.
As we speak, there are 15 children that are there.

With the annual budget of R21 million, we have been able to support four
projects in Limpopo to the tune of R14,6 million and three projects in
KwaZulu-Natal at R7,2 million. Last year we received more than 80
applications for financial assistance and we expect the figure to double
this year.

We are also looking at beneficiation of our minerals in South Africa. To
that end, we have amended the Diamond Amendment Act as well as the Precious
Metals Act in such a way that we will be establishing a state diamond
trader. The board is already in place and that state diamond trader will be
in Kimberley. The clock is intimidating me.

Hon members, women in mining are doing well. We have launched offices for
the SA Women in Mining Association and we are looking at improving and
strengthening Sawima for better participation of women. We want to see more
women owning mines.

On the issue of applications, there has been a lot of noise that we are
behind in terms of processing applications. We have no backlog as far as
applications for mineral rights are concerned. So, anybody who says that we
are behind is not telling the truth.

We still have a concern with regard to safety in the mines. There is still
a long way to go in terms of ensuring that companies comply. Although we do
appreciate the fact that mining, characteristically, is a very dangerous
activity, we shall nevertheless persuade the mining companies to try and
meet the standards that we have set for them.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the two chairpersons and members of
their committees, namely the portfolio committee and the select committee,
for their support, as well as the director-general and staff of the
Department of Minerals and Energy for their loyalty and commitment to their
work. I would like to thank the chairpersons and CEOs of state-owned
entities reporting to the Department of Minerals and Energy for continuing
to share my vision.

I would also like to thank my family for their understanding, especially my
grandchildren, they are five years and two years of age, respectively, and
they know that when makhulu [granny] takes her suitcases she is going to
Pretoria. They then say, “That Pretoria of yours, makhulu [granny]!” But I
know that they understand that Pretoria is very important.

Chairperson, I request the House to approve my department's budget of R2,96
billion for the 2007-08 financial year. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs E S MABE: Chairperson, let me first congratulate myself on being the
new acting chairperson of economic and foreign affairs. [Laughter.] The ANC-
led government, guided by the Freedom Charter, advances policies for, and
advocates, social inclusion, economic inclusion and social justice. It is
in this context that my take in this Budget Vote will be more on the
transformation agenda of the economy of our country through the Department
of Minerals and Energy, as a vehicle to achieve this noble vision.

At the 51st ANC national conference in Stellenbosch, in 2002, it was
resolved that the establishment of a vehicle to support mineral exploration
by previously disadvantaged groups should be explored, and that especially
rural communities should be given the importance of sustaining the industry
and bringing in new entrants through legislation.

Legislation has been formulated primarily to ensure equitable sharing in
the ownership of mineral resources. This is the marathon in which the ANC-
led government will emerge victorious for the benefit of the poor masses of
our country, and to ensure access to a variety of minerals such as rough
diamonds and other precious metals to local beneficiators which will
unleash a strong and job-creating downstream industry.

However, we have noted the misunderstanding regarding the forceful removal
of our people in Limpopo by the mining giants of Anglo Platinum. We
therefore plead with the department to take the leader in trying to resolve
the matter in a manner which will not undermine the rights of our own
people.

I must also add my appreciation for the department in its endeavour to
ensure that our people do participate in mining. A number of small-scale
miners are receiving technical assistance from the government to enable
them to comply with the legislation, and some of them are receiving
financial aid to help them get off the ground.

The Small-Scale Mining Board has been created to find and implement
solutions intended to overcome limitations and challenges within the small-
scale mining sector. Thus far, 11 small-scale mining projects have been
developed and implemented with the support provided.

Further, a plan to support SMMEs through sustainable intervention is being
developed, from the basis of intervention for SMME support. This is
intended to improve the turnaround time for processing of payments
submitted by SMMEs and for ensuring that support initiatives are
sustainable, and that they create synergies with other government
institutions and facilities.

At the heart of these initiatives are programmes dealing with the
following: rehabilitation of mines, small-scale mining - as I said before -
jewellery fabrication and other forms of beneficiation, and mineral value-
addition where we hope and know that our youth and women will benefit
immensely.

Also, in its quest to transform, the department has a plan to achieve
universal access to energy by 2014. As the ANC-led government, we
acknowledge the significance of energy to the economy. Currently, energy
contributes about 15% of the Gross Domestic Product. Surely, the energy
sector is a critical vehicle in ensuring that the growth trajectory we have
set for ourselves is achievable, and it is also critical to the benefit and
betterment of the lives of poor South Africans.

The refurbishment of Camden, Komati and Grootvlei power stations and the
building of other power stations in Lephalale signify the seriousness
accorded to the energy sector as the nerve centre of our economic growth.
However, as the ANC-led government, we are committed to creating an
enabling environment for a renewable energy industry. This is consistent
with our position of an energy mix. We therefore urge the department to
speed up development programmes in this regard, because we believe that
this initiative will certainly increase our sources of energy within the
country.

In the same breath, we have noted some serious challenges in small-scale
mining that come with small-scale miners in particular. I have received
information from my colleagues from the Northern Cape indicating that
within the community of Longlands, next to Kimberley, there is a community
that has been applying for a permit to mine the land on which they live. We
have noted with great regret that the application has been surrounded by a
long list of controversies.

Therefore, there is a need for an investigation into this Longlands issue
because it has led to violent activities between the present miner, the
communities and the police. This is just one example where communities are
denied direct participation in small-scale mining and this has a bearing on
socioeconomic upliftment.

We note that the programme of mine rehabilitation is in progress. Regarding
the Free State, we believe that the department should call upon the mining
houses to use the people who used to work in these mines. This will serve
to uplift their socioeconomic conditions because these are the poor people
who only know the skill of digging in mines and nothing else. So, these
people are sitting there with nothing else to do in the province. At least,
this should come to the attention of the department.

In conclusion, as the National Council of Provinces – the House that
represents provinces - I have been urged again by my colleagues from the
province, in the area of Kimberley, to say that they wish to extended their
appreciation to the Minister after the announcement that she made about
locating the State Diamond Trader in Kimberley.

It is our belief that such a strategic move will contribute immensely to
the economy of that particular province. We also hope, Minister, that the
same kind of progressive moves will be applied to other provinces, the Free
State in particular. I thank you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Ms S H CHEN: Chairperson, Minister, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I
would like to begin by applauding the overview presented by the Department
of Minerals and Energy yesterday. We understand that the department is
facing major difficulties and challenges. It is clear from their proposal
that the necessary steps are being taken to face the challenges and remedy
these problems. I sincerely hope that the proposal will be fully
implemented.

The DA particularly welcomes the strategies related to the biofuels energy
initiative. However, it is our job as MPs and representatives of the public
to draw the attention of the hon Minister to the people’s messages from the
grassroots level, no matter how small or trivial the issues are, and act as
a bridge to explain to our stakeholders how government intends to resolve
the issues.

I would therefore like to highlight some problems that have been
identified. The lives of our citizens and the activities of the business
sector in our country have by now almost all been adversely affected by
power outages in some way or another.

I was surprised to hear my colleague point out in the National Assembly
that the power outages have come about because of an ill-advised policy
decision by Cabinet some years ago not to allow Eskom to build additional
power stations. Cabinet was unable to anticipate a rapid increase in the
demand for electricity, in the light of both economic growth, which the
government aims for, as well as the actual economic growth.

However, the following steps could have been taken by government to avoid
this shortcoming. Firstly, our government is in desperate need of a unit
that is specifically tasked with long-term economic development planning.
Secondly, aside from our good macroeconomic position achieved under the
Growth, Employment and Redistribution programme, little has been achieved
in terms of targeted interventions such as those indicated by the recently
released annual report on Asgisa. Thirdly, we need efficient monitoring and
evaluation of capacity in our government.

I would also like to highlight another issue that may have contributed to
the electricity supply problems that we are experiencing in our country. It
is likely that Eskom board members were unable to anticipate South Africa’s
electricity supply crisis in light of the large number of other company
boards on which they serve. It is evident that 14 board members and
executive management members holding 128 positions cannot possibly
effectively fulfil all the functions required.

There will be many people who will not be able to afford the 18% increase
in electricity tariffs that our electricity utility now has to effect in
order to bring its electricity supply capacity up to date. These people
will be angry and confused, for they cannot understand why Eskom was unable
to start improving its power generation ability timeously when they were
reporting millions in profit. They may also not be willing to consider the
possibility that the power shortages may be due to overworked board members
who have far too many responsibilities and job descriptions, as well as
regulating all aspects relating to electricity generation.
It is also incumbent upon our hon Minister of Minerals and Energy to
provide political leadership on the monitoring and promotion of the
security of our electricity supply. This implies that the Minister should
also advise Eskom on their unrealistic overloading of responsibilities on
board members.

Re-evaluating the manner in which electricity generation is regulated is a
real need which we would like to see prioritised by the hon Minister. It is
also suggested that the price increase should occur gradually or be
subsidised in order to assist the public to afford a fundamental need in
maintaining their quality of life. It is unfair to expect people to
shoulder all the burdens of problems not created by them, in the first
place.

A system where Eskom is forced to pay some measure of compensation to
consumers who suffer damages as a result of power outages because of the
power utility not fulfilling its mandate within reason would be another
much-improved way of dealing with the situation.

Cases such as Ekurhuleni Municipality’s claim for the three-day
interruption in the power supply experienced in the Bedfordview area serves
as an example. We trust that the hon Minister will let the people guide her
on this issue. I thank you.

Mr D G MKONO: Chairperson, my hon Minister, hon members and officials, as I
was just about to take the podium I received an SMS from the Eastern Cape
requesting that the Minister takes the State Diamond Trader to the Eastern
Cape instead of taking it to Kimberley. [Laughter.] I just thought I should
pass that message on, so that I don’t defy my province.

The problems afflicting the distribution sector are acknowledged by all as
being the fragmentation of the industry and poor regulation. These manifest
themselves as the blackouts and brownouts that we continue to experience as
we approach winter. Therefore, in 2007-08 the government will focus on
addressing these problems by advancing the REDs creation process and
implementation, and the Electricity Regulation Act.

As the Minister has just mentioned, as per Cabinet decision of October
2006, six REDs are to be formed as public entities. In a parallel process,
the electricity distribution industry restructuring Bill will be presented
to Parliament this year, providing the legislative framework for the
establishment of REDs. The biggest challenge to REDs creation still remains
but, of course, this could be due to constitutional constraints.

As the ANC-led government, we acknowledge the significance of the energy
sector to the economy. Currently, energy contributes about 15% of the GDP.
The energy sector is a critical vehicle in ensuring that the growth
strategy we have set for ourselves is achievable and also critical to the
betterment of the lives of poor South Africans.
Driven by this quest to achieve universal access to energy by 2014, from
April 2005 to June 2006 about 165 000 households and 350 schools were
connected to the grid. In terms of non-grid electrification, 14 195
households have been connected in KwaZulu-Natal, and about 6 000 in
Limpopo.

Furthermore, it should be noted that non-grid technologies like solar
energy have been incorporated in the integrated national electricity plan
as complementary supply technologies to grid extensions. To this effect,
there is a pilot programme aimed at establishing a limited number of public-
private sector institutions in partnership with relevant municipalities to
provide electricity services on an integrated basis.

As the ANC-led government, we are committed to creating an enabling
environment for the renewable energy industry. This is consistent with our
position on the energy mix. There are programmes in place for research and
development with regard to wind energy, solar energy, hydro energy etc.
These programmes are aimed at increasing our energy sources.

In connection with wind energy, a demonstration wind farm at Klipheuwel is
exploring the use of wind energy for bulk electricity generation. The other
wind farm is in the Darling area of the Western Cape. Solar power is
utilised increasingly for water pumping through the rural water provision
and sanitation programme of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.

Three co-operatives employing 10 people permanently in the Eastern Cape
have started to maintain 8 000 solar home systems installed under the
previous electrification programme. I thought you were going to say, “Viva
Eastern Cape”! [Interjections.] The programme on solar heaters is being
rolled out under the auspices of CEF. It focuses on middle to higher income
households in Gauteng, the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.

In order to ensure that energy is efficiently utilised, an energy-
efficiency strategy has been established. In addressing the challenge of
energy poverty that has dogged our communities, integrated energy centres
have been established. These IECs are one-stop energy shops operated by
community co-operatives. They offer a variety of energy sources and are
easily accessible. They focus on creating awareness about different energy
sources and services. They provide capacity-building, and promote local
economic development.

Provision of free basic electricity remains one of the critical components
in helping the poor and indigent in our communities. This signifies the
socioeconomic consciousness that is synonymous with the ANC-led government.


Free basic electricity offered by our government continues to assist
millions of households across the country. It helps in lessening the burden
on the little money they have so that they can use it for feeding their
families.

Renewable energy offers alternative sources of energy for utilisation. Our
policy, as the ANC, embraces research into renewable energy technology to
increase the energy source basket. Most importantly, it is for the benefit
of locals to develop those sources. This is consistent with our position on
the energy mix. It is imperative to invest substantially in the development
of these energy sources.

Fundamental to renewable energy development are partnerships that were
established during the World Summit on Sustainable Development. They are
premised on promoting the widespread use of sustainable energy sources. As
the ANC, we are committed to taking concrete steps to combat pollution
arising out of greenhouse gasses by setting clean targets in the context of
sustainable development, without increasing costs to the poor.

The Freedom Charter states that the national wealth of our country, the
heritage of South Africans, shall be restored to the people; the mineral
world beneath the soil, the banks and monopoly industries shall be
transferred to the ownership of the people as a whole. It is these
fundamental tenets that inform our legislative and policy developments.

Primary to our transformation agenda is our belief in the equality of
mankind. Business will play a pivotal role in redressing past imbalances,
especially in deracialising ownership of the petroleum sector. It is
imperative to continue to assess the progress made with regard to supplier
development, specifically the oil companies’ procurement from BEE
companies.

Consistent with the liquid fuel charter, the Petroleum Pipelines Act
promotes competition in the transformation of the industry and inhibits
monopolistic abuse of pipelines and storage facilities. The RDP says that
the regulation of liquid fuel is necessary to ensure a stable and high
quality supply, stable investment and low input prices to the economy.

With regard to biofuel, our approach as the ANC-led government is premised
on three pillars: affordability, reliability and sustainability. The masses
of our people must be in a position to afford these energy sources and they
must be reliable for usage. Furthermore, the utilisation of biofuel is
going to contribute to job creation in the second economy, thus playing a
role in Asgisa.

Our government is intensively engaging on a campaign that is promoting the
usage of liquefied petroleum gas – LPG. LPG is a better burning fuel for
cooking and heating and it generates less smoke, dust and choking fumes – I
am sure Mrs Mchunu will support me on this one. These programmes are an
indication of our commitment to the utilisation of cleaner, healthier and
safe energy sources. As the ANC, we are committed to the development of
various energy sources for the benefit of the masses of our people and the
next generation.

Yho, Sihlalo, liyabaleka eli xesha! [My goodness, Chairperson, the time is
flying!]

On behalf of the committee, I would wish to appeal to the members ...

... ukuba noko ayalazi eli sebe sisidudla sesebe, ngoko maluphumelele olu
hlahlo lwabiwo-mali lwalo. Enkosi. [... that as they know that this
department is quite big, its budget should therefore be approved. Thank
you.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, energy
provision as part of the department’s responsibilities is proving to be a
daunting task. At least the department is honest enough to say that there
are problems.

The budget has grown from R2,6 billion in 2001 to today’s R2,96 billion for
2007-08. Apart from the allocated amount, there is the provision of
R973,083 million as a national electrification grant to Eskom and also
R467,827 million as a national electrification programme grant for
municipalities.

Now the above budget is geared towards providing electricity in all
municipalities and to all groups. Realities have proved to be against us,
owing to huge electricity demands. The electricity that comes from
Mpumalanga province is unable to serve the whole of our country. Regarding
the electricity that is available, funding has been provided by the
government but it may not be enough, as South Africa has valleys and
mountains. Now these areas may not be properly budgeted for because of the
topography. For instance, there are areas like Ndwedwe, Maphumulo,
Obanjeni, Mahlabathini, Nkandla and others, even in the Eastern Cape, where
there are mountainous areas.

Because underbudgeting may occur in these areas, intergovernmental
relations communication will assist in having all spheres of government
assisting in ensuring that availability of electricity, at some time, is
accomplished so that the poor too can escape poverty.

Ndwedwe Municipality has a grant of R1,102 million; Maphumulo Municipality
has R2,398 million; and Nkandla R3,331 million. As hon members, we have to
assist the department by working together to make sure that when we do our
oversight, we can assist these areas to find out if this is enough to cover
the provision of electricity.

Metros also experience problems of outages, as has happened in Cape Town,
Johannesburg, Tshwane and others. They have stated that this is due to
heavy demand on existing electricity supply. Obviously, poor unemployed
people go to towns and cities to seek jobs and, in the process, they put up
shacks and connect electricity from the nearest poles. It is therefore
urgent for all areas in our country to have electricity.

The provision of regional electricity distributors will assist a lot, as
the department has indicated and as stated by our hon Minister. The plan to
electrify 1 039 schools and 314 clinics is commended as this will assist
learners in schools with their projects and experiments. In the clinics, it
will assist particularly at times of the delivery of babies when you cannot
tell whether the baby is breathing well or not; but when there is
electricity it makes a big difference.

Preparedness to explore alternative energy needs to be taken seriously as
promises of having electricity soon are not materialising. Even if
electricity is available, energy has to be saved because it is becoming
more and more expensive.

Regarding mining, poor communities have to be supported in quarrying so
that rural roads may be made firm and passable even on rainy days. I think
it is the department’s view that quarrying is also part of mining. As
regards women, particularly in rural areas, mining of glass has to be
explored so that beads may be made as they are used by women for adornment.


The IFP supports the budget and we look forward to having all the areas
being electrified. I thank you.

Ms B L MATLHOAHELA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members of this House
and all protocol observed, I need to draw the Minister’s attention to the
fact that this speakers’ list is dominated by the select committee on
minerals and energy.

I need to agree with the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs, the hon Moatshe. The two committees need to meet,
that is the committee he chairs and the Select Committee on Minerals and
Energy which I am part of. Some issues are closely related. There is a thin
line.

It is time that we get a clear picture in relation to the need for coal by
the poorest of the poor and environmental pollution solutions. Coal mines,
as we all understand, provide employment. Seventy-five per cent of South
Africa’s primary energy needs are provided by coal. Due to the lack of an
alternative, we will still be dependent on this energy source for
approximately two decades more.

Global warming is a reality. How much do we contribute towards it? We need
to see solutions on the table.

The contributions that mines are coming up with in the context of
sustainable projects regarding the communities are not satisfactory at all.
They have the capital to come up with something but they come up with small
projects only.

Another concern is the racial composition of board members. This needs to
live up to the policy standards of the country.

Biofuels are part of development and we have to keep pace but not to the
disadvantage of the poorest of the poor who are already at a disadvantage.
Basic foodstuffs are going to increase in price and who is going to suffer
most? We have to seek answers to these challenges.

The rehabilitation of mines that are no longer utilised is a concern. The
owners of these mines need to be called to account and take responsibility
for them. The exception here is the Big Hole at Kimberley. That is a
tourist attraction and is a benefit to the community.

It is good to live by what God has provided, but caution needs to be taken
in order to prevent the greed of humankind from ultimately destroying
humankind. I thank you, hon Chair. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please! Hon members, I have
called you to order. It is unfortunate that I have probably allowed some
members to apply for sleeping concessions in this House. Members are not
allowed to sleep in the House.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, they told me to be careful, but
I don’t think this hon member will say I am talking nonsense.

The mining sector has seen tremendous transformation via mega black
economic empowerment deals which have virtually transformed the manner in
which the sector operates. More deal-flow is likely, as some corporates
unbundle to make way for new BEE entities.

Government’s transformation agenda has been a great success in this sector.
However, we need to see more mineworkers and communities surrounding mines
benefiting from these deals. We need to see more blacks - and I mean more
blacks - at senior management positions within mining companies, not public
relations roles, but actual strategic decision-making roles.

What is of concern is that too many mine accidents are still occurring.
Mine safety needs to be looked at.

New electricity generation capacity is currently under way. Our grid
network is breaking under pressure due to poor historical lack of
investment in fixed infrastructure. Regarding this, the former government
must take the blame because these things take many years to plan and come
to fruition, as we now see with nuclear capacity and the way it could be
delayed for many years. When will the new generation capacity be ready,
seeing that our economy is estimated to grow at 6%?

The controversy surrounding the capitalisation of regional electricity
distributors, REDs, and the City of Cape Town refusing to support them
emanates from revenue-generating capacity which municipalities need. I
think this issue requires some consideration in defining how REDs operate
in relation to the metros.

Regarding the outages, we as the public must conserve energy, and there is
no other way. There is no doubt that nuclear energy is a cost-efficient way
to solve our future energy needs. Given that our future source is nuclear,
we need to be proactive in training more black nuclear scientists. The
department must allocate bursaries for this and I think you are already
doing that. As regards solar and wind energy - and I believe there is wave
energy too - what we are looking at is all very exciting.
Hon Minister, we need to do something about the erratic fuel price
increases and decreases. I have no answer, I don’t know but I am just
mentioning it here because increases in fuel prices lead to higher
transportation costs and that has a knock-on effect on food prices. That
results in a ripple effect throughout the economy.

The SA Diamond Board continues to do good work in support of the Kimberley
Process, with regard to certification of diamonds. As regards the State
Diamond Trader, I believe you said it’s coming to the Northern Cape, and we
are happy about that. It is good news.

We are extremely happy about the electrification of schools; that’s a
fantastic step. I remember that, many years ago, we electrified 14 schools
in Langa and Gugulethu, and made a massive difference to people and the
whole outlook on education.

Regarding gas, I want to say its good news, but we have to be careful. I
have seen a massive house explode because there was a gas leak there and
the stove was on - not even a naked flame. So we need to educate our people
when that comes. I am worried about the cost of electricity being passed
on. Otherwise we in the UIF support the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Madam Chairperson, we note that the State Diamond Trader
will be in Kimberley. As KwaZulu-Natal, we know democracy and we note that
the wealth of this country belongs to all. But then, as KwaZulu-Natal, we
will be ready to polish and cut diamonds at the new Dube Trade Port.
[Laughter.]

As we engage in this budget debate today, I’m reminded of at least three or
four significant episodes in the history of South Africa: the first one is
that June is Youth Month - all of us know about June 16; the second one is
that June is the month of the Freedom Charter; the third one is that Inkosi
Albert Luthuli died 40 years ago; and the fourth one is that the late O R
Tambo took over the leadership of the ANC 40 years ago. I could add a lot
to these issues on June and the year, but time doesn’t permit.

Forty-one years ago, in 1956, one hundred and fifty-six leaders and
activists of the movement were arrested in predawn raids all over the
country and charged with high treason, an offence that was punishable by
death then. The charge was plain and simple. It was based on the Freedom
Charter that had been adopted by a multiracial Congress of the People which
proclaimed: South Africa belongs to all those that live in it. That was the
only charge.

The prosecution tried to prove that the holding of the Congress of the
People and the adoption of the Freedom Charter were steps in the direction
of the establishment of a communist state, the necessary prelude to the
revolution.

If the apartheid regime then hoped to intimidate, discredit and disrupt the
liberation movement through this mass trial, it failed dismally and
miserably. On the contrary, today we have a country that is led by the ANC,
the very same movement, the very same people that were arrested, detained
and tortured. Today, we have a country that is united, nonracial, nonsexist
and democratic. Surely, we must thank the ANC.

Today, I take part in this debate, 40 years after the death of the late
Inkosi Albert Luthuli and after, as I said earlier, the death of the son of
the soil, O R Tambo, who took over the leadership of the ANC. Today, we
contribute in making the laws of this country and today we pass the budget
debate of this department. For all this, we say thanks to the ANC.

In this debate, I will speak about nuclear energy, petroleum licensing and
mineral regulation. The challenge that we face is that we, as a nation, are
overreliant on coal for power generation. In response to that, I would say
that a nuclear energy policy is being developed and at this stage we are
aware that the draft policy has been submitted to Cabinet. This nuclear
programme would need skills. We await the finalisation of the radioactive
waste management policy during this financial year.

The transformation of the petroleum industry remains a big challenge. I’m
happy that the Minister has acknowledged this. However, positive strides
have been made. Whilst more opportunities have been opened to historically
disadvantaged South Africans, many have not been able to access this, due
to other constraints such as lack of information and other resources such
as financial resources.

You would understand that if you lack information, you lack quite a lot.
One leader quietly remarked when students protested in one school that the
school fees were too high and said: “If you think that paying for school is
expensive, you don’t know how expensive ignorance is.”

With regard to mining regulation, we appreciate that the backlog in the
processing of mining applications has been addressed. The mining charter
assists in monitoring and regulation. The social and labour plants are
bearing fruit. I’ve heard some of my colleagues talking about “these
derelict and ownerless mines” but, in most cases, these mines are turning
green. Where we still face challenges is to identify those people that own
those mines, but in most cases such mines are no longer there.

Concerning mineral regulation, for transparency and accountability to be
implemented in the mineral industry, sound regulation is a prerequisite.
The regulation of the mineral industry is fundamental to effecting
transformation. The mineral regulation programme oversees the
implementation of the Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Act and
other related policies.
The promulgation of the Diamond Amendment Act and the Precious Metals Act
has ushered in a new epoch in the regulation of the industry. This is in
line with what the Freedom Charter says: People shall share in the
country’s
wealth.

If I had time I would quote from the book by the late Inkosi Albert
Luthuli, Let My People Go, but I would urge all members, especially those
from other parties, to get hold of that book and read it and understand
what the ANC wants - especially hon Thetjeng; otherwise they will do the
same thing that was done by those people earlier on and they will fail
dismally and miserably.

I’ve heard other colleagues talking about challenges that we face, but we
as the ANC say we support this budget and the people of South Africa with a
big smile. Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson and hon members, I thank
you for your overwhelming support. All of you have supported the budget.
Let me start by making comments on the input made by the hon “acting
chair”, who congratulated herself for acting as the chairperson.

I want to extend a word of appreciation to the members, especially members
of this House, who have been very much involved in assisting regarding the
problem of forced removals in Limpopo. Indeed, I am on record as saying
that we cannot promote mining at the expense of our people and I meant
exactly that. If we need to intervene we will do so and we are doing so.
But I want to commend hon members for taking an interest in that problem.
You are the legitimate representatives of your people.

Now, there is a situation that is developing in Limpopo which is disturbing
me. There are self-proclaimed representatives who say they speak on behalf
of the people and yet they are sowing divisions within our communities, and
we will get to the bottom of this problem. We know who they are and we will
deal with them accordingly. So, it is really heartening to see you being
involved in that and I would encourage you to continue to do so.

On the issue of Longlands and the applications, I am told that there were
members that had applied for licences, but members of the community allege
that they had no mandate from the community to apply for the rights. The
regional office referred the matter to the head office, and both
departments are addressing the issue.

However, I think we learnt from the Limpopo experience that there is
nothing in the law about a provision for the meaningful participation of
communities as shareholders, not to benefit only from the social labour
plan but as shareholders, so that you could then have the whole community
benefiting from the mining activity happening in their locality. To that
end, we are amending the law so that we ensure the participation of our
communities.

Somebody said something about skills and I agree with that. If, for
instance, you take Lejweleputswa in the Free State, the mining industry is
dead in that area and people there are not skilled and cannot find jobs,
because there was no plan to ensure that companies that were mining there
at the time were ploughing back into the community by giving skills to the
people. But the social labour plan is supposed to take care of that.

Companies are compelled by the social labour plan to come up with skills
development programmes for people in areas where mining is happening but
also for people from labour-sending areas. This implies that if labour
comes from O R Tambo municipality, they must do something for O R Tambo
municipality. This would also mean that, after mining, you don’t have these
highly impoverished people as if nothing happened in those areas. So, the
Act takes care of that.

On the issue of infrastructure, I have conceded that we have had problems,
and I want to link my response to this with the point that was raised by
Mrs Mchunu. She is quite correct with regard to the topography of some
areas. In some areas we have a serious problem with the geographic makeup
of those areas. For that reason, the infrastructure is very expensive.

It is not that we are not going to do it, but it takes longer. So, there is
a delay in the rolling out of the programme. But we have identified that
problem and we are addressing it. We have increased the allocation for
infrastructure development. Eskom is getting more than it was supposed to
get and that will go a long way in taking care of the infrastructure.

Despite these challenges, 2012 is still our timeframe in terms of universal
access. We are still committed to that date and nothing is going to change.
There may be these hiccups in between and delays for us to connect in some
areas, but 2012 is still the target for the eradication of the existing
backlog.

With regard to the Eskom board, although I saw the story in the newspapers,
it is difficult for me to respond on that as it doesn’t fall directly under
my responsibility, it falls under the Department of Public Enterprises. So,
I wouldn’t be able to give you a specific response to that one. I have
taken note of it as it might happen even to people who serve on my boards
and it would impact negatively on the work that they are supposed to do. I
will look into that.

I think the issue that was raised by that hon member regarding ill-advised
policy decisions by government shows that the member does not know much
about the state of electricity in our country. The challenges in respect of
electricity are mainly in the distribution sector, which requires
upgrading, and not so much maintenance has been done in the past as the
infrastructure catered for the minority. That is one of the reasons.

When we expanded these services, especially to our poor people, there were
problems. That is why, hon member, you will find that when it comes to
rural areas people complain about the weak quality of electricity.

Xa kukho umoya uvele uhambe umbane. Ndiyabona ufana nala ngoma ithi:
khanibone nanku umoya ucima isibane sam. Sicime isibane sombane ... [When
the wind blows, it triggers an electricity outage.  As a Xhosa traditional
song sung at pre-school level, loosely translated, goes: “There goes the
wind, blowing out my lamp.” And my electric lights go off, ...]

... because the quality of electricity is weak. So, that is the problem.

There are quite a number of things that we do together with the Department
of Public Enterprises to address this problem. I also spoke about
substations and they are going to augment the existing infrastructure so
that we improve the quality of the electricity supply in those areas. So
there are a lot of things that are happening in that area.

I was put on the spot by hon Mkono that I must take the State Diamond
Trader to the Eastern Cape. [Laughter.] I am reluctant to respond to this
because Mrs Mchunu will cry, “nepotism”. I come from the Eastern Cape. So,
hon Mkono, do not push me into that corner as I will be in trouble. Let us
leave it in the Northern Cape.

The hon Mkono spoke about the creation of the REDs. It is a very important
process, especially the issue of constitutional constraints that we have.
The problem is that municipalities are services authorities and it is
difficult for them to participate in this process, and we can’t force them
to participate. They can participate when we have persuaded them. Their
participation is voluntary and there is a problem and I hope it will be
addressed over time.

What I can say is that we are busy and we are in a consultation process as
we speak. We are meeting with the Premiers’ Co-ordination Forum in all the
provinces. At the end of that process its outcomes will be tabled before
Cabinet. If there is a proposal for a constitutional amendment, it is then
that we can talk about the amendment of the Constitution.

I think it would be premature for me to talk of the amendment of the
Constitution because there has not been a formal tabling of the proposal to
Cabinet, as far as that matter is concerned. I think, for now, it is just
an observation by the company that is dealing with the REDs that there may
be a need to amend the Constitution, but we are not yet there in terms of
that issue.

With regard to the issue of solar and wind energy, and all the issues that
that hon member spoke about, I just want to remind the House that our
policy is a comprehensive one. We even refer to it as an energy mix, where
we look at all carriers. We are piloting, as we speak. We are piloting on
solar energy and wind farms, as you said. We talk about nuclear energy
because we are looking at all possible solutions to the challenge that we
have.

I hear a lot of people making a lot of noise about nuclear energy as if it
is the only thing that we talk about. We also talk about these other
alternatives in terms of the carriers that we would have to use. So, ours
is an energy mix. What is important is that we want a carrier that will
give us energy that is sustainable. Quality and sustainability are two
things that are important.

I agree with you, hon member, that we need to improve in providing free
basic electricity. As a result, we have decided to get into partnership
with Salga so that we are able to monitor and implement, as required. But I
agree with hon members that there is room for improvement.

With regard to liquefied petroleum gas, Mrs Mchunu, this is your favourite
subject. What I need to stress here is that we have decided to regulate the
price of LPG because we feel that it is not accessible to the poor. It has
to respond to the needs of the poor, and if it responds to those needs, it
has to be accessible in terms of its price. For that reason we have decided
to ensure that prices are regulated.

Thank you for supporting the energy efficiency campaign. I am trying to
rush, but I hope everybody here will support us regarding the energy
efficiency campaign. It is a quick win and a low-hanging fruit. It is
something that we can do. You have seen the campaign by Eskom, and it has
immediately yielded positive results. We have been able to manage the
electricity crisis and outages because of that campaign; otherwise we want
you to support us, as we are coming out vigorously in terms of that
campaign and we want your support.

With regard to the overlap, yes, it is there but I can’t answer in any
other way for the domination of Minerals and Energy in the debate. I think
that is how it should be. Of course, we could give you some time but, I
think they should dominate because it is their area.

My time is almost over. Let me say that we are one of the biggest culprits
in terms of emissions but we do have strategies to deal with that. We have
a renewable energy strategy and carbon development mechanisms. As we speak,
10 projects have been approved and 27 are in the process of being approved.
We lead in Africa, in as far as that is concerned.

There is a report that will come through. It did come through, but we were
not happy with its contents so it has had to go back to Cabinet. It will be
made available to the two Houses; otherwise we do have a lot of strategies
in as far as that issue is concerned.

Hon Gamede, I was naughty when I said you stole my speech, but I have taken
note of all the issues that you raised. The only thing that I can say in
closing is that it is not yet uhuru. We have all of these policies that are
transformative in nature but we still have problems. There are still forces
out there that are intransigent and if anything, we need your support;
otherwise it would end up in policy and not translate into a better life
for our people. It is only when the patterns of ownership have changed that
we can say it is uhuru [freedom] and indeed that we have, in spirit and
letter, lived up to the expectations of the Freedom Charter. For now, we
are not yet there.

Thank you very much for your inspiration and thank you to all of you, hon
members. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I am rising in terms of Rule 33, which allows
for a point of order and a point of privilege. I am rising on a point of
privilege. I would request, Chair, since the speech was so informative,
that it be distributed to all pigeonholes of members. We should not be told
that we will get it from Hansard, but it should be distributed to all the
pigeonholes so that we are able to use it in our constituencies. Thank you
very much.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Of course, I think the department
has heard the hon member’s plea. So we expect that copies of the speech
will be put in the pigeonholes of members.

Hon members, let me thank the hon Minister.

Ngiyethemba ukuthi nathi usiphilisile sonke. [I hope that she has also
healed us all.]

I also want to thank the officials from the department.

The Council adjourned at 17:46.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007].


         Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 77) and
         referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the National
         Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 7 June 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


          b) Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 29961 of 1 June 2007].


         Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 75) and
         referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the National
         Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 7 June 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.
2.    Translation of Bill submitted

    (1)     The Minister of Trade and Industry


          a) Lo Mthetho kuthiwa nguMthetho weNkampani zeeHambo zoMoya
             zoMzantsi Afrika, 2006 [Um 35B – 2006] (National Assembly –sec
             75).

         This is the official translation into Xhosa of the South African
         Airways Bill [B 35B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Extradition Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the
         Argentine Republic, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Extradition Treaty between the
         Republic of South Africa and the Argentine Republic.

    (c)     Treaty between the Republic of South Africa and the Argentine
         Republic on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Treaty between the Republic of
         South Africa and the Argentine Republic on Mutual Legal Assistance
         in Criminal Matters.

