---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 June 2007'
layout: debate
year: 2007
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2007/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2007-06-21
---

THURSDAY, 21 JUNE 2007
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:10.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                      WELCOMING OF YOUTH TO PARLIAMENT

The SPEAKER: Can we ask for silence, even in the gallery? I imagine we have
many members of the youth who are attending the Youth Parliament, and I
would like to welcome them. [Applause.]

                DEEPENING YOUTH PARTICIPATION THROUGH SERVICE

                            (Debate on Youth Day)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Madam Speaker, hon members, Chairperson of
the National Youth Commission and other commissioners present, participants
in the Youth Parliament who are on the gallery, ladies and gentlemen, I
know that some of us are speaking here not as young but as youth veterans.
I would like therefore to welcome some in this House who will be
participating in this debate for the last time as members of the youth, as
they are in the category of those aged 18 to 35. You are not lost; you are
welcome in the veterans’ category like some of us.

Today we are able to express our concerns and our fears and ambitions
because those before us sacrificed their own lives in order for us to
attain freedom and the liberties that come with it. It is for this reason
that every year during the month of June, and in particular on 16 June, we
spend some time reflecting on the heroic deeds of the youth of 1976 and
those who followed them, because their contribution has given birth to a
democratic, nonracial, nonsexist and prosperous South Africa.

As we commemorate the generation of 16 June, we are asking ourselves a
range of questions that relate to what the legacy would be of post-
liberation youth. This question has been answered in some way and will
continue to be answered by ourselves and those of you particularly in the
gallery and somewhere in our country.

In 1994, the young people were among those who took part in the first
democratic elections that our country held. These young people were also
part of the first cohort that went into the legislatures and Parliament. It
is these young people who were instrumental in setting up the policy and
legislative process that finally created a platform for youth policy and
institutions that support youth development, such as the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund and the National Youth Commission. It is therefore clear that these
cohorts of young people, who included the generation of 1976 and after,
laid the foundation from which we are working today.

What is of interest though is that central to these processes of developing
policy frameworks and legislation, the young people asserted their right
that nothing should happen without them but with them. They also made sure
that, as young people, they asserted their right that they would be at the
centre of their own development.

As our country evolves into its future, the youth generation of today faces
different challenges that are consistent with the environment in which they
live. Some of these relate to the ever-changing needs of our economy as
well as the global economy. Such changes require a different set of skills
while at the same time still requiring the old ones.

The burden of disease that affects our society today also impacts on young
people in a particular way. Population migration internally and
internationally, particularly within our region, also imposes certain
challenges among our youth. The challenge of youth unemployment is another
matter of concern. The challenge of drug and substance abuse is also worth
mentioning as another threat that impacts negatively on the development of
young people of today. While I have mentioned a few of the challenges that
young people of today face, it is also interesting that we must not forget
that our youth are also and should be critical players in defining our
future as a country.

If one takes a look at the journey we have travelled since 1994, we can see
the interventions that have been made in particular by the public sector in
addressing some of the challenges that affect young people in our society,
such as in education and health as well as in introducing institutions that
seek to support the participation of youth in the economy.

The advocacy role played by the National Youth Commission has enabled us to
remain conscious of the challenges that young people face on a daily basis.
In continuing with this advocacy and monitoring role, recently the National
Youth Commission has been engaged in a process of policy reviews so that
they can better understand whether the current youth policies and
programmes address the concerns that the youth of today face.

It is my hope that this process which has sought to engage a number of
youth formations in our country will result in the strengthening and
affirmation of existing policies where necessary or maybe new proposals
that can assist us in addressing youth development challenges that our
country faces today.

We are all aware that challenges that face our young people cannot be
addressed by interventions of government alone, but they also require a
range of stakeholders in our society, among which is the private sector. It
is therefore encouraging to note the report, which will be made public
soon, which has been commissioned by the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and which has
looked at the investment that the private sector is making in youth
development.

This report reflects the various interventions that a number of private
sector companies have or might have made in the investment on issues that
affect young people. Some of these will be found in the corporate social
investment of these companies. These investments would in the main be in
the areas of education, social development and health.

A few companies, however, have also invested, albeit minimally, in
enterprise development. Some of them have also enrolled young people in
their internships and learnership programmes that have in some way created
a platform for some of these young people to gain employment within these
companies while some of them have been absorbed in other companies.

Interestingly, the report indicates that a number of these interventions by
the private sector have actually never been designed with the specific
target of young people in mind. They were actually made for particular
purposes, if I were to call them a feel-good action by the private sector
in order to promote their own brands or even have in their conscience that
they have done something in their communities where they live. What clearly
can be said is that these interventions have been incidental rather than
targeted.

NgesiZulu, singasho nje ukuthi intsha ifana nocilo ezishaya endukwini. Uthi
ungaqondanga ukumdubula ngesihlilingi kodwa kuphazame-ke nje. Into efana
nokuthi ithi inyoni izidlulela itshe lizitholele yona. Kunjalo-ke nalokhu
okwenziwa yizinkampani eziningi ngalezi zinhlelo ezinazo ngentsha.
Azizenzanga ngoba ziqonde ukuthi zibhekane nezinkinga zentsha, kuyenzeka
nje ngokuphazama okuthile ukuthi zibhekane nezinkinga zentsha. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[In isiZulu, we can say that it is just like killing a bird without having
had any intention to do so. The same applies to what most companies are
doing as far as youth empowerment programmes are concerned. They were not
designed to address youth problems per se; it is purely coincidental that
they end up addressing those problems.]

This report clearly identifies the gaps that exist in the interventions
both in the private and the public sector. If one accepts therefore that
among the challenges that young people face, as I have said earlier, is the
challenge of economic exclusion, we need to identify in detail the nature
of the constraints, and their underlying causes, that young people face in
this regard. We also need to examine the gaps that are there in existing
programmes of government as well as the private sector.

In my view, today’s discussion in the National Assembly and also afterwards
in the Youth Parliament will, among others, propose certain solutions that
have a possibility of drawing young people into the economic mainstream of
our country.

Allow me to make some proposals which I think may actually help us to go a
step further. I must say that they are not new, some of them; they have
actually been raised by others before. Firstly, I would hasten to say, we
should continue to work at mechanisms that will improve the chances of
young people to be absorbed in formal employment. In this regard, one
applauds the work that has been done by the Office of the Deputy President
and the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition in finding
placement for unemployed graduates within the public sector as well as in
the private sector.

The work that has been done in improving the quality of education by our
Department of Education, particularly at the foundation phase, and the
investment in the further education and training colleges will also go a
long way in preparing young people for better absorption into employment.

We also need to create a possibility for active participation by our young
people in growing this very economy. This can happen in a variety of ways,
within the existing public sector programmes such as the small and medium
enterprises and co-operatives within the Department of Trade and Industry.

What we also need, in my view, is to actually create a supportive
environment for entrepreneurs, particularly young entrepreneurs. I am
pleased that the Umsobomvu Youth Fund has been actively working in this
area by, among others, supporting young people financially, linking them up
with service providers of young people who can assist them in the
development of their businesses and financial management as well as legal
work.

I must share with hon members that I was fortunate that yesterday I
participated in the fourth national young entrepreneurs’ conference and
exhibition that is being held in Durban, where I saw young people
exhibiting goods that they have manufactured and the services that they
render, ranging from construction to enterprise support.

You can see this Y plastic product. It’s actually manufactured by
Simelakhona Trading, a company of young people who are 26 years of age from
A417 Umlazi Township in KwaZulu-Natal. These young people, when they tell
their story, say that when they could not find employment, they started to
work as vendors selling tomatoes on the streets.

They actually asked their neighbour to allow them to connect electricity so
that they could continue working at night, but when it was raining their
hands were wet and they were actually afraid that if they tried to pull out
the plug, they could endanger not only themselves but also the owner of the
house who had been so good to them. So they decided to take a plastic
“amasi” container and cut it into a y-shape and punch three holes into it
and see whether they couldn’t use it to pull out the plug rather than
touching it. They said it worked.

They decided to play around with the idea, approached the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund, and today they have started a manufacturing company where they
produce this product and they have intellectual property rights on it. This
is one of the examples which can be multiplied.

There is also a company which is called Izibuko Multimedia and some of our
government departments are now clients of this company of young people,
where they do the branding and also other media solutions for our people.
Another one – how can I forget - is the young contractors who can now be
employed to do plumbing and paint work and many other maintenance jobs and
improvements at homes. This is just an indication that if we give young
people a chance and give them the necessary support, they can actually
become the growers of our economy.

I therefore trust that as we undertake this work on youth development, we
continuously need to look at the capacities that young people have, and
acknowledge that sometimes they will make mistakes but it is not for us to
say that they have failed; we need to encourage them to do even better. So,
as we deepen our dialogue, we need to do so in the context of the
challenges that face young people today and ask ourselves: What will the
legacy be of young people who have been born into democracy? I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms T V TOBIAS: Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, today I
participate for the very last time in the June 16 debate while still being
a youth. Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
giant youth movement, the African National Congress Youth League, for the
guidance it provided to me for the past 22 years.

On this occasion of the 31st anniversary of June 16, young people from all
walks of life are gathered in this Parliament to commemorate the commitment
of the 1970s generation of youth and their predecessors’ contribution to
the liberation struggle. All generations of youth committed themselves in
the liberation struggle and the 1976 generation was but one generation
which took over the baton from the other generation to the current
generation, which I had the privilege to belong to.

These generations of youth are always put to a litmus test to rise to the
occasion to address challenges of their lifetime and many have stood the
test of time and were victorious in their endeavours. Therefore, the
current generation is faced with totally different challenges - their role
is of a developmental approach, as they will have to raise their interest
within a democratic setting and theirs is not to fight for freedom but to
jealously guard the gains of freedom and ensure that what their former
leaders fought for is sustained.

Madam Speaker, please allow me to quote Professor Paulo Freire in one of
his books titled Pedagogy of the Oppressed:


  The radical committed to human liberation, does not become the prisoner
  of a ``circle of certainty’’ within which he also imprisons reality. On
  the contrary, the more radical he is, the more fully he enters into
  reality so that, knowing it better, he can better transform it. He is not
  afraid to confront, to listen, to see the world unveiled. He is not
  afraid to meet the people or to enter into dialogue with them. He does
  not consider himself the proprietor of history or of all men, or the
  liberator of the oppressed; but he does commit himself, within history,
  to fight at their side.
He further states:


  However, the oppressed, who have adapted to the structure of domination
  in which they are immersed, and have become resigned to it, are inhibited
  from waging the struggle for freedom so long as they feel incapable of
  running the risks it requires.

This analogy made by Paulo Freire, explains in our context that young
people are not docile recipients of freedom, but are active participants in
the transformation agenda of a developmental state and they will continue
to raise sharply issues of their interest with the radical temperament
inherent in their body politic. It therefore becomes important to recognise
that their struggle translates into a system that will recognise the social
ills that created less capacity among black people to provide the skills
that the job market demands and address this with an education system that
will open doors of learning to the poor and marginalised by providing a
comprehensive plan and free and compulsory education.

In the same vein, we need to recognise skills that are not being employed
on the part of the youth, who are blocked from participating in the job
market as vacancies available overlook the youth and prohibit them from
gaining experience, because experienced candidates are sought, especially
by private companies whose intention is to obscure the current skills base
available by creating the impression that the majority of skilled people
are white and look down on black skilled youth. Therefore, government
should continue to have a deliberate bias towards them, as this role cannot
be shifted to the private sector since the market without government
regulation is unreliable.

Madam Speaker, I know that when I make this statement I run the risk of
being booed by people who were never affected by Bantu Education and the
possible response might be that we dwell too much on the past. But a
Sesotho proverb says:

Setjhaba se sa tsebeng nalane ya sona se a timela. [A nation that forgets
its history does so at its peril.]

And we as youth need to know the revolutionary evolution of our struggle to
be able to pave the way forward and it is this historic context that we
call on for youth development.

Moving forward into the future, the ANC-led government has introduced
programmes to address these challenges as part of the National Youth
Service programmes such as the MSDS that has been introduced by the
Department of Defence to address such challenges of skills shortages and
unemployment. As this is not adequate to deal with 40% unemployed youth, it
is therefore important for government to adopt the Integrated Youth
Development Strategy which was adopted at the national youth policy
convention and the fast-tracking of the resolution to merge the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund and the National Youth Commission, which is a call we have been
making in previous years. We also need to ensure that while the country is
building its skills base the current generation of youth is not subjected
to being abused but is moved towards representing the working class better.


However, the dichotomy presented by both these two institutions has not
yielded the best results to challenges that present themselves today.
Therefore, an integrated approach does not only allow for government
intervention but also allows the private sector and state-owned enterprises
to play their role. In the same vein, youth also have a responsibility to
commit themselves to producing the best results that will qualify them to
access tertiary education and subsequent placement in the job market to
sustain the momentum of the country’s economic growth. We also need to
implement the integrate development strategy to ensure that while the
country is building its skills base young people are taken into
consideration.

Youth should also be creative enough not to expect handouts but to create
their own destiny and move from a dehumanising perception to that of pride
and self-sustenance. They should have a sense of belonging and build the
nationhood that will make them proud South Africans who will not see
government as a force to oppose but as a force to be reckoned with, to
rebuild the moral system that the apartheid system eroded; that made our
masses see government as an object to hate and treat with disrespect. These
memories are still fresh in their mind, hence it will take time before
institutions such as the police service and the army will be respected.

I therefore salute all generations and detachments of youth for the
sterling work they did and continue to do to ensure that ours is a just
society that embraces the principles of a united, nonracial, nonsexist and
democratic society, where there is a better life for all and all are equal
before the law. I am also proud to have belonged to the 1980s generation
that took over the baton from the 1970s generation. I thank you, Madam
Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M M SWATHE: Madam Speaker, this year’s 16 June celebrations marked the
31st anniversary of the historic 1976 youth uprisings. Yet, the youth of
today are still in want and wondering about their future. The 1976 youth
had a vision of a democratic South Africa where there is hope, equality,
quality education and opportunities for all.

The sad turn of history is that 70% of the youth – about four million – are
unemployed, poor and unskilled. Another major problem that threatens the
youth and skill acquisition is the negative use of the affirmative action
policy. This policy was supposed to address the imbalance created by the
apartheid regime and not to divide our current youth based on race.

Our view as the DA is that morality, virtue, strength and character have to
be instilled in young people and are expected as a social norm of society
as they grow up. As a people, we need to be clear about what we value and
teach those values to the youth. Service is one way of achieving that.

However, the drive to engage youth in service programmes must be grounded
in a broader framework that reflects a consistent, solid, moral and ethical
structure. It would be too easy for a service learning programme to become
a substitute for employment and to lose sight of the whole purpose of
service as a social civic duty.

An emphasis on service would encourage young people to think of the public
good and the broader community before thinking of themselves.
Unfortunately, we are living in a society that values the pursuit of self-
interest over the trades. Youth must stop dwelling in the past and
contribute towards a better future.

The examples that many of us, including political and community leaders,
set for young people are not positive. The Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the
National Youth Commission are given a mandate to develop and promote
interests of the youth. We are concerned that the National Youth Commission
uses millions of rands to fund events, whereas millions of young people are
unemployed and poor. This money could have been used for job creation and
something of great values to the youth.
These bodies are not effective and not visible at all. In addition, we have
fathers who don’t pay maintenance; parents who don’t spend time with their
kids; gangsters as role models and teachers who abuse their students. All
of this creates an environment hostile to young people from which they have
little hope of escaping repeating the pattern with their own children.

Re le ba DA, re re mananeo a tšwelopele ya baswa a swanetše go hlomphiwa le
go tšwetšwapele. Tšhelete yeo mmušo o e šomišago go tšweleletša mananeo a
baswa e swanetše go lekolwa gore e šoma eng. National Youth Commission le
Umsobomvu Fund di swanetše go rwala maikarabelo go hlokego ya mešomo.
Mekgatlo ye e swanetše go bona gore baswa ba kgatha tema ekonoming ya naga.
Kgolo ya ekonomi e swanetše go laetša mohola go baswa. Ge se sa bonagale,
go itaetša gabotse gore ba ikhola ka dithoto le mahumo a setšhaba.

Re le ba DA, re re taba ya go ikhola e swanetše go bonwa e le bosinyi gomme
bao ba amegago ba swanetše go otlwa ka molao. Gape re re baswa ba dinageng-
magae ke baswa ba Afrika Borwa le gore ba swanetšwe ke tše kaone. Re dira
boipiletšo go mmušo go lekola lenaneo la go thuša baswa bao ba sa šomego la
Basic Income Grant ka kgwedi. Tšhelete yeo e tla thuša gore baswa ba kgone
go nyaka mešomo, ba bule dikgwebo-potlana le go romela mangwalo a di-CV go
boramešomo.

DA e bona taba ye e tla thuša dikolo le dipapadi le go hola baswa ge e ka
šomišwa. Tšhomišo ya boraditegniki le boramahlale bao ba tlogetšego mošomo
e swanetše go thuša go abela baswa bokgoni. Re bona ba Umsombomvu Youth
Fund le National Youth Commission ba sa lebelele taba yeo gabotse ka ge e
tla be a thuša setšhaba go hloma dikgwebo.

Re bona taba ya go hlabolla mabokgoni a mešomo mebasepaleng ya Kgalagadi,
go la Kapa-Leboa e šoma gomme re rata gore ba Umsobomvu Youth Fund le
National Youth Commission ba tšeye malebiša gomme ba bule Youth Skills
Development Centres dinageng-magae. Se se ka thuša go fediša mekhukhu
ditoropong le go hlola mešomo ya matsogo gomme baswa ba kgona go ka itirela
mešomo. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[We as the DA say that youth development programmes should be valued and
developed. It should be determined how the funds allocated for youth
development programmes are used. The National Youth Commission and the
Umsobomvu Fund should be held responsible for unemployment in the country.
These structures should ensure that the youth are playing a role in the
country’s economy. Economic growth should be of importance to the youth. If
this does not happen, this will be a clear indication that they are
enriching themselves through the public’s assets and wealth.

As the DA, we say self-enrichment is a crime and those involved must be
punished. We also say that youth from rural areas are South African
citizens and therefore deserve the best. We make a plea to government to
check the Basic Income Grant, which is meant for unemployed youth on a
monthly basis. That money will help the youth to seek jobs, open small
businesses as well as sending CVs to employers.

According to the DA, if used, this will help schools, sports and the youth
will also benefit. The use of retired technicians and scientists should
help in transferring skills to the youth. We think that the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund and the National Youth Commission are not paying attention to this,
and this would help youth start businesses.

We think that skills development in the Kgalagadi Municipalities, in the
Northern Cape, does work and we therefore urge the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and
the National Youth Commission to emulate that by opening Youth Skills
Development centres in rural areas. This will help eradicate informal
settlements in cities as well as create skill-orientated jobs and the youth
will be able to be self-employed.]

In order for service programmes to have any moral worth, it should not be
presented as a substitute for employment but as something to do while you
are looking for a job. Used properly, service programme can be a valuable
way of re-integrating the youth into society by making it possible for them
to regain a sense of pride, self-respect and dignity through service to
others.

Gresham’s Law tells us that low values tend to drive out high values and
unless we set an example and insist on high standards of conduct from our
youth we will soon be living in a society that has no concept of higher
values at all. How will today’s youth raise their own children if they do
not have some frame of reference that speaks to values other than the
pursuit of self-interest?

Re rata go dira boipiletšo go baswa ba lehono gore ba emelele, ba kgathe
tema mo ekonoming ya naga; ba se lebelele batho ba bangwe gore ba tla ba
direla. [We would like to appeal to the youth to stand up, play a role in
the country’s economy and not look to other people to act on their behalf.]

This is the right time for young people to take the initiative to come up
with programmes that are going to develop the youth. We request the
government also to ensure that the National Youth Commission and the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund do help young people to develop economically.

We believe, as the DA, that young people should be given priority because
young people are the leaders of tomorrow and we must ensure that those
young people participate in the economy. It is very sad to hear that about
four million young people are unemployed, and we really ask ourselves:
Where are we going as young people of this country?

We need to give young people a chance to take advantage of growing our
economy. Our economy is growing but it doesn’t help our young people. So,
we need government to help these young people to participate actively in
our economy. Thank you very much. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Ms S P LEBENYA: Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I can
hardly believe it was one year ago that I participated in the Youth
Parliament, and now I stand here making my maiden speech. [Applause].

As a young person, I stand not only for dreams, but for ambitions and
aspirations. I believe that this is the true living message conveyed to us
by the heroes of 16 June 1976. The chief aspiration at that time was
freedom from oppression, and many of those who bravely took that journey
did not live to see a free South Africa. We remain to enjoy their efforts.

We remember and honour the youth of 1976 because they taught us that it is
possible for young people to stand up and confront the challenges facing
them. We remember them because they left us a legacy of bravery and
determination in the face of what appeared to be impossible odds.

The South African youth of today enjoy the fruits of political liberation,
but face the challenges of a diverse and growing young population at a time
when a large number of them are living in poverty and in families stricken
by HIV and Aids, unemployment and crime.

Considerable numbers of our young people are growing up in a climate of
uncertainty and fear. Their prospects for healthy development are
dramatically compromised by HIV and Aids and other preventable diseases.
Their formative years are under threat, and that is why today I want to
call upon government to establish a dedicated Ministry for Youth.

South Africa, as we all know, is a study in contrast and complexity. We in
the IFP are pragmatists who believe in the virtues of self-help and self-
reliance. That is why we have always promoted workable solutions to all
challenges, from liberation to HIV and Aids. Our actions and responses have
always been consistent with core pragmatism and the evidence about what
really works.

We believe in deliberate strategies to promote the ideal of healthy youth.
We believe in young people’s own capacity to reduce their risky behaviour
that threatens their wellbeing. This is not about a deliberate killjoy
approach to self-sacrifice. It is about personal responsibility. It is
about morality and good citizenship.

I believe that we can increase the likelihood of our young people growing
up as healthy, caring and capable adults by providing opportunities for the
development of skills and positive experiences.

Our families, our communities and our congregations can provide for our
youth the essential nutrients required to thrive in life. The crucial
ingredients are supportive healthy families and communities. We need
effective safe schools, efficient social networks, caring adults and
welcoming community organisations that provide other educational
opportunities as well as the fun time that we all need and deserve as young
people.

It was once said: “Some men see things as they are and say, ‘why?’; I dream
things that never were and say, ‘why not?’” I thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon members, 31 years ago, young people
marched against the oppressive and purposely disempowering system of Bantu
Education. They sought to oppose the propaganda and the deliberate
misinformation of an education system that insisted that they should buy
into the idea of their own inferiority and willingly accept a life of
legalised slavery. They realised that they had to voice their opposition to
this attack upon their dignity and their future.

With nothing but the courage of their conviction, they took to the streets
to face the guns and armoured vehicles of the previous regime. The outcome
was bloody, as had been the case in Sharpeville nearly two decades earlier.
In Soweto, 15 000 students took to the streets and afterwards 28 of them
had been shot dead. It was a predictable resort to violence and brutality
by the oppressor, and yet the youth of 1976 understood the dangers and
still chose a brave course of action. Their message was clear: “We will not
be dictated to and we will not submit silently.” Today, 31 years later, a
great many of us are able to celebrate the fruits of courage of the
generation of 1976.

Kungoko ke sinoluvo lokuba ulutsha maluthathe inxaxheba kwezopolitiko kunye
nezoqoqosho lweli lizwe, ngoba lungabazali neenkokeli zangomso. Kungenzeka
ke oku, ngokolwethu uluvo, xa urhulumente, ebambisene noogxa bakhe,
eluncedisa ulutsha. Siphakamisa ukuba enye into enokuqhubela phambili
ukuthatha inxaxheba kolutsha kuqoqosho kukuba kubekho isebe elijongene
nemicimbi yolutsha, ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[That is why we are of the opinion that the youth should participate in
politics and the economy of this country, because they are parents and
leaders of tomorrow. We believe this can happen if the government works
together with all relevant stakeholders. We propose that, one other method
of developing youth participation in this aspect would be the establishment
of a youth affairs department ...]

... not an obscure subsection in a department or somewhere in the
Presidency.

Siyalivuma lona ilinge likarhulumente lokuqwalasela lo mba, ngakumbi xa
linokungakhethi zibi namaphela emasini.

Kolwalo icala, nalo ulutsha siyalukhuthaza ukuba lube noxanduva, luqale
ngokwazi ukuba le nto bayicula mihla, yamalungelo, itshatile; umyeni wayo
yindoda apha ekuthiwa luxanduva. Umzekelo, umntwana unelungelo lokufunda,
kodwa unoxanduva lokuba azimisele, afunde aphumelele, ukuze kubonakale
inkqubela.

Isizathu sokuba ndigxininise kuxanduva kukuba zininzi iingxaki kule mihla
siphila kuyo ezijongene nolutsha, ezifana nempilo. Xa sivayo, ngabo kanye
amaxhoba eNtsholongwane kaGawulayo noGawulayo.

Ngokubhekisele kwimfundo nengqesho, amanani abantu abatsha abangaqeshwanga
ukuze babe nokuthabatha inxaxheba kuhlumo lwelizwe lelona lixhomileyo.
Siyambongoza ke ngoko urhulumente nabalingane bakhe kwezoshishino ukuba
bawunike ingqwalasela lo mba. Enkosi.  [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)
[We would appreciate the government’s efforts to consider this matter,
especially if it would not split hairs about it.

We also encourage the youth to take the responsibility, and begin to know
that the rights that they always talk about are married and their husband
is called responsibility. For example, a child has a right to education,
but he or she has a responsibility to be committed and learn to pass in
order to see progress.

The reason to emphasise responsibility is that there are many problems that
the youth are facing today, such as health. From what we hear, they are the
biggest victims of HIV and Aids.

With regard to education and employment, there is an extremely high rate of
unemployment among the youth that should be taking part in developing this
country. We request the government and its relevant partners in the private
sector to consider this economic issue. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Speaker, seeing that, like hon Tobias, this is the
last year of me being able to categorise myself as being part of the youth,
let me take this opportunity to salute all the youth of this country.

It is clear that South Africa’s youth are being asked to grapple with
enormous challenges. Youth unemployment, for instance, stands at a
staggering 70%, while child abuse and HIV/Aids are forcing our youth to
take on challenges way before their time. Many children in South Africa are
unfortunately not given the opportunity to simply be children. Too many are
having to assume the role of parents and look after their siblings, and too
many are forced onto the streets through abuse, where their trauma is
compounded by an uncaring society.

Although the youth have many challenges to face, the ID believes that they
are also at the forefront of transforming South Africa. It is the youth
that hold the seeds of a new value system that does not contain the past
tragic divisions of our country.

I believe that the youth should be seen as not only our future, but in fact
our present. They are not only our leaders of tomorrow, but in fact are
leaders of today. They - or should I say we? - are occupying positions of
leadership in many different fields and are forging ahead in creating a new
South Africa we all dream of. It is time to give the youth the true
recognition they deserve and ensure that their vision informs our new
society. As a young parliamentarian, I will continue to fight for that even
after I am no longer a member of the youth. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, though I am not part of the youth anymore, I
didn’t ask my colleagues their age, but I might be the youngest in my party
and that is why I am speaking on behalf of my party today.

The ACDP would like to remind the House that 30 years ago the youth stood
up against the inadequacies pertaining to educational instruction. It was
not only that Afrikaans had to be used on an equal basis with English as a
language of instruction in secondary schools, but the whole system of Bantu
Education was characterised by separate schools, separate universities,
poor facilities, overcrowded classrooms and inadequately trained teachers.

These conditions resemble the current conditions our children are exposed
to in schools today. The irony is that we have equal rights. Children are
educated in their home languages; they have the right to tertiary education
in the institutions of their choice. However, the conditions in which they
are taught are still a concern for us. Overcrowding and poor facilities are
elements that cause a lack of concentration, coupled with the fact that
teachers do not have the relevant skills or training, which is a recipe for
disaster.

Deepening youth participation in services starts at home, but there is more
room to grow at school level. Schools should ultimately be linked with
government in order to benefit the youth. This can only be created once we
have moved away from dwelling on the past.

Though we commemorate the events of 16 June 1976 and the turn of the tide
in the battle against apartheid, we also have to deal with the new
generation and plan for their future. We cannot blame the inadequacies of
the new South Africa on the apartheid legacy any longer.

Essentially, Youth Day should have been to commit government and society to
taking the youth and their plight seriously and to doing everything in our
power to ensure that this important sector is never ignored or brutalised
again. Sadly, some of us have let the youth down in many ways.

The government is also responsible for the violence, drug and alcohol
abuse, and exposure to gangsterism that the youth are faced with on a daily
basis. The question of the HIV/Aids pandemic could have been addressed much
more strongly in order to prevent our young people from facing death on a
daily basis. The ACDP would like to say to the youth: Be strong, be
courageous, face the challenges of life and God will bless you. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Mevrou die Speaker, dit is met teleurstelling dat ek
vanmiddag hier geluister het na die twee agb sprekers van die ANC. As ’n
mens geluister het na die toesprake van dié twee lede dan is dit baie
duidelik dat die regerende ANC-party die jeug net sien as synde die swart
jeug in Suid-Afrika. As u mooi geluister het na daardie twee sprekers, sal
u verstaan hoekom ek dit sê. Hulle het net gepraat van die jeug in die
struggle.

Niemand kan die blanke jeug daar buite kwalik neem, dat as hulle vanmiddag
na hierdie debat geluister het, hulle sou dink dat hulle tweedeklasburgers
in Suid-Afrika is nie. Daar word twee keer teen hulle gediskrimineer. In
die eerste plek word daar in die werksplek teen hulle gediskrimineer as
gevolg van regstellende aksie. As hulle entrepreneurs wil word en ’n bydrae
tot die ekonomie van Suid-Afrika wil lewer en hulle gaan na finansiële
instellings toe, dan word daar ’n tweede keer teen hulle gediskrimineer as
gevolg van regstellende aksie.

Aan die regerende ANC wil ek sê: U kan nie ’n voorheen benadeelde groep
bevoordeel deur ’n nuwe benadeelde groep onder die blanke jeug te skep nie.
Dit is nie billik nie. Dit is nie regverdig nie. As ons sê dat ons aan die
jeug diens wil lewer, het dit tyd geword dat die ANC ’n in-diepte gesprek
met hulle gaan voer.

Die Nasionale Jeugkommissie lewer nie eens diens aan die blanke jeug nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Die bewyse is daar. U kan maar gaan kyk na die notules
van die Nasionale Jeugkommissie. Ek daag die agb lede uit: Bring vir ons
enige projek wat die Nasionale Jeugkommissie geloods het ter bevordering
van die blanke jeug in Suid-Afrika.

Dit het tyd geword dat die ANC indringend gaan sit en gaan kyk dat hulle
ophou met regstellende aksie. Dit sal die grootste diens wees wat hulle aan
die totale jeug van Suid-Afrika kan lewer. Dit sluit in die swart jeug, die
blanke jeug, die bruin jeug, die Indiërjeug – noem dit wat u wil, want dan
praat ons van die jeug van Suid-Afrika. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Madam Speaker, it was with disappointment that I
listened to the two hon speakers of the ANC this afternoon. If one listened
to the speeches of these two members it is very clear that the ruling ANC-
party sees only the black youth as being the youth in South Africa. If you
listened carefully to those two speakers, you will understand why I say
this. They only spoke about the youth involved in the struggle.

Nobody can hold it against the white youth out there, if they listened to
this debate this afternoon, for thinking that they are second class
citizens in South Africa. They are discriminated against twice. Firstly,
they are discriminated against in the workplace as a result of affirmative
action. If they want to become entrepreneurs and make a contribution to the
economy of South Africa and they approach financial institutions they are
discriminated against a second time as a result of affirmative action.

I want to say the following to the ruling ANC: You cannot favour a
previously disadvantaged group by creating a new disadvantaged group
amongst white youths. That is not just. That is not fair. If we say that we
want to deliver services to the youth, then the time has come for the ANC
to have an in-depth discussion with them.

The National Youth Commission does not even deliver a service to the white
youth. [Interjections]. The evidence is there. You can have a look at the
minutes of the National Youth Commission. I challenge the hon members: Show
us any project the National Youth Commission has launched for the promotion
of the white youth in South Africa.

The time has come for the ANC to have an incisive look at when they will
stop with affirmative action. It will be the biggest service that they can
render to all the youth in South Africa. That includes black youth, white
youth, coloured youth and Indian youth - call it what you want, because
only then will we be talking about the youth of South Africa. I thank you.
[Applause]]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Year after year the Youth Month
celebrations focus on the historical events of June 16. The tragic events
of that day are valuable to us.

Izehlakalo ezinjalo zisifundisile ukuthi silibone ikusasa. Ukubona kanye
ukubona kabili. [Such events have taught us how to prepare for the future.
Once bitten, twice shy.]

Historical events, good and bad, are valuable tools to empower the people
and determine what values and practices to exclude or include as straws to
weave a future identity for themselves as individuals and as a nation. This
vision dictates what we must do today, as we lay foundations of what the
future citizens and our country are going to be among the community of the
nations of the world of the time.

As the current weavers of the unique South Africa of the future, let us do
it in style to ensure an empowered citizenry, where there will be no Soweto
of June 16; where there will be no Khutsong, Matatiele and no half month
protests by civil servants, which in turn has also affected the youth of
today, affected our economy and crippled the health system.

According to the World Youth Report 2005, South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa
have the largest number of young people living below the poverty line, and
these regions are home to the largest concentration of undernourished
youth.

Forty-eight per cent of unemployed South Africans are youth. This indeed is
an issue of great concern, which requires government, business and civil
society to work together to tackle the problem.

Programmes such as Asgisa and Umsobomvu have to take great strides in
ensuring that the youth, who are the future of this country, are
effectively supported in their entrepreneurship initiatives. Greater
intervention is needed to provide the youth with entrepreneurship skills.

Young people are increasingly being identified as a target group in mainly
poverty reduction strategies. Government needs to create concise programmes
that will allow for the channelling of graduates to where there are skills
shortages.

Akungaze kusetshenziswe ukugodlwa kwamandla ngaphambi kokuba uhulumeni abe
nodlebe nozwelo maqondana nezidingo zentsha nezabantu. Asakhe, sisize
intsha yethu. Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Government should not wait until there is dissatisfaction before listening
and showing sympathy concerning the needs of youth and people in general.
Let us be proactive and help our youth. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Rre B E PULE: Ke a go leboga Mmusakgotla. A ke latlhele tlhware legonnyana
mo setlhogong se se reng baša ba nne le seabe mo go tseneletseng mo dilong
tse di ba amang.

Re na le puo ya Setswana e e reng, tlogatloga e tloga gale, modisa wa kgomo
o tswa natso sakeng. Seane se, se raya gore motho o tshwanetse go simologa
le go simolola go dira mo dilong tsotlhe tse di amang botshelo jwa gagwe a
sale mo bošeng.

Baša ba rona ba tshwanetse go nna le seabe ka tiro, e seng go bua fela. Re
tshwanetse gore jaaka bagolo re atametse bana ba rona mo mererong, mme go
tswa foo ba tshware ka diatla.

Motswana o ne a feditse mafoko fa a re, magogorwana rokela banneng e tle e
re setsiba se tlala ba se go thuse. Baša ba rona ba diiwa ke go emela dilo
di dirwa, ba be ba bona diphoso mo go se se dirilweng. A ba dire re bone,
morogo wa bone ga kitla re o tlhopa ditlhokwa, re tla ba gakolola ka
lorato.

Le rona bagolo ba re tshwanetseng go rotloetsa bana go dira, re tshwanetse
go nna sekai jaaka Thamaga-ya-BoJesu e bua e re: A lesedi la lona le
phatsime fa pele ga batho, gore ba tle ba bone ditiro tsa lona tse di
molemo.

Baša ba bone seo mo go rona re le bagolo, e seng jalo re tla tshwana le
makakauwe. Lekakauwe le ya kwa le be le re ngwana wa lona a tlhamalale fa
lona le tsamaela kwa thoko. A rona bagolo re nne sekai se se ntseng jalo. A
go nna le seabe ga baša go tlhakane le boikarabelo jo bo tseneletseng.

Mo re ka gakololang baša fela gore ba seka ba nna le seabe mo teng, ke mo
nnotaging. Ke gona fela re ka ba gakololang gore, lemphorwana la bojalwa ga
le fofe. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana speech follows.)

[Mr B E PULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a contribution
to this discussion in which youth are encouraged to take part intensively
in things that affect them.

There is a saying in Setswana that the earliest bird catches the fattest
worm. This proverb means that it pays to be early in doing things that
matter. Our youth should not only speak but they should also be actively
involved. We should, as parents, introduce our children to issues and
support them while they are on their own.

Motswana concluded this issue by saying: If you do not sow in spring you
will not reap in autumn. Our youths are lazy, given the fact that they wait
for everything to be done and then start criticizing. We should encourage
them to work as we will not criticize their work, but we will instead
advise them sincerely.

As parents we have to encourage our children to work, as it is said in the
Bible: Let your light shine before men, that they may see your good deeds.

Children should learn this from us parents; if not so, we will be like a
crab. A crab moves sideways while it instructs its child to move straight
while it gives support. Let us be such an example to them. The active
participation of the youth should also come with responsibility.

Our advice to the youth is that they should refrain from alcohol. We can
also advise them that drinking irresponsibly will not help them to progress
in life. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Madam Speaker, hon members, guests and participants in
the Youth Parliament, as opposed to hon Tobias, I’ve got anxieties about
crossing the age line. So, I won’t blow my cover in that regard, up until
I’ve had a conversation with the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, perhaps
there is something we can do about my ID. Well, hon Khumalo is not correct.


To all that the hon Swathe has said we can only say: “Ag shame! It’s a
pity!” On Saturday, 16 June, our country celebrated one of the important
days in the evolution of the history of our struggle against apartheid.

This epoch-making day 31 years ago marked a turning point in the
determination of our youth to fight the demon of apartheid and injustice.
As we commemorate the 31st anniversary of June 16, we recall the bravery
and the sacrifices of our youth who had to perish in pursuance of our
people’s yearning for freedom and democracy.

These young women and men had nothing to offer but their blood to their
country, tears to their families and loved ones, and sweat in their
determination to fight against apartheid. Many of our youth had to die and
perish, linger in jail and be separated from their loved ones, in order for
us to be free.

They died not knowing what it meant to be a free South African. Their
families and children continue to ponder how life would have been with them
in their midst. They have a sense of permanent loss, a sense of grief, a
void in their hearts that cannot be filled.

As the ANC, we will continue to be guided by the vision, the will and
desires of these fallen heroes and heroines. As we celebrated Youth Day, we
were also commemorating the 30th anniversary of the assassination of Steve
Biko, a student leader, a youth leader, a revolutionary intellectual and a
hero for our people; and I’m sure we will have a moment to commemorate his
death in a befitting manner in September, which is the month in which he
was assassinated. May his soul and many others rest in peace, their spirits
live on, and their deeds continue to inspire us.

This day reminds us of the role young people played throughout the history
of mankind and continue to play. They are the lifeblood of every nation;
they are the brick and mortar of every society.

The sustenance or defeat, reproduction or creation of any social
organisation depends on the political and social mobilisation and moulding
of the youth. Even the most backward and retrogressive regimes relied on
young people. Hitler relied on young people to build a Nazi state whose
orientation was murder and genocide in pursuance of a purified Germany. On
the other hand, the progressive forces like the Bolsheviks relied on the
important role of young people in the defeat of the Tsarist regime and the
construction of a new society.

Here at home, the colonial and apartheid regimes introduced compulsory
military training for white youth to defend the apartheid system. They
invested a great deal in the education of the white youth to produce the
intellectual capital necessary for the sustenance and reproduction of the
apartheid system.

On the other hand, the youth under the leadership of the ANC mobilised
themselves for the noble goal, that is, the liberation of our people.
Consequently, young people swelled the ranks of the ANC Youth League over
successive generations; young people swelled the ranks of MK, they swarmed
in our streets in acts of defiance and militancy, coming face to face with
the apartheid killing machine.

If anything, the most defining feature of South African society at that
time was the battle between the white youth, who sought to perpetuate the
demon of apartheid, and the black youth, who sought to liberate our country
and its people, both black and white. We are here today because we honour
these youth, without whom there would not be freedom and democracy to talk
about.

The challenge, therefore, for today’s youth is to define their role in the
political, social and economic life of this country. To this end, I would
like to congratulate the National Youth Commission on launching the
National Youth Dialogue. I think that it is an important platform, through
which a national consensus can be built around the future of this country
amongst young people.

I suppose some of the issues that hon Groenewald raised around the issue of
white youth, could be dealt with through that particular platform. These
are not new issues; hon Dr Mulder also raised them during the state of the
nation debate in 2005. So, I suppose that the National Youth Commission
would arrange a conversation that takes into account some of the issues to
check where we actually agree and where we disagree. Do we have a shared
destiny and how do we reach that particular destiny?

We are a very opportune generation, because whilst we are concerned about
the future we are also participants in the acts of its creation, thus we
can make that future in our own image. We are often told never to cross a
bridge until we come to it, but we know this world is led and owned by men
and women who have “crossed bridges” in their imagination, far ahead of the
crowd.
We have to ask ourselves as this current generation of youth whether our
ancestors are resting or turning in their graves, whether we are giving
them confidence that we care about the future of this country and its
people. We have to earn our stripes in defending our democracy, building a
caring society, a society where, in the words of President Mbeki, in
reference to the Sepedi expression that says:

    Mma o tlile, tlala o nyele. Sepedi ga se rogane, se a reta. [There is no
    child that can go hungry when the mother is there. The Sepedi language
    does not swear but praises.]

Just in case there was a low point in the translation, what that means is
that children cannot go hungry when the mother is there. It is an
expression that praises our mothers. So that’s what Sepedi does ...


Sepedi ga se rogane, se a reta. [The Sepedi language does not swear, but
praises]

To this extent, in the past eleven years we have made tremendous strides
with regard to youth development. We have created institutional mechanisms
through the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth Commission to
respond to the challenges of youth development.

No matter the challenges these institutions face, they continue to provide
the necessary leadership to millions of our youth. In fact, a review of
government youth development programmes suggests that there’s been
progressively greater commitment to youth development since 1994.

As government, we have made strides in making sure that we invest in
skills, entrepreneurship development, learnerships, the Expanded Public
Works Programme and so on. Having achieved all of these and more, the
challenge that we face is economic participation. In this regard, we have
to deliberately integrate youth into the mainstream of our economy.

As we meet here today Umsobomvu, together with the KwaZulu-Natal provincial
government, are hosting a Youth Entrepreneurship Conference, intended to
develop programmes to create and massify young entrepreneurs. I hope,
Comrade Ben Martins, as they cross the class line, they will not lose their
status as the motive forces of the national democratic revolution.

The issue of increased youth employment is a matter that we will have to
deal with with vigour and the private sector has an important role to play
in this regard. We call on big companies to ensure that their procurement
should benefit youth co-operatives and enterprises. This will lead to
economic growth and increased employment.
We call on the BEE Charter Councils to accommodate youth representation and
make sure that the implementation of those charters addresses the issue of
youth economic participation.

It is important not to pigeonhole the issue of youth development to be the
purview of provincial and national governments or, at the very least, the
role of Umsobomvu and the Youth Commission. The role of the local sphere of
government cannot be overemphasised. We would like to persuade
municipalities to establish youth units in their organisations.

The Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth Commission have launched a
National Youth Service Programme targeting mainly unemployed youth who will
emerge out of this programme with skills that can open opportunities for
them.

Finally, as young people, therefore, we must see beyond the ordinary and
build this country, hand it over to our children in a much more improved
condition than we found it. The future is ours, let’s build it now.

Ke tšhaba baditi. [Legofsi.] [I conclude.] [Applause.]]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Speaker, the patience of the youth in this country is
running out and this matter should be treated as a matter of urgency in
order to put our House in order. The youth of our country want to
participate in the socioeconomic development of their country and have
patiently waited for us to implement the much talked about transformation,
but transformation takes a long time.

To honour the fallen heroes and heroines of June 16 ... [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: ... 1976 sabotage. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: We can’t allow sabotage. Can the sound engineers please help.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Speaker, let me start again. [Laughter.] The patience
of the youth has run out and as a matter of urgency we must put our House
in order. The youth of our country want to participate in the socioeconomic
development of their country and have patiently waited for us to implement
the much talked about transformation, but transformation takes a long time.


To honour the fallen heroes and heroines of 16 June 1976, the youth that
revolutionised our liberation struggle, the PAC wishes to say to our youth
what I said in my address at the rally of the Soweto student uprising
organised by the Pan-Africanist Youth Congress, Payco, on June 16 at site C
- some of them are sitting up there. Our youth must stand up and wage an
economic and land distribution revolution for the creation of jobs and the
eradication of poverty. This time it will be a different type of revolution
brought about by all the people of our country without any element of
discrimination - Mr Groenewald.

The PAC wants to state very clearly that our economy is in the hands of big
capital, which is unfortunately dominated by foreigners. BEE, and now often
BBBEE, seems not to be a solution. Our land, the primary source of wealth,
is in the hands of the same foreigners. Land restitution, as legislated,
moves at a snail’s pace. What the youth must know is that whilst we
experience problems on the issue of land distribution, large tracts of our
land are being bought day and night by foreigners. In plain language, we
are moving one step forward and ten steps backwards.

This is exactly where you should come in and ignite this special type of
revolution to stop the sale of our land to foreigners and demand an
equitable distribution of wealth and land. To all peace-loving Africans in
our country, this is a dream that all of us must realise for lasting peace
and stability in our country. This is our clarion call. Join us and let us
fight neo-colonialism to the end - or let it perish. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, into our second era of democracy, the MF
considers the South Africa that we are leaving to our youth to handle in
the next decade as serious and a responsibility to ensure that the devilish
horrors of poverty and crime are contained by then. We need to open up
opportunities for our youth to take on the challenges that South Africa may
develop.

But while they are children, let’s work hard to protect them from cruel
adult masters who kidnap them into child labour and trafficking. Let’s
rescue them from the evil of poverty that paves the way to a life of drugs,
crime and abuse. We need to cradle our children in the celebration of
sport, recreation, arts and culture that shall allow them to enjoy their
childhood and celebrate being South African.

However, let our children be educated about our past and the childhoods
stolen by the apartheid regime. Let us teach our children how to live a
free life and how to look after South Africa when we no longer can. When we
leave this legacy of a developing democracy, let us leave with the
insurance that our children will take South Africa to even greater heights.
The MF salutes all our little comrades and calls for the department to
invite a huge participation in the many projects we have on the way to
stabilising South Africa.

Madam Speaker, the future belongs to those who have a dream. The MF has no
doubt whatsoever that the youth of 1976 had a dream and could undoubtedly
live with losing a good fight but could never have lived without fighting
it. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A J NYAMBI: Madam Speaker and hon members, it’s an honour for one to be
afforded such an opportunity to participate in this debate. My speech is
dedicated to all the heroes and heroines who were and still are able to
respond to challenges in fighting to make sure that a better life is
realised for all.

I felt that it would be proper to quote a philosopher. Let me borrow from
Leo C Rosten’s words when he said, and I quote:


  I cannot believe that the purpose of life is to be happy. I think the
  purpose of life is to be useful, to be responsible, to be compassionate.
  It is, above all, to matter, to count, to stand for something, to have
  made a difference that you lived at all.

As we debate and celebrate the heroes and heroines who made the supreme
sacrifice on 16 June 1976, we must always bear in mind that we carry a
heavy responsibility to ensure that what they sacrificed for is achieved in
totality.

Youth Month is being celebrated in a democratic, nonracial, nonsexist and
prosperous South Africa. We are debating today because the students and the
youth of our country turned the tide of history and our revolution forever.
Today we are able to remember the significance of those years and the
lessons that can take us forward as a country to deal with the current
challenges. Their sacrifices will forever be remembered by all peace and
freedom-loving people of our country. We remember and reflect on the
countless selfless sacrifices that they made so that today we enjoy the
fruits of freedom they laid their lives down for.

Our recent study tour visit to Sweden has made me realise that even though
there are programmes in place to champion youth interest, it still remains
a must that the government in our country maximises its championing
programmes that will ensure that no skill required by a competitive modern
economy is absent or in short supply. It has been proved that it is not the
duty of government alone to deal with the issue of skills. The private
sector can also play a crucial role when it comes to skills development.
The private sector must channel their funds to universities through the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme and work closely with institutions in
guiding the disbursement of funds to needy students while at the same time
ensuring that they are channelled to studies that will produce scarce
skills in our country.

Transformation has to do with much more than demographics. It has to do
with mindset and attitudes. The question is how to transform an institution
so that it can take account of the impact of the modern economy. The
working together of the Departments of Education, Labour, Arts and Culture,
Science and Technology can take us a long way in championing skills
development in our country, as we have seen.

The lessons that we have learned, if we reflect on the contribution of the
youth, are dedication, sacrifice, commitment and discipline. When we
celebrate and debate 16 June 1976, we also remember the contribution of all
the generations of our youth in the struggle for revolution as the youth of
our country has always been at the forefront.

South Africa has been fortunate to have had outstanding and revolutionary
youth during each historical epoch in its history. From the 1944 youth
generation, which formed the ANC Youth League, we speak of Mziwakhe
Lembede, O R Tambo, Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu and others, up until the
first recruits of uMkhonto weSizwe combatants who participated in the
Wankie-Sipolilo campaign as part of the Luthuli detachment which played an
important role. The youth were central in the struggle for national
revolution.

After that you had the 1976 Soweto youth generation which produced martyrs
and struggle icons like Solomon Mahlangu, Barney Molokoane and countless
others who took the struggle to unparallelled levels. This is the
detachment that O R Tambo called the June 16 Detachment.

The thread was not broken as the young lions of the 1980s took the struggle
to other levels. The militancy of the youth was once more cemented and
evident through their brave and heroic actions. The youth of our country
were here to strike another blow in the face of apartheid when they played
a central role in the first democratic elections in South Africa in 1994,
when they voted the ANC into power with an overwhelming majority. Since
then, the youth of the country have been integrally involved in the
reconstruction and development of the country from the ashes and the legacy
of apartheid.

June 16 has left a huge legacy for the youth today. Whilst benefiting from
the opportunities of democracy, they too have a revolutionary task to build
a forever-vigilant society that is combat-ready to defend the gains of the
revolution, consolidate democracy and build sustainable communities. My
message is that the challenges that face young people today are not
insurmountable. History has proved that there have been even greater
challenges that were faced by the youth before. The youth can tackle these
challenges and overcome them if we are united and there is unity of
purpose.

In dealing with challenges that face the youth, remember the inspiring
words of Moses Kotane in a statement to the youth of South Africa in 1968.
This great revolutionary was a real African organic intellectual who
towered above many in the political landscape of this country. This great
leader had this to say to the youth, and I quote:

  At this hour of destiny, your country and your people need you. The
  future of South Africa is yours and it will be what you make of it. On
  the other hand, a people, a country, a movement that does not value its
  youth does not deserve its future.

[Applause.] Such words should always be a reminder to maximise dedication,
sacrifice and discipline in all endeavours to advance the interest of young
people as the youth generation of 1976 did.

When we honour and salute the great sacrifices that the youth of the
country made for the liberation of our country, I am sure that you will
agree with me that the greatest honour and respect you can show to that
youth generation as we are celebrating today, is to ensure that we redouble
our efforts in addressing the challenges that face the youth of our
country.

In conclusion, transformation in relation to all endeavours that have to do
with the emancipation of the youth can better be understood in what was
once said by Paulo Freire, and I quote:

  Transformation is only valid if it is carried out with the people, not
  for them. Liberation is like childbirth, and a painful one. The person
  who emerges is a new person: no longer either oppressor or oppressed, but
  a person in the process of achieving freedom.

I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, greetings to the
delegation of the Youth Parliament and condolences to those who have lost
their youth. We have an obligation to respond with a sense of urgency,
mission and purpose, as well as comprehensively, to the urgent needs of the
youth.

The challenge of social cohesion requires that we pursue with added zeal
the social and economic inclusion of the youth, especially those who live
with disability, young women, rural youth and unemployed youth in general.

We must succeed to increase social and economic opportunities for the
youth. The question of course is: What if we did nothing? What if we were
to let the youth’s socio-economic marginalisation persist and there was no
intervention from either the government or the private sector or both?

The youth are our cornerstone and the foundation of our future. To invest
in them is synonymous with investing in the future. However, I must hasten
to say that to build this future requires that the youth must participate
and be active in the process. To that extent, youth development and youth
mobilisation must go hand in hand. They reinforce each other and they are
two sides of the same coin. They have a dialectical relationship.

It is for that reason that the hon Madikiza was correct that to address the
needs of the youth requires a strategic partnership between the youth,
government, the private sector and civil society in general.

The hon Swathe’s tirade against the National Youth Commission, Umsobomvu
Youth Fund and affirmative action was predicable. His predecessors
delivered the same speeches and we can already predict that for the next
ten years we will prepare the same responses to the same speeches.
[Laughter.]

The entire speech isn’t worth responding to, save to say, sir: To refuse to
forget the past doesn’t mean the same thing as dwelling in it; actually, it
is your party that still dwells in the past. Ask the hon Seremane how many
votes he got at your federal congress. [Laughter.] Then tell me who is
dwelling in the past.

The National Youth Commission does not deliver projects, hon Groenewald.
The hon member would do well to reread the legislation establishing the
National Youth Commission before making patently incorrect remarks about,
or having false expectations of, the National Youth Commission. Sir, the
disadvantage suffered by the white youth as a result of affirmative action
is more of a perception or a mere misconception than reality. Actually, it
is propaganda meant to mobilise the white youth to fear the future. It
belongs in the same category as “swart gevaar” or as Nazi propaganda.

The problem with all those who attack affirmative action is that they all –
without exception – equate merit with being white and lack of merit with
being black. [Applause.] Nobody suggested that we put into positions people
who do not deserve it simply because they are black. It would be wrong to
select the hon Swathe for the Springboks as he will prove a very mediocre
Springbok player, or to select the hon Groenewald for Bafana Bafana.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] To correct the past does not mean that you are
dwelling in it.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Agbare Voorsitter ... [Hon Chairperson] ... is the hon
speaker prepared to take a question?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: I am finishing just now, I will take
the question.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: You are still young, you can take it.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: I will finish just now, sir.
The youth of our country are capable of ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, before you continue, may
I ask the gallery not to participate in the debate. I know it is very
exciting but it is something that is here for the older people down at the
bottom. Don’t clap your hands but just enjoy yourselves. Please continue.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: The youth of our country are capable
even today of producing heroes and heroines. I have faith in the youth, in
their capacity to grasp and summarise the situation today and produce new
heroic feats of the struggle.

It is therefore important that we reflect seriously on the matter of
deepening youth participation through service, to mobilise the youth, to
deepen their participation, to raise their patriotism and love for their
country. Glory to the roaring youth of our country. Madam Chair, I can take
the question now. [Applause.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I would like to ask the hon Deputy
Minister: If Bafana Bafana start selecting people like me, don’t you think
they have a better chance of winning? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFIRS: Hon Groenewald, what does your own
conscience say to you? Thank you very much. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                  IMPROVEMENT IN MATRIC RESULTS IN TSHWANE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R S NTULI (ANC): Our parliamentary constituency office has just compiled
a preliminary assessment of the performance of the 2006 matric class in
Atteridgeville. This is what we found, among other things: From a dismal
average matric performance of 48% in 1995 we have progressed to an 81%
average pass rate in 2006. Five public schools, with Bokgoni Comprehensive
School leading the pack with a 100% pass rate, performed even better than
the private school in the vicinity. We commend the sound foundation the
feeder primary schools provided to the matric class of 2006. This dispels
the myth that good performances are limited to private schools and ex-model
C schools only.

This quantitative and qualitative improvement is a result of the continuous
involvement in and motivation of our schools by the PCO, ANC councillors,
the Mayor of Tshwane, the Gauteng MEC for education as well as community
stakeholders.

We are fully aware that we can still do better and we continue to strive
for excellence in education and therefore appeal for continuous support
from all relevant stakeholders. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): We’ve had a request that the youth
must please go back to their commissions, but do it as quietly as possible,
thank you. Enjoy yourselves.
                    REMARKS BY ANC YOUTH LEAGUE PRESIDENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Madam Chairperson, the remarks made by the
President of the ANC Youth League, Mr Fikile Mbalula, at the Wits Great
Hall about Indians at the University of KwaZulu-Natal during the June 1976
memorial lecture are indeed a cause for great concern.

He reportedly said:


  Transformation of higher learning institutions has turned the university
  into nothing but Bombay.


  When you get into that institution you can think it’s an exclusive
  university of Indians only.

This goes against the facts. Only about 31% of students at the University
of KwaZulu-Natal are Indian. What is strange about that? In terms of
demographic reality, most South Africans of Indian origin live in KwaZulu-
Natal. These statements attributed to him are racist and xenophobic. It’s
that plain and simple. It does great damage to the project of nation-
building, so I call upon all peace-loving South Africans to treat his
remarks with the contempt they deserve.
The DA also calls on all South Africans of Indian origin, especially the
youth, to dismiss his nonsensical remarks and to remain ever-patriotic and
dedicated to the project of making our country a better place for all. By
the way, the silence of the ANC government in this regard is deafening. I
wish that the Deputy Minister standing here cynically in her arrogance ...
Thank you. [Time expired.]

                      RULING BY CHAIRPERSON ON 19 JUNE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE (IFP): Chairperson, I wish to refer to a ruling by the
Chairperson on Tuesday, 19 June 2007, that it was not unparliamentary for a
member to point at other members of Parliament and then use unparliamentary
words. Deputy Minister Johnny de Lange pointed at opposition members,
saying they are all racist. The Chairperson did not regard that as
unparliamentary.

On the strength of the ruling I then pointed at members of the ANC, saying
they were idiots. The Chairperson did not rule that as unparliamentary. I
thought about this ruling and I am sure, with respect, that the ruling was
wrong. I therefore suggested that the presiding officers look at this
ruling and hopefully change it so that in future insults of this nature
cannot be levelled at other members.
Also, although my statement was not ruled as unparliamentary, I believe it
was unparliamentary. I therefore withdraw my statement that members of the
ANC are idiots and I apologise to the ANC for saying that.

                        INTRODUCTION OF SOCIAL GRANT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D M DLALI (ANC): Chairperson, there should be appreciation for what the
ANC government is doing to make sure that no family goes to bed without
food in their home and no learner goes to school without food, in that the
ANC-led government has implemented social grants after its election in 1994
and has integrated old-age pensions for all South Africans, irrespective of
colour or race. The previous racist government discriminated against old-
age pensioners with some getting their pension on a quarterly basis while
those who were supporting the then government were getting their pension on
a monthly basis.

After the introduction of the social grant by the ANC government poor
people’s lives were improved and life was better for everybody, but there
is still more to be done. Food security is key to this. The Department of
Agriculture and Land Affairs must take the lead on food security, in
particular. They should focus on rural areas and also improve
infrastructure in order for the economy to grow.
Agriculture is the key to food security and the eradication of poverty,
thereby creating a better life for all the citizens of our country. The
social grants, as referred to above, are not necessarily sustainable,
although they are helping to better the lives of our people. Therefore I
repeat that agriculture should be the focus area in all respects, so that
the poorest of the poor are able to sustain themselves and not depend on
government handouts. [Time expired.]

                  CONCERN ABOUT VIOLENCE AIMED AT CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM expresses its deep concern about
the ongoing phenomenon of violence aimed at children. On 19 June in the
Cape High Court sentence proceedings were under way in the final chapter in
the long and agonising saga of baby Jordan Lee Norton.

At this very moment a Western Cape community is searching frantically for a
girl by the name of Michaela who recently went missing. She is but one of
nearly a thousand South African children that go missing every single year,
like the young girls whose bodies were discovered a few days ago in Limpopo
where it is now feared that a serial killer is on the loose.

This scourge against our children is a taint on democracy. It mocks
everything that we stand for. It undermines the promise of a better life
that is the abiding election mandate of government. We call upon government
to reconsider the fate of the specialised family and child units within the
SAPS. Somehow we need to find new and special ways of dealing with this
crime and rooting it out. Thank you.

                       POLITICAL INTERFERENCE IN SPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF PLUS): Voorsitter, tydens die debat oor die
Wysigingswet op Sport en Ontspanning het die Minister en die Adjunkminister
die versekering gegee dat hulle nie glo aan kwotas in sport nie. Die wet
sal nie politieke inmenging tot gevolg hê nie.

Die VF Plus het tydens die debat gewaarsku dat die wet daartoe gaan lei dat
Suid-Afrika in botsing gaan kom met internasionale sportkonvensies.
Verskeie artikels in die Olimpiese Handves verbied uitdruklik enige
politieke inmenging in sport. Daardie kodes bepaal dat slegs die beste
sportmanne en-vroue vir elke span gekies moet word, dat meriete moet geld
en dat regeringsinmenging in sport teëgestaan moet word. Daar is verskeie
internasionale voorbeelde waar internasionale sportliggame opgetree het en
lande geskors het waar die regering in sport ingemeng het.

Die VF Plus het reeds by verskeie geleenthede hom uitgespreek ten gunste
van meer geld en groter erns met die ontwikkeling van sport om dit vir
almal toeganklik te maak. Die regering kan en moet hierin ’n rol speel. Dit
beteken egter nie die regstreekse inmenging van die regering met die kies
van internasionale spanne nie.

As die regering egter die standpunte steun wat Woensdag in die
Portefeuljekomitee oor Sport gestel is, naamlik dat spanne wat nie na die
sin van die ANC saamgestel is nie, nie die land sal verlaat nie en dat die
wet teen hulle gebruik sal word, oortree Suid-Afrika die internasionale
sportkonvensies en sal daar teen die land opgetree word. Sulke uitsprake
mag goeie ANC-partypolitieke propaganda wees, maar is gevaarlik en baie
sleg vir Suid-Afrika se beeld in internasionale sport. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF PLUS): Chairperson, during the debate on the Sport and
Recreation Amendment Act, the Minister and the Deputy Minister gave us the
assurance that they did not believe in having quotas in sport. Political
interference will not be a consequence of this Act.

During the debate the FF Plus had warned that the Act would result in South
Africa acting contrary to international sporting conventions. Several
articles in the Olympic Charter expressly forbid any political interference
in sport. Those codes stipulate that only the best sportsmen and –women
should be selected for each team, that the principle of merit should apply
and that government interference in sport should be opposed. There are
various international examples where international sporting bodies have
acted and suspended countries, where their governments had interfered in
sport.

The FF Plus has on several occasions declared itself to be in favour of
more money being given to sports development and it being treated more
seriously in order to make it accessible to everybody. The government can
and must play a role here. This, however, does not mean that the government
can interfere directly in the selection of international teams.

If, however, the government supports the standpoints that were adopted on
Wednesday in the Portfolio Committee on Sport, namely that teams not
composed to the liking of the ANC will not leave the country and that the
Act will be used against them, South Africa will be contravening
international sporting conventions and action will be taken against this
country. Such utterances may be good ANC party-political propaganda, but
are dangerous and very bad for the image of South Africa in international
sport. I thank you.]

                      MALELANE COMMUNITY RECEIVES LAND

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms K R MAGAU (ANC)): Madam Chairperson, this week the Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs, Comrade Lulama Xingwana, handed over to the
Malelane community the largest parcel of land resulting from South Africa’s
land restitution process. It is estimated that more than 10 000 people will
benefit from the land, the value of which is estimated at more than
R1 billion.

We commend the ANC-led South African government on its unwavering efforts
to realise the goal of a better life for all. The ANC would also like to
commend the white farmers who agreed to sell their land to ensure the
success of the restitution process. Theirs is a patriotic act that will
help us to ensure lasting peace and stability in our country.

We call upon all sectors in our country to work towards people-centred and
people-driven developments, to pursue the goal of deracialising the
ownership of resources in our country. Thank you. [Applause.]

                    STANDARD OF LIVING OF PUBLIC SERVANTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M MDLALOSE (Nadeco): Madam Chairperson, as we are seated here in the
National Assembly, we all are products of individuals who were passionate
about their chosen career paths. We are products of dedicated teachers.

The foundation and passion of an individual’s chosen career path is set in
place and enhanced as early as primary school. It is teachers who provide
parents with the support structure to mould the moral calibre of a child.

The standard of living for public servants, ranging from doctors,
accountants, teachers and nurses, has declined markedly over the past
decade. The decline in the standard of living is one of the reasons for the
loss of skills through the ongoing brain drain. The brain drain will
continue if all that is being offered are fringe benefits.

Some of us, as we sit here in the National Assembly, have had firsthand
experience of being disgruntled public servants, unable to make ends meet.
The consumer price index is a measure of the cost of various necessities to
a theoretical average family each month. It is not a measure of poverty or
the inequalities that currently exist in our country.

In April last year Nehawu conducted an extensive survey of the real cost of
living for South African workers and found that food prices have risen by
18% over the year, transport by 13% and schools by 12% ...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon member, I regret your
speaking time has expired.

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Workers do not want an unending strike. Let’s be
sympathetic.

                ASSISTANCE OF VULNERABLE CHILDREN with GRANTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Madam Chair, according to Statistics SA, over 63% of
our black African children live in homes with a monthly income of less than
R800. A total of 64% of our white children are said to come from homes with
a monthly income of R6000.

It is also claimed that children under 14 years of age come from households
that are better off financially than older children. We are here, firstly,
to acknowledge that 8 million children benefit from social grants and 400
000 from the foster care grant. At present we have 12 million beneficiaries
of social grants.

We, however, call for the revision of the cut-off age for the child grants
to be extended to 18 years. This certainly will address the imbalance of
the household income and rescue our children-in-need from poverty.
We also call on the Department of Social Development to consider a meeting
with the Departments of Education and Health in order to expand children’s
access to free basic health care and extending no-fee schools, as well as
the nutrition programme to secondary schools.

We further feel that we should consider equalising the qualifying age for
pensions to 60 years for both sexes and call for the pension allocation to
be raised to a minimum of R1 200 per month, which has been the call of the
MF all the time. Thank you very much, Chair.

                        LAND CLAIMS IN GRAAFF-REINET

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): Chair, I’m very happy that the Minister is in the House
this afternoon. I trust that she will listen to what I have to say. After
13 years and despite repeated appeals to the government, 186 poor people in
Graaff-Reinet cannot get the Department of Land Affairs and Forestry to pay
out their land claims. They are owed an amount of R12 million, and all the
Minister has to do, metaphorically speaking, is just sign the cheque. That,
however, seems to be beyond this administration and it’s the poor that are
suffering as a result.

Briefly, the claim was lodged in 1994. For seven years nothing happened. In
2001 the department told them that the claims had to be researched. Twice
in 2004 they were told that the claims list was still being prepared. Twice
they were told that the Minister was about to approve the claim and twice
in 2005 they were told that payment was pending. Today, 13 years later,
nothing has happened.

They are still poor; they still have received no compensation from the
state; their experience of the ANC government is of a cold, inefficient and
uncaring administration - where’s Batho Pele? – that does not have any
concern for their problems.

Once again, on behalf of those 186 poor people in Graaff-Reinet, I would
like to appeal to the Minister not to ignore the plight of these ordinary
people. Don’t let their plight once again fall on deaf ears.

Chair, they have been to lawyers; they have tried everything to get this
money, and it simply doesn’t come. [Time expired.]

                     LACK OF BUILT ENVIRONMENT TRAINEES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B L MASHILE (ANC): Chairperson, our country has a skills shortage with
respect to the built environment professions. The current training
programme at universities of technology requires that trainees undergo
theoretical training for four semesters and two semesters of experiential
training. The experiential training should be undertaken under the
supervision of a qualified mentor.

These universities have a huge backlog of built environment trainees, who
require experiential training in order to complete their studies. We
believe that the current rise in infrastructure investment presents good
opportunities for these trainees to acquire this valuable experiential
training and therefore ease the skills shortage within the built
environment professions.

We call upon the SA Association of Consulting Engineers, the SA Black
Technical and Allied Careers Organisation and the SA Federation of Civil
Engineering Contractors in the built environment to patriotically and
proactively provide these trainees with the opportunity to complete their
studies. It is in the best interest of the country and the industry that we
develop these skills for the future. I thank you.

                             HIGH BANKING COSTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Chair, the IFP welcomes the result of a study
into international banking costs, which has revealed that South Africans
are paying more than double the global average in banking charges. The
results have confirmed what we have known for a long time and that is that
banks in South Africa are overcharging on banking costs. Furthermore, we
reject the banks’ reaction that the study’s findings by Cap Gemini are not
relevant to South Africa’s situation.

This has once again highlighted the fact that there is a lack of healthy
competition both locally and internationally in the banking sector. We also
believe that banks are colluding in keeping banking costs at exorbitant
levels. The IFP therefore applauds the investigation by the Competition
Commission and the Jali Commission into South Africa’s banking charges and
we hope that the findings will ultimately signal good news for South
African consumers. I thank you.

                              LOW-COST HOUSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C MABENA (ANC): Madam Chairperson, the ANC notes with appreciation the
commitment demonstrated by the financial sector to the delivery of low-cost
and affordable housing in the country. As we all should know, housing in
general and shelter in particular remains one of the critical challenges of
our government, not only if we are to eradicate poverty but also to realise
the objective of creating sustainable communities and hence a better life
for all.

In this regard, the national Department of Housing has, in collaboration
with Absa Bank, launched a series of housing construction projects in the
form of public-private partnerships. The first of these sites of delivery
is the Olievenhout Project in Tshwane, where the first 200 of 5 480 houses
were handed over to the Minister of Housing recently.

In terms of the agreement for this public-private partnership, Absa
undertook to make land available for the development of the project and
developed bonded houses, whilst the city of Tshwane was to develop the low-
cost houses. Given the historical legacy of homelessness which continues to
blight the landscapes of our towns and cities, the significant pace with
which the first phase of this housing project was accomplished, is indeed
commendable.

As the ANC we are bound to acknowledge that this project reflects the
vision of integrated human settlements which our President spoke of earlier
this year. [Time expired.]

                  RECOGNITION OF DIVERSITY IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Voorsitter, dit is ’n mite om voor te gee dat die
Suid-Afrikaanse gemeenskap een groot roereier is. My gemeenskap het ’n
spesifieke verlede, erfenis en fondament wat niemand ongedaan kan maak nie.
Dit beteken nie dat ons nie deel van die groter Suid-Afrikaanse legkaart is
nie. Dit sou in elk geval ’n simpel prent wees as elke deel van dié
legkaart identies sou wees.

Ons erfenis wat versteek lê in die religieuse, historiese, antropologiese,
linguistieke en geografiese sal herontdek word en dit sal betekenis gee aan
wie ons is en aan ons Godgegewe roeping in ons land en op ons kontinent.
Die sterwende son, die wintersonstilstand, kan vanaand 21 Junie besigtig
word vanaf die Maggia of die sterwende sontuig of ander antieke
klipobservatoriums dwarsoor Suider-Afrika. Dit was deel van die kosmologies
georiënteerde godsdiens van die Khoena. Dit is die godsdienstige naam van
Hottentotte.

Toe die President van die Demokratiese Republiek van die Kongo ons onlangs
toegespreek het in Frans en sy toespraak afsluit in Engels, het ek met ’n
skok besef dat ons op die kontinent gelaat is met ’n lingua franca wat ons
in ’n groot mate afgesny het van ’n belangrike deel van ons eie verlede,
wortels en fondamente; selfs die afkorting “Nepad” is Engels, terwyl
“Renaissance” weer ’n Franse woord is. Diversiteit moet gekoester word,
want dit bly ’n belangrike onderdeel van ons land se leuse: Xe E:/Xarra
//Ke. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)
[Mr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Chairperson, it is a myth to pretend that the South
African society is one big scrambled egg. My community has a specific past,
heritage and foundation, which nobody can undo. This does not mean that we
are not part of the greater South African jigsaw puzzle. It would in any
event make a silly picture if all parts of the puzzle were identical.

Our heritage, which lies embedded in religious, historical,
anthropological, linguistic and geographic realities, will be rediscovered,
and it will give meaning to who we are and to our God-given calling in this
country and on our continent. The dying sun, the winter solstice, can be
observed tonight, 21 June, from the Maggia or the dying sun craft or other
antique stone observatories all over Southern Africa. These were part of
the cosmologically-oriented religion of the Khoena. That is the religious
designation of the Hottentots.

When the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed us
recently in French and concluded his speech in English, I realised with
shock that we are left on this continent with a lingua franca which to a
large extent has severed us from an important part of our own past, our
roots and foundations. Even the abbreviation “Nepad” is English, while
“Renaissance” is a French word. Diversity must be cherished, because it
remains an important part of our motto: /Xe E:/Xarra // Ke. [Diverse
peoples united.] I thank you. [Applause.]]
                            RIVONIA TRIAL RECORDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M H MATLALA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC, together with our people,
continues to work tirelessly for the preservation, promotion and
revitalisation of our national cultural heritage so that it would be
accessible to all of humanity. Our efforts have been rewarded by the
international community, Unesco, by inscribing South Africa’s Rivonia trial
records among the eight items of documentary heritage that were added by
the UN Memory of the World Register to help to preserve them for posterity.

The Director-General of Unesco, Mr Koïchiro Matsuura, said on Tuesday that
they have approved the latest inscription after they were recommended by
the international advisory committee of the Memory of the World Programme
during a meeting in Pretoria last week. The programme was launched in 1992
to preserve and promote documentary heritage of global significance, much
of which is in danger. The 38 items of documentary heritage of exceptional
value bring the number of inscriptions since 1997 to 158.

The ANC will continue to encourage the dipping into cultural treasures of
humanity by all South Africans through open and free exchange of books. I
thank you.

                  IMPROVEMENT IN MATRIC RESULTS IN TSHWANE
                      MALELANE COMMUNITY RECEIVES LAND
                        LAND CLAIMS IN GRAAFF-REINET

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I want to agree with the hon
member that, indeed, our matric results are improving year by year. Even in
my own constituency, in Atteridgeville, ten years ago, the pass rate was
very low, but today it is also in the 80% average. I believe that this is
because of the investment that the ANC government has made in education and
also about the biggest slice of our national budget; and also in terms of
resources, skills and other inputs such as social welfare for the poor and
for children, as the hon Dlali has already mentioned.

I also want to say that on agriculture, we are rolling out food security
and we have just adopted a campaign that we call ILima – Letsima, where we
are saying that all the fallow land, especially in our rural former
homelands, must be cultivated, to ensure that we produce enough food, and
increase food production in order to fight hunger and poverty. This will be
done by ensuring that those poor and rural communities are given
implements, inputs and also that we fast-track land redistribution.

Yes, hon member, restitution is moving very fast. On Wednesday I
distributed over 30 000 hectares of land from Tenbosch; prime agricultural
land with sugar cane, bananas, guavas and so on. We believe that our people
will benefit from that. There has been a strategic partnership that has
been formed with TSV and the local commercial white farmers. Indeed, there
is a lot of goodwill. Many farmers are now supporting the restitution
programme of government. They are coming forward and offering their land
for restitution.

I also want to warn or advise hon Groenewald that we are not grabbing this
land for free. Indeed, we paid over R1,1 billion for one land claim in
Mpumalanga on Wednesday. I also want to advise Mr Groenewald again, to warn
his friends or drop-in-the-ocean constituency that those that don’t want to
comply and support government’s restitution programme, we are going to
expropriate the land. We will do it within the law. Our Restitution Act and
our Constitution allow us to expropriate in order to redress the imbalances
and injustices of the past.

To Mr Trent ... [Interjections.] ... yes, I cannot answer to an unnamed,
unidentified land claim. We have said that we will finalise most of our
land claims by the year 2008. Give me all the information and wait, we will
process it, but I cannot talk about an unknown and unlabelled claim that
has just been raised here for television coverage. I also want to say to Mr
Trent, I never voted for an apartheid government that removed our people
illegally from their ancestral land. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Shabangu?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Hlala phantsi, ndim omdala.
[Sit down, I’m the older of the two of us.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Ladies first.

                  CONCERN ABOUT VIOLENCE AIMED AT CHILDREN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Ladies first! Hon Chair, I want
to respond to the question raised by the hon member from the UDM. Hon
Chair, the issue of children cannot be compromised. We cannot allow any
individual in our country or society to abuse children. Therefore, hon
member, the role of the police will always be to make sure that those who
abuse children are arrested. They don’t belong in society.

I have said it before that they are not civilised and are not human enough
to be part of our communities. So we will make sure that at all times, if
there are those who trample on the rights of children, they don’t belong in
communities. But that on its own cannot be achieved by the police alone, it
requires that we all participate. Especially we as parents need to defend
our children. When I say our children, I am not referring to biological
children. I am referring to all children. We as parents must defend and
protect children at all times. It will take all of us coming together and
defending our children and exposing perpetrators of abuse against them.

On the issue of the Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences
Units, may I bring to your attention the fact that those units have not
been disbanded. We said it and we will say it all the time. In the past, in
the whole country, we used to have 26 units. Now we have over a hundred
units, precisely because the need on the ground is much bigger than it was.
So that expertise has been decentralised so that they are able to attend to
the people, but are closer to them in providing that service. We will
continue to train people in that area, to ensure that they reach out to all
communities.

Currently, with our restructuring, those FCS services have been
decentralised to accounting stations which are responsible for fewer
stations, unlike in the past. So that service will never be dismantled or
disbanded in our country. It will always be there, because the need and the
respect which needs to be given to children and their dignity lies with
that unit in making sure that they are recognised and that their dignity is
protected at all times. I thank you. [Applause.]
                ASSISTANCE OF VULNERABLE CHILDREN WITH GRANTS
                        INTRODUCTION OF SOCIAL GRANT
                       POLITICAL INTERFERENCE IN SPORT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chair, I want to quickly respond to
two things. I think I do agree with utat’uDlali [Mr Dlali] regarding what
he said about how Social Development is assisting ...

... abantwana abahlelelekileyo ngokubanika izibonelelo zikarhulumente ukuze
bakwazi ukuphila kakuhle [... by providing vulnerable children with grants
so that they can lead normal lives.]

Even MaMkhize [hon Rajbally] addressed that issue of poverty-stricken
children.

Urhulumente okhokelwa ngumbutho we-ANC ungumama kanti ukwangutata kwaba
bantwana. Kuthiwa umama okanye utata ufikile, ngoko ke indlala igwetyiwe.
Andifuni kuyibeka ngoluya hlobo luthi: [The ANC-led government is both a
mother and a father to these children. You will hear them saying, the
mother or the father has arrived; Therefore, hunger has been dealt with. I
do not want to put it in a manner that says:]

Mme o tlile, tlala ... [the mother has arrived, therefore hunger ...]

... Andizi kuyigqibezela ke, ngoba iyandoyikisa. Luluphi ulwimi? SisiPedi?
Oo, kulungile! Kodwa ke ithi: Umama ufikile, indlala igwetyiwe. Mandiyibeke
ngolo hlobo. Okanye ndidlule? Kulungile. [... I won’t complete it, because
it scares me. Which language is it? Sepedi? OK! But it actually means that
the mother has arrived, therefore hunger has been dealt with. Let me put it
that way. Or should I pass on? OK.]

Regarding the second issue, we are heeding the call for access to no-fee
schools and health care. That is happening with regard to ... izinto
zezibonelelo zabantwana kunye nezinye izibonelelo zikarhulumente, MaMkhize
[... issues like children’s and other social grants, MaMkhize [hon
Rajbally]]. We will definitely pass the information on to the Minister
regarding the other call that you have made.

The last thing I want to say is that I am not sure why Members of
Parliament, particularly of the FF Plus and other smaller parties, are
getting so worried and concerned about things which we have discussed here
in Parliament. The National Sport and Recreation Bill was discussed. We
agreed that the Minister must have powers to intervene. So this nonsense of
“political” ...

... endingaziyo ukuba baluthatha phi na ooDonald Lee ... [... I do not know
where the likes of Donald Lee gets that idea ...]

... really makes one wonder what their agenda is. We have trust and
confidence in the Minister of Sport and Recreation and we believe that,
with the powers that he has been given to make sure that there is
transformation ... [Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Hon Lee has said he is going to
arrest me.

Ek sal jou in ’n donker tronk smyt. [I will throw you into a dark jail.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister!

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Sorry, I have to stop there. We have
confidence in the Minister of Sport and Recreation, and we have confidence
that what the sports administrators will do is to protect that national
asset in our country, which is sport, and make sure that sport is
accessible to all the young people of South Africa. Thank you.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION
Ms C DUDLEY: Chairperson, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that I shall
move:


   That the House-


   (1)      notes with concern the documents in possession of the ACDP that
        raise serious questions with regard to whether the alleged loss of
        millions of rand in the Fidentia debacle could have been prevented,
        had action been taken sooner;


   (2)      acknowledges that, should the funds not be recovered by the
        curators and if there is evidence that the state was in fact
        negligent in not acting sooner, the state may be held liable for
        compensation; and


   (3)      calls on -


        (a)      the Financial Services Board to further report to
              Parliament on the Fidentia matter, and;


        (b)      the Minister of Finance to identify regulatory gaps in
              licensing, monitoring and enforcement in the financial
              sector, and to consider collective action to provide income
              support to the widows and orphans who may be left destitute.


I thank you.

                              WORLD REFUGEE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs M M MAUNYE: Chairperson, on behalf of the Acting Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move without notice:

  That the House –


     1) notes that 20 June is observed by  the  world  community  as  World
        Refugee Day;


     2) further notes that the  Charter  of  the  United  Nations  and  the
        Universal Declaration of Human Rights approved on 10 December  1948
        by the General Assembly have  affirmed  the  principle  that  human
        beings  shall  enjoy  fundamental  rights  and   freedoms   without
        discrimination;



     3) recalls that the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees  is
        charged with the  task  of  supervising  international  conventions
        providing for the protection of refugees;


     4) recognises that the effective co-ordination of  measures  taken  to
        deal with this problem will depend upon the co-operation of  states
        with the High Commissioner;



     5) further recognises that today people do not just  flee  persecution
        and war but also  injustice,  exclusion,  environmental  pressures,
        competition for  scarce  resources  and  all  the  miserable  human
        consequences of dysfunctional states;



     6) believes that the task facing the international community  in  this
        new environment is to find ways to unlock the potential of refugees
        to assist them to regain control over their lives; and


     7) urges the international  community  to  observe  the  international
        instruments aimed at improving the conditions of refugees.

Agreed to.

        EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR AD HOC COMMITTEE TO REPORT TO HOUSE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Chairperson, I move the first motion as it appears
on the Order Paper in the name of the Acting Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, as follows:


   That, with reference to  the  resolution  adopted  by  the  House  on  21
   September  2006  to  establish  an  ad  hoc  committee  to  review  state
   institutions supporting constitutional democracy and the  Public  Service
   Commission  as  listed  in  Chapters  9  and  10  of  the   Constitution,
   respectively, the deadline for the committee to report to  the  House  be
   extended from 30 June to 31 July 2007.

Agreed to.

             AMENDMENT TO SCHEDULE TO JOINT RULES OF PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Chairperson, I move the second motion on the Order
Paper in the name of the Acting Chief Whip of the Majority Party, as
follows:

   That the House, having regard to the resolution adopted by  the  National
   Council of Provinces on 13 June 2007, amends item 8(f) of the Schedule to
   the Joint Rules of Parliament, relating to gifts and hospitality, to read
   as follows:


   8. (f) Gifts and hospitality:
             i) A description and the value and source  of  a  gift  with  a
                value in excess of R1 500;
            ii) a description and the value of gifts from  a  single  source
                which cumulatively  exceed  the  value  of  R1  500  in  any
                calendar year; and


           iii) hospitality intended as a gift in kind.

Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Can we just suspend the House whilst
they are fixing the microphone. You can sit down. You don’t have to go very
far, but you can use the chair for the speakers. We can now proceed because
we have our sound back. We apologise for that. We are still experiencing
sound problems, therefore the House will be suspended for a few minutes.

Business suspended at 16:08 and resumed at 16:14.

            HOUSING CONSUMERS PROTECTION MEASURES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr D C MABENA: Chairperson, hon Ministers present and hon members, as the
portfolio committee collective, we are expressing our unanimous support for
the Housing Consumers Protection Measures Amendment Bill, as amended, in
the absence of our chairperson who unfortunately is out of the country on
official business.
The Bill seeks to rectify certain interpretation and implementation
problems which have been encountered since the promulgation of the Housing
Consumers Protection Measures Act of 1998. The essential issues addressed
in the Bill deal with the clarification of the scope of the application of
the Act; making provision for the enrolment of homes with the National
Homebuilders Registration Council after construction has commenced;
extending the warranty scheme provided for in the Act and an appeal’s
procedure against decisions taken by the National Homebuilders Registration
Council.

During our deliberations we were cordial and acted in the spirit of our
mandate as legislators. The fundamental issue was our objective to ensure
compliance and uniformity in relation to the provisions in the Bill.

The Bill endeavours to provide better protection to all vulnerable groups
exercising their right to housing and/or entering the residential market by
ensuring that the structural quality of houses is of the highest order.

This Bill aims to address one of the key objectives of the comprehensive
plan for the development of human settlements, namely enhancing efficiency
and capacity for housing delivery, as adopted by our government.

Amongst others, the following institutions participated in the process: The
NHBRC, the Banking Association of South Africa, all major banks, the
national Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, the
Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs, provincial and local
governments, the nine provincial housing departments, Salga, the Master
Builders Association, the Building Industry Federation of South Africa and
Cosatu.

As the portfolio committee we are particularly pleased with the spirited
and constructive participation that was displayed by all political parties
in the committee, resulting in the kind of consensus we continue to seek in
discharging our constitutional obligations. It is this direction in which
we hope to advance as we confront the enormous challenges in the delivery
of housing in general in our country. I thank you.

Bill read a second time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! The Bill will be sent to the
National Council of Provinces for concurrence.

We will now take the third to eighth Orders together. These are the reports
of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, as they appear on the Order
Paper.

 CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                          DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

  CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
        NATIONAL ELECTRONIC MEDIA INSTITUTE OF SOUTH AFRICA (NEMISA)

  CONSIDERATION OF NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                         NATIONAL SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

  CONSIDERATION OF TENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                     INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS DIRECTORATE

 CONSIDERATION OF ELEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                         NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY

 CONSIDERATION OF TWELFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                     SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE (SAPS)

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, I present here on
behalf of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, six reports for
adoption by the House. These reports are: The seventh report -the
Department of Agriculture; the eighth report – the National Electronic
Media Institute of South Africa; the ninth report - National Social
Development; the tenth report - the Independent Complaints Directorate; the
eleventh report – the National Development Agency; and the twelfth report -
the SA Police Service.
Scopa remains unhappy with the unsatisfactory levels of financial
administration and management in a great number of our departments and
public entities. There are cross-cutting concerns that are in all these
reports which negate acceptable benchmarks as laid down in law and National
Treasury regulations. These relate to noncompliance with laws and
regulations, inadequate policies and procedures, lack of capacity in terms
of skilled personnel and high vacancy rates and poor management of
departmental assets.

All these problems point to poor leadership of departments and public
entities. They point to a lack of proper and sustained monitoring and
supervision by management and failure to construct an operational
environment with adequate guides and capacity.

We wish to restate and re-emphasise Scopa’s displeasure with officials
whose running of public affairs is negatively affecting service delivery.
To illustrate the above points, comrades and hon members, in the Department
of Agriculture it is noted that there were a lack of policies and
procedures to ensure effective management of revenue resulting in several
deficiencies being identified and also in the Auditor-General being unable
to reliably decide on the accuracy and fair presentation of the majority of
the balances disclosed in the financial statements due to a lack of the
requisite expertise, proper accounting and data management systems.

Scopa recommends in this particular regard, amongst other things, that the
accounting officer reports to Parliament within 60 days of the adoption of
this report on progress made to address these deficiencies.

In relation to the National Electronic Media Institute of South Africa, it
is noted, amongst other things, that Nemisa’s finance staff do not possess
the necessary Generally Recognised Accounting Practice- GRAP - and/or
Generally Accepted Accounting Practice- GAAP knowledge to facilitate
accounting and disclosure as required in terms of GRAP and GAAP.

There are also instances of noncompliance with laws and regulations as well
as with adequate policies and procedure with regard to supply chain
management, Treasury regulations and international accounting standards.
Amongst other things, we also recommend that the accounting officer report
to Parliament within 60 days of the adoption of this report on progress
made to remedy these deficiencies.

If we check the National Social Development, the Independent Complaints
Directorate, the National Development Agency and the SA Police Service, the
same issues play themselves out in varying degrees of severity. This cannot
be acceptable and Parliament in its oversight function is correct in
demanding answers and corrections.

I believe that my colleagues will deal in much more detail with the reports
as presented. I must pronounce my sincerest appreciation and gratitude to
Scopa members for their hard work and attention to detail. This year was
extremely packed but we have, as a collective, risen to the challenge and
we have every intention of raising the bar further, quickening the pace and
adding to the load. Our unity of purpose has made Scopa what it is in
Parliament and in the eyes of the nation. Well done, colleagues. Let’s keep
it up. Forward ever, backwards never.

The same appreciation should go to our hard-working and ever willing
secretariat. They are a valuable asset to the committee and a vital cog in
our work. From our side there will be no let up, no equivocation, no
shirking of responsibility. From our side there are no two ways about it,
state resources must be managed effectively and utilised efficiently to
deliver the services that the people rightly deserve. I thank you.

Mr T R MOFOKENG: Chairperson, I am honoured to stand on this podium to
support my chairperson’s sentiments. Here we are talking about the work of
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts having an impact on service
delivery. I think what should be noted here is that we are not only dealing
with money as it concerns accounts. The work of Scopa is not merely about
ensuring proper financial management in government departments and public
entities.

Scopa oversight is important to service delivery. This should be
emphasised, and that is why we are now interacting with the portfolio
committee to make sure that we follow the President’s January statement.
Scopa seeks to ensure improved service delivery by focusing on those areas
of poor financial management that are compromising the effective use of
millions of rands voted annually in Parliament to the various departments
for them to provide service delivery.

By reviewing more than 260 annual reports every year and by holding public
hearings nearly every week that Parliament is in session, Scopa examines
the financial management performance of departments and entities.

By examining the following key elements of effective financial management
we can assess the ability of departments to manage their finances and
conclude whether they are at an adequate enough level of financial
management to provide a proper environment for effective delivery. The
elements we look pertain to proper control. Without proper control funds
and other assets are not protected or resources properly controlled;
without control there is no certainty that programmes, as departmental
objectives, will be achieved or be sustainable.

Nearly every report of Scopa over the past few years has made
recommendations about the improvement of internal controls and I am glad to
tell you the reports of the Auditor–General indicate that government
departments have been showing steady progress in establishing proper
controls.

Scopa also examines the quality of financial management information, in
other words whether management information shows any availability, is
reliable and is used by departments to get the best out of their resources.
Without good management information the director–general is like a blind
man. It would be very difficult to make government more businesslike if
stronger financial information is not well integrated into day-to-day
management. Progress has also been made in this area, but Scopa will keep
monitoring it.

The last financial management focus area that Scopa examines is strategic
planning and how it is linked to resources. Setting strategic targets as
objectives and ensuring that these are achieved enables departments to
provide the service delivery they have been established for. Scopa has
found that a high number of strategic plans exist but that they are not
always sufficiently linked to resources. Strategic planning also goes hand-
in-hand with proper budgeting.

Reporting to Parliament on performance will become more and more important
as Parliament improves its oversight on service delivery performance and we
shall make it an order of the day.

The annual report promises to become the main accountability mechanism in
the hands of the legislature. Scopa, therefore, seeks to ensure the
improvement of financial management systems that will enable government to
provide a quality public service.

Consequently, I want to state that we would not be effective without the
assistance of an independent Auditor-General and welcome the improved legal
framework established by the Public Audit Act that enables the Auditor-
General to do his or her work even better.

As stated previously, the work of Scopa - I want to stress that - the work
of Scopa is not merely about financial savings but about ensuring improved
service delivery. This is critical because in the private sector bad
service results in more business for competitors or market failure. In the
Public Service, however, there is simply no alternative.

I am told that Scopa members have a poor reputation with senior public
servants as we are seen as too aggressive. I am glad to say that it is not
said that the ANC or the opposition is singled out but that we are all
tarred with the same brush. That is true. It is a true reflection because
as Scopa we generally work as a team to ensure proper use of the limited
public funds.

What concerns me is that accounting officers seem to fail to realise that
we are questioning them about audit reports which reflect weaknesses and
sometimes incompetence or mismanagement which they, as the accounting
officers, are responsible and accountable for.

Scopa produces reports that are objective, enabling evidence-based
judgements on the performance of government functions. Scopa is about
agreeing on measures to improve future performance, not about hauling
persons in front of it merely to answer for what has been done or not done.

Issues raised by the Auditor-General during the 2006-07 financial year on
the Department of Agriculture, National Social Development the SA Police
Service and the National Development Agency, were as follows: With regard
to the Department of Agriculture, in the 2005-06 financial year, the
department received an unqualified opinion - you must really understand
that was wonderful - however, there were a number of emphases of matter.
Even if that documentation or that statement is unqualified, matters will
be emphasised where we find mismanagement.

They were raised by the Auditor-General and on that basis Scopa decided to
call the department to account for some of those issues. Amongst other
issues that were raised by the Auditor-General were: Lack of policies and
procedure to ensure effective management of revenue and insufficient
control over phytosanitary certificates – which are being cancelled by
export companies.

Secondly, reconciliation for revenue deposited against certificates and
licence issues was not done throughout the year. This was due to an
inadequate database of import and export licences and certificates and
inadequate issue registers being kept and resulted in the collection of
revenue not being properly monitored and controlled.

In the previous two years, the financial statements of the Department of
Agriculture were unqualified and there was also emphasis of matter on fixed
assets during 2004-05.

Coming to the national Department of Social Development, the department
received an unqualified audit report with matters of emphasis in the 2005-
06 financial year. Issues that were emphasised related to the Division of
Revenue Act of 2005 and noncompliance with the Non-Profit Organisation Act
of 1997 - that Act is Act 71. Other issues raised centred on the lack of
procedure and mechanisms to safeguard records.

Thirdly, coming to the National Development Agency, a qualified audit
opinion was issued to the National Development Agency in the 2005-06
financial year. The following were issues that led to the qualification:
Misappropriation of funds, poor control over NDA projects and funds
committed to projects could not be substantiated.

Fourthly, coming to the Independent Complaints Directorate, it received an
audit disclaimer and now it has become worse. According to the transactions
of the accounts, if one has passed the qualification one gets to the
disclaimer then to the emphasis of matter, then this proves that one’s
books are not in order, they are in tatters. This is what is shown in the
ICD in the 2005-06 financial year.

Amongst other matters that were raised by the Auditor-General in the year
under review was noncompliance. If, as an accounting officer, you show
noncompliance that means that you do not really worry about Treasury
regulations and the Public Finance Management Act. [Time expired.] Thank
you very much.

Mr E W TRENT: Chairperson, It’s very quiet here this afternoon but of
course this is a very dignified debate. I am going to approach it from a
slightly different angle to my two former colleagues. First of all, let me
say that we are discussing only six reports this afternoon. All six of them
are as a result of the public hearings and I am going to come back to
those.

Two of the reports relate directly or indirectly to safety and security,
two relate to social development and the National Development Agency, which
assesses projects aimed at reducing poverty, and the remaining two reports
deal with very diverse issues such as agriculture and the electronic media.

I am sure all hon members have read these reports diligently and also read
the Auditors-General reports. I am not going to bore you with telling you
how many emphasis of matter there were and how many disclaimers and so on.
That is important but I would like to do it slightly differently.

I am going to talk more about what we heard from the people, from the likes
of Mr Selebi and others, what they actually told us and then we can come
back and assess in a couple of months’ time what he has done.

I am going to just share with you the responses of the Independent
Complaints Directorate, the SA Police Service and then make a few comments
on auditing of performance information, which was dealt with briefly by Mr
Mofokeng.

The ICD must ensure that the public is protected from police excesses and
that abuse, corruption and fraud committed by SAPS members is dealt with
swiftly.

While we acknowledge that the job of the police is stressful and the public
must feel assured that they are protected against the actions of that small
minority of policemen and women who abuse their authority - that we accept
- in order to do this we need the ICD. The ICD is underresourced in terms
of severe staff shortages, as well as the inability to pay salaries at the
level of other departments. As of January 2007, the ICD was 305 members
short. This is based on a 535 members’ requirement for its operations. That
is the situation that you find in the ICD.

Let me tell you what they say, and I am going to quote from their
documents. One of the challenges is to get skilled investigators and people
who are supposed to investigate misdemeanours by the police. Remember the
police are trained investigators themselves. You need somebody that is
really skilled to be able to catch an offender. You are talking about
people who understand what it is to tamper with the evidence at a crime
scene, while you are there to train persons to be effective investigators.
This takes a minimum of two years. What happens is that you need highly
qualified investigators, but the minute they are qualified they are poached
back by the SAPS. Therefore, they have this turnover of staff. They are
also hopelessly underfunded.

I am going to throw out something and I am really glad that hon Smuts is
here because I don’t see anybody from the other side. I wonder whether we
should not seriously consider converting the ICD into a Chapter 9
Institution so that they are truly independent and their staff does not
fall under the Public Service. Then they could, perhaps, attract the
quality of people that we need in order for them to deliver on their
mandate. I just put that there for debate and consideration.

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts has recommended that the
accounting officer must ensure that there is continuous engagement with
Treasury and the Department of the Public Service and Administration. They
really need to engage in order to get more money in the meantime so that
they can actually deliver on their mandate.

I want to move from the watchdog to the watched. We have had a very robust
and frank interaction with the Commissioner and he gave us certain
assurances and that he takes note and responds to the ANC’s advice. I want
to give you some of these assurances because I want you to note that he is
now at level two. He has all risk management, and all assistance in place
and now has to manage them properly and we have to deal with him very
briefly in terms of vehicle management, which is a very important matter,
firearm control and case dockets. If I have time I will go onto the
forensic audit.

However, let me start off with vehicle management. Mr Selebi assured us
that he has enough vehicles. He said he has 35 000 vehicles and 120 000
police officers on duty. They work for three shifts, 40 000 for eight
hours. He said he has more than enough vehicles and there should never be
detectives and police that don’t have vehicles. Therefore, when you phone
the police station next time and ask them to send somebody out, if they say
that they don’t have a vehicle then you must tell them that you know that
Mr Selebi said they have vehicles. I think we need to just take note of
that.

He also said – and this is very positive and very important – that they
were going to put tracking devices into all the vehicles and this would be
starting in April, which is two months ago, and that they would be able to
track and see exactly where they are. That is wonderful. Now we have to
look for the New Year’s Audit Report to see whether these things have been
done.

In respect of firearm control of the police, he told me that most police
stations now have safes, and that they have circulated and trained the
people in terms of the procedures that have to be followed when they hand
in firearms.

The station commanders who carry the responsibility for these inspections
are going to be prosecuted if they do not comply with these regulations,
which is also good news. I am very happy that Mr Selebi is taking notice of
the things that have been raised by the Auditor-General and, I am sure, by
Scopa.

With regard to case dockets, he said that crime administration has improved
to the point that a docket is now issued every 21 days. Dockets are now put
electronically into a computer so that there is always a copy, so that they
cannot get lost. So, he does not believe that they are sold, but anyway he
says they do get lost.

He also told us that they are training 2 000 staff members to administer
the whole crime detection system. In other words, to see to it that the
workload of detectives is evenly placed and that when cases that are being
investigated have been withdrawn, they know about them. So, they hope that
will increase the efficiency of the SAPS and the way that detectives are
deployed and used. We welcome all this.

The challenge now is: is he going to deliver on those promises? That is
where Scopa must now do its work. We must now start to follow up and find
out whether Mr Selebi is going to deliver or not.

I would like to conclude by saying that this whole question of performance
information is very critical. Mr Selebi says that Cabinet will not allow
him to give the Auditor-General the crime statistics before they have had a
look at them. He is not going to deal with ad hoc things. He wants a law to
make sure that he does it.

I just want to tell Mr Selebi that the Treasury regulations actually force
him to comply with that and that he must give his statistics audit because
if statistics are not audited, who knows whether they are correct or
incorrect. [Time expired.] Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, I will stand here now to make up for the other
time when I did not stand up, more particularly when you entered on a
previous occasion. So, I hope we are forgiven for that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): You definitely are.

Mr H J BEKKER: Thank you, Chairperson. I am not going to dwell on what the
previous speakers have said. It is a fairly conclusive report and all the
members are absolutely in full agreement with that.

This is one of the fantastic things about Scopa. I think you have a
dedicated group of people here working towards that and much of the credit
must go to our Chairperson. I think he has achieved quite a lot by bringing
a group which is quite versatile, with different opinions and I can safely
say from the opposition benches that we are working together as a dedicated
team. Therefore, this is part of the success of Scopa as it is at the
moment.

The Scopa reports on the Department of Agriculture, National Electronic
Media Institute, National Social Development, Independent Complaints
Directorate, National Development Agency and SA Police Service, yet again,
bring into sharp contrast and focus the inability of many state
institutions to comply fully with public finance laws and regulations.

The Public Finance Management Act was created specifically to improve state
financial administration, but now, some nine years after its creation, the
Act is still not being properly implemented and is perhaps – I am saying
perhaps – not really taken seriously by reporting and accounting officers.

By way of example, Scopa reports also highlighted lack of proper internal
controls, inappropriate accounting transactions, lack of performance and
weaknesses in financial administration.

I am the very first person to admit that the previous Auditor-General, as
well as the present one, have given the assurance that the limit is going
to be lifted every year for the different departments. This is how we see
that things are going to happen in future.

Reporting and accounting officers will simply have to know that the easy
days are gone and that there will be much greater emphasis on these
aspects. Forgive me for not repeating what the other people have said and
that we rather dwell on this particular aspect with the glaring weaknesses
that have been identified by the Auditor-General with regard to these
specific items.

With this in mind, I just want to say that the IFP supports these reports
and that we will support them and vote for them if it is deemed necessary.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon members, the Auditor-General has
identified serious deficiencies in the management of the Department of
Agriculture as well as major procedural gaps with regard to the record-
keeping for the agriculture debt account. This situation creates the
possibility for fraudulent activities and effectively undermines any effort
at proper management of these financial matters. Consequently, the
committee has recommended that the accounting officer pay specific
attention to these issues and report back on progress within 60 days of the
adoption of this report.

With regard to Nemisa, the finance staff lacks the basic accounting skills
associated with the Generally Accepted Municipal Accounting Practice and
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. There are also concomitant gaps
in governance arrangements that lead to non-compliance with laws and
regulations. This can be ascribed to blatant negligence by the department.

As far as the Department of Social Development is concerned, the year that
ended in March 2006 yielded an unqualified opinion from the Auditor-
General. However, it is disconcerting that 90% of the R54 billion in
conditional grants transferred to provinces were not spent as required.
This has a direct impact on poverty alleviation.

There are also questions surrounding financing policy for nonprofit
organisations, the safekeeping of records as well as control weaknesses in
the social security pension system. The latter is particularly concerning
since these are high-risk weaknesses, according to the Auditor-General.
The ICD seems to be a continuous source of management and noncompliance
issues. In terms of both administration and policy management, it is
uncertain whether the ICD is actually meeting its basic mandates or not.
Drastic action is required here.

The Auditor-General has reported that the National Development Agency has
been the victim of a significant misappropriation of funds, to the tune of
R8,77 million, in the year ended March 2006. Perpetrators have been
identified and a criminal case has been laid. However, the committee
recommends that the accounting officer ensures that the Asset Forfeiture
Unit should be involved to recover the taxpayers’ funds and also pursue
disciplinary action against all officials implicated. As with the
aforementioned case, the lack of proper controls is a cause for concern as
it directly affects poverty eradication.

The SAPS received an unqualified audit opinion from the Auditor-General but
certain concerns remain. The inadequate control and monitoring of vehicles
and firearms in the SAPS are not new problems. One would think that SAPS
management has had ample time to resolve these problems.

With regard to vehicles, it means that emergencies cannot be attended to
timeously whilst the lack of control over firearms is the height of irony
for the authority that is responsible for enforcing the Firearms Control
Act. There are also concerns regarding the supply chain management as well
as the dockets and case administration system.

The UDM supports the recommendations of each of the Scopa reports tabled
here and urges the responsible accounting officers to urgently address the
concerns raised and report back to Parliament speedily. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr T J BONHOMME: Hon Chairperson, hon members of the House, today I would
like to remind the House that Scopa does not review the financial
management performance of departments and entities in order to determine
compliance with the framework that Parliament has put in place, but carries
out all this vigorous scrutiny because there is a relationship, a link,
between service delivery and sound financial management.

In the rigorous assessment of the financial administration in the public
sector, Scopa categorises the annual report into A, B and C. In C are the
reports that Scopa is generally satisfied with so there is no need to call
the department or its entities to a hearing.

Today, Scopa is tabling in the House the category A reports where
departments and their entities were called into a hearing. Scopa would like
the House to note that it is far from being satisfied with the general
position regarding public sector finance management, especially taking into
accounts that some of these departments appear before the committee each
and every year.

If one considers the key elements of effective financial management, one
can assess the ability of a department to manage its finances and therefore
its ability to deliver on its mandate on a daily basis. We are able to
conclude whether the department is at the elementary level of financial
management or has progressed into stronger effective financial management
and resources utilisation. The key element of financial management is a
proper control environment.

Without proper controls and associated practices, there will a lack of
sustainable practices of financial management. Assets may not be adequately
protected or integrating their financial and nonfinancial systems,
practices and procedures. The aim is to provide information that can be
used to manage resources and take decisions with caution, and in an
efficient and economical manner.

This information provides a basis for developing performance indicators,
cost and quality measures and monitoring performance, to ensure that the
intended results are being achieved and to demonstrate accountability.

We still come across too many instances where management information is of
poor quality. Then, surprisingly, we also come across instances where it
seems as if the management is not using information that is available.

To ensure that there is progress, we request the accounting officers to
provide Parliament with progress reports on all category A reports and
report back to Scopa within 60 days after tabling the report.

I must say that when I was deployed to Scopa I did not know what I was
going into. But I must say that it was fortunate for me that I was deployed
to Scopa with a dedicated group of people. I must say that our chairperson
was outstanding and our group leaders have been outstanding.

So, I want to thank them for what has rubbed off them onto to me, for the
professional manner in which they deal with things, and for the way they do
so with passion. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, it is disgraceful that a department such as
Agriculture and the IDC receive disclaimer reports from the Auditor-
General. The ACDP, however, wholeheartedly supports the Scopa resolution
that these and other delinquent departments must provide Parliament with
progress reports within 60 days. In the case of this department it is to
ensure that it is properly staffed with qualified employees and that the
necessary systems are implemented to ensure that these departments comply
with benchmark accounting standards.

Last year the SAPS received an unqualified report and the AG highlighted
problems pointed out by previous speakers such as inadequate control over
police vehicles. That was particularly in after-hours situations, which
resulted in vehicles not being available to respond to emergencies. This is
particularly deplorable as the public often complains about the police’s
response time in emergencies. We note from the report that the SAPS is to
provide Scopa with a progress report on implementation of a tracking system
to monitor vehicles.

A further issue that is continually raised is the inadequate control of
firearms resulting in firearms being lost, stolen or robbed from personnel.
Quarterly progress reports on how to provide safe and control systems
should be implemented in this regard.

Our further concern relates to weaknesses identified in criminal
investigations, with the AG reporting inefficient management and control of
investigations and appropriate docket allocation at provincial level.
Clearly, these issues impact upon the police’s ability to effectively
investigate crime and to ensure successful prosecutions.

In response to the question concerning quotas, the answer is unequivocally
that Scopa is watching the SAPS and other departments very carefully. The
ACDP therefore supports Scopa’s recommendations and supports its reports.
We commend hon Themba Godi and Scopa on its extensive and in-depth
engagements with various departments and institutions that received
unfavourable Auditor-General’s report. Thank you.

Mr B E PULE: Chairperson, during the rigorous assessment of financial
administration in government departments and their public entities, it
became very clear that all is not well in certain departments.

Scopa engaged almost all government departments, 90% of whose reports were
either qualified, disclaimed, emphasis of matter and so on. Of course,
Chairperson, I am being very economical with a percentage of these reports.

It was further apparent, to the amazement of Scopa, that more often than
not officials pay themselves performance bonuses when the performance of a
government department leaves much to be desired. The reports under
discussion, that is the 9th to the 12th Reports of the Standing Committee
on Public Accounts, are no exception to this practice. Non-compliance with
the Public Finance Management Act, the Division of Revenue Act, the
Generally Accepted Accounting Practice – GAAP – and Generally Recognised
Accounting Practice – GRAP – are the order of the day in government
departments and entities.

Lack of policies and procedures, purported lack of capacity and skills,
lack of internal control, no IT systems in place, proper keeping of asset
registers and all other governance issues, such as tardiness of accounting
by accounting officers – all these will make one shudder to the very marrow
of one’s bones.

A case in point was the National Development Agency – NDA – where an amount
of R8,7 million was misappropriated during the period of 3 December 2004 to
31 May 2006. Scopa will ensure that this matter is vigorously pursued
through the Asset Forfeiture Unit so that funds are brought back to the
NDA’s account. This money is supposed to be used to alleviate poverty which
is rampant in our society.

Finally, Scopa congratulates all those government departments and entities
that have diligently carried out their mandates to give service to the
people of South Africa. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, South Africa has realised the seriousness of
corruption in our systems and we have seen all departments putting in place
mechanisms to smoke out culprits. We are especially interested in the 11th
Report of Scopa on the National Development Agency of June 2007.
The MF is especially pleased that criminal charges have been laid against
the perpetrators of misappropriated funds in the NDA. We also note that the
management of the faculties of various sectors are easily misguided into
mismanagement and that it is transparency, oversight and accountability
that serve to cater for correction.

With reference to the 12th Report of Scopa, the MF expresses its concern
over the evident mismanagement of vehicles, firearms and supply chain
mismanagement in the SA Police Service. We are pleased to hear that it has
been addressed in certain areas but we also request regular reports to keep
us informed on progress. The MF supports the reports. [Applause.]

Mr D M GUMEDE: Chairperson, hon members, one of the most basic powers of
Parliament is the control of the public purse. No state money may be spent
without Parliament’s approval. No department should spend money without
that approval.

The money voted by Parliament is for particular purposes and according to
specific programmes that are informed by specified strategic objectives.
These funds have to be spent in a specific period, in a specific way and
according to specific rules.

The stewardship of the funds is the competence of the executive. Parliament
is the referee as to how that money is spent. The executive has to deliver
certain goals that derive from political programmes for known deliverables.
Delivery has to be efficient, economical and effective. There has to be
value for money.

The accounting officer is the director-general, who is responsible for
stewardship of all resources, capacities and assets within his or her area
of competence. The National Treasury sets the rules for management of state
resources and Parliament uses these rules, the PFMA, annual reports and
information from different sources, to oversee executive actions.

However, in setting these rules, the pace of transformation in
administration should be in line with improvements in the available
expertise and competence of resources in departments. It is of no use to
change systems where there is no money and there is no one to implement
them.

We have noted that there are a number of non-compliance issues that result
from the fact that sometimes National Treasury raises the bar without
checking the required adjustments of capacities in departments to implement
these changes. A closer liaison between the National Treasury, departments
and the Office of the Auditor-General may assist in managing this matter
better.

For effective oversight, government has to be transparent, accountable and
answerable to the public, largely through Parliament. Sometimes oversight
requires that hearings be held and in this regard it is very important to
have a record of what has been said in a place like Parliament, and quite
often recording equipment is not in optimal working order. This is a matter
of serious concern when resolutions have to be formulated and we find that
there are no transcripts recording accounts of the accounting officers. We
propose that Parliament should update its recording equipment and sound
system and develop back-up systems in all committee rooms.

With regard to government and its entities, funded vacant posts have been a
major problem in a number of departments and this often poses problems in
management, and financial management in particular. There are a number of
reasons that have been advanced for this problem but we believe that if
managed better departments can reduce their vacancies in shorter periods
than is the case at present, especially where we are dealing with skills
that are not scarce.

Allow me, Chairperson, to thank the Office of the Auditor-General for
increasingly expanding the area of performance audits. That is value for
money. This area has made our job much more meaningful, effective and
interesting and indeed has expanded horizons. It has increased transparency
and has exposed issues that otherwise would not have been exposed.

However, serious questions still have to be asked in some areas of
procurement management in a number of departments and entities - non-
compliance with rules and regulations which seem not to be hard to comply
with. From where we sit, when some departments appear before us, it is
inescapable sometimes to find oneself asking whether the type of
stewardship they have is the best available in the market for the salaries
we command. Are some accounting officers exercising due care in their
stewardship of state resources and finances? Although this is predominantly
the position, it is our concern that in a few cases this is not the case.

Together, let us strive for a better South Africa by managing South Africa
better and using its resources better. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.
The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION – PROVINCIAL
       OVERSIGHT VISIT TO SCHOOLS IN NORTH WEST AND LIMPOPO PROVINCES
 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION - CONSIDERATION
 OF ANNUAL REPORT 2005/06 OF THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, DATED 19 SEPTEMBER
                                    2006

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION - VISIT TO
      OUDTSHOORN AS PART OF THE PEOPLE’S ASSEMBLY ON 14 SEPTEMBER 2006

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION - CONFERENCE ON
                TRANSFORMATION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN AFRICA

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION -STUDY TOUR TO
                                  MAURITIUS

Prof S M MAYATULA: Thank you, Chair, and hon members. I must thank my
portfolio committee members for allowing me to present all these
reports. I’m not going to bore you with the details; I will just whet
your appetite so that you read some of these reports.

I’ll start with the reports to the provinces. From 31 July to 4 August, we
had two teams, one visiting Limpopo and another one visiting North West. If
one goes through these reports one can get a real feel as to what is
happening in the schools, because we have reflected on achievements and
even challenges, and we’ve ended up with recommendations.

Those who come from these two provinces, that is, North West and Limpopo,
I’d really recommend to them to read this report that is in the
Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 22 March 2007.

Let me cross over to the second report, which was our visit to Oudtshoorn.
That was during the People’s Assembly. We managed to visit three schools
there in one day. Some of our recommendations have already been
implemented. We were excited by one businessman, who is sponsoring a farm
school.

If I can go back to North West, for example, we appreciated the new model
of farm schools where different farm schools have been brought together and
are run as one school. All the resources have been brought into that
school.

If I take you to the next report, which relates to the annual report of the
department, again there we have referred to some of the issues. I’m not
going to go into that.

We did attend a conference on Transformation of Higher Education. We want
to thank Parliament for allowing us to do that. We got exposure to what the
people out there are saying about our education.

I’ll cross over now to the visit to Mauritius. Mauritius is an interesting
country, it is a small country, and it is an island. It is 50km from one
tip to the other. The education system there is based on the British system
and even their examinations are set in Britain.

What was interesting there is that the education in Mauritius is free from
primary to tertiary, but if you look at the report, you’ll find that it is
also not free. Not free in the sense that, for example, if you go to a
Mauritius University it is free only for A-level students. If you go to
primary schools, you’ll find that they have dual systems; dual systems in
the sense that teachers teach and are paid by the government. But in the
same school, in the afternoon, the teachers are paid by parents. So,
parents are also paying for education in Mauritius.

So, you end up not being sure whether that system is free or not. It is
only Grades 3-5 where teachers are not allowed to teach privately. Let me
end there, Chair.

There was no debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


  That the Reports in Orders No 9 to 11 be adopted and the Reports in orders
  No 12 and 13 be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Provincial Oversight Visit to schools in North  West  and  Limpopo
Provinces accordingly adopted.

Report on Annual Report 2005/06 of the Department  of  Education,  dated  19
September 2006 accordingly adopted.

Report on Visit to Oudtshoorn  as  Part  of  the  People’s  Assembly  on  14
September 2006 accordingly adopted.

Report on  Conference  on  Transformation  of  Higher  Education  in  Africa
accordingly noted.

Report on Study Tour to Mauritius accordingly noted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
        QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF WOMEN – VOTE 1: THE PRESIDENCY

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
          QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF WOMEN - APPROPRIATION BILL

Ms M R MORUTOA: Chairperson and hon members, in support of the report of
Vote No 1 in the Presidency, the Joint Monitoring Committee on the
Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of Women, having considered
the Appropriation Bill and the associated Budget Votes, reports that it has
concluded its deliberations thereon.
This year, as in previous years, the JMC has focused its attention on three
issues: poverty, gender-based violence and gender and development. I am not
going to deliberate so much on the report of the SA Police Service on rape
that shows that by the year 2005-06 a total of 54 926 rapes would be
reported. This gives an average of more than 150 reported rapes per day,
and as you know, some of the reports that we got from the provinces, when
we went there, were quite ridiculous.

Although the economy of the country continued to grow at a robust pace of
4,9% last year, the Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel, noted that more
work needed to be done. Despite this massive growth in the economy,
Statistics SA’s Labour Force Survey of September 2006 found that the female
unemployment rate was 31,7% compared to 22,6% for men.

From the committee’s perspective on the Expanded Public Works Programme, it
is more interested in the innovative social sector of public works
programme activity in the areas of home and community based care. The
Budget Vote is disappointingly reticent about this area of the department’s
work.

The strategic overview acknowledges that the Expanded Public Works
Programme is meant to become the government’s leader in the creation of job
opportunities especially for unemployed women, but states only that the
department has established partnerships with state-owned enterprises and
other spheres of government to scale up expanded public works
interventions. It does not mention partnerships within its own sphere of
government, such as with the Departments of Social Development, Education
and Health, which bear responsibility for the social sector on the Expanded
Public Works Programme.

We need to highlight that the number of programmes under Vote 1 for the
Presidency has decreased from six in 2006-07 to three in 2007-08. This
decrease resulted in less information being made available to Parliament
and the public. The extent of the paper work on this Vote has decreased
from 16 to 13 pages.

The Office on the Status of Women was previously a separate subprogramme
under Programme 5, with R3,77 million for 2006-07 and R3,96 million
projected for the current financial year.

For 2007-08, the Office on the Status of Women falls under Programme 3,
since the office does not have a separate budget line and is thus not seen
as a distinct subprogramme; instead, it is included in the subprogramme
gender, disability and children.

The Vote states that the role of this subprogramme is to work with focal
points in the offices of premiers, mayors and departments to bring certain
issues into the mainstream, including bringing the rights of women,
children and people with disabilities into governance processes.

I’m going to go on to talk about the recommendation that we have, since in
South Africa we have dealt with the eight declarations of Millennium
Development Goals, and I’m also going to talk about the recommendations
that the JMC has made.

One of them is that the Presidency should provide detailed information on
the gender outputs and an indication of outputs that the gender, disability
and children’s unit intends delivering at the non-municipal and district
municipality levels.

The second one is an indication of the activities the gender, disability
and children’s unit can provide to achieve a systematic change in processes
and government operations and a response as to the progress of the gender
manual, the review of gender structures and focal points, and the
implementation of focal points. The JMC appeals to this august House to
adopt this report. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Agb Voorsitter en kollegas, die verslag wat ek vandag
voorlees is ... [Hon Chairperson and colleagues, the report I shall read
out to you today is ...]

... on behalf of hon Janet Semple who cannot be here today. South Africa is
rightly proud of its gender machinery and the structures put in place to
effect gender equality. It is therefore disturbing to note that the number
of programmes under Vote No 1: The Presidency, has decreased from six in
2006-07 to three in 2007-08. This might be to affect greater efficiency,
but it has also resulted in less information being available for scrutiny
by Parliament and the public. The DA would like to know why this has been
done.

For example, the Office on the Status of Women –OSW- was previously a
separate subprogramme under programme five, policy co-ordination. It had an
allocation of, as it was mentioned, R3,77 million for 2006-07 and R3,96
million projected for 2007-08.

The 2006 Vote stated that the role of the subprogramme was to facilitate
the development of a national gender policy framework and to co-ordinate
activities in the areas of gender equity and equality. The Vote included
one three-line sentence on recent outputs of the OSW. It also included some
definite outputs and measures or indicators relating to the development of
gender structures and focal points and an agreed set of implementation
indicators.

In the 2007-08 Vote, the OSW falls under programme three, executive co-
ordination. The office does not have a separate budget line and therefore
cannot be seen as a distinct subprogramme. Instead it is included in the
subprogramme of Gender, Disability and Children – GDC. The role of the
subprogramme is to work with focal points in the offices of premiers,
mayors and departments, and I quote:

  ... to bring certain issues into the mainstream, including bringing the
  rights of women, children and people with disabilities into governance
  processes, co-ordinating GDC activities and overseeing GDC work in
  government.

I apologise for the lengthy quotes from the Joint Management Committee
Report but this illustrates that there is no longer any distinction between
activities in the three key areas, apart from listing the different days
and campaigns which are celebrated. There is no mention of the gender
manual, the review of gender structures and focal points and the
implementation indicators which were commitments in the previous year’s
budget.

Gender, children and disability are all important groups which deserve
individual attention. The JMC does not believe that any purpose is served
by lumping them all together in a single grouping of vulnerable subgroups.
Indeed, it can be argued that women are not primarily vulnerable. All three
groups in the South African context are deserving of individual special
attention and individual special budget programmes that can be measured in
terms of outputs.

Concern was also raised by the JMC with regard to the type of activities
listed under outputs. Special days like National Women’s Day and campaigns
like 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children are
fine for raising awareness, but the OSW and gender focal points need to do
more in respect of systemic change and government operations.

I hope that my colleagues on the JMC will raise issues around gender
mainstreaming in the Appropriation Bill which I do not have time to cover.
The DA supports the adoption of the report. I thank you.

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, the IFP agrees with the committees reports
on the Presidency and the Appropriation Bill and wishes to highlight just a
few of its more important findings.

Firstly, we must echo the committee’s concern at the shortage of crucial
information in this year’s Budget documents. In many instances, we were not
able to compare issues we raised last year with progress and achievement on
them via the documents. We were, of course, able to turn to other sources
of information. But because of time constraints between budgets and annual
reports of departments, this was not always desirable.

We are also concerned about the apparent contradictions between some of the
figures provided to us. For instance, the figures for work opportunities
created by the Extended Public Works Programme differed from those
presented by the Department of Public Works and the Minister of Finance.
The IFP wishes to argue that committees be provided with the most complete
information available and that the information be accurate. The committee
can only execute its mandate properly if this shortcoming is rectified
immediately.

Secondly, the quality of life of women and their status will only improve
if the Justice department makes a concerted effort on maintenance and
domestic violence. Again, we have to raise concern that these two
fundamental issues are not covered more fully in the department’s budget.
We are aware of some successes on these issues but what we really need to
know is what targets and outcomes have been set by the department for the
financial year so that we can measure progress next year. I thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms B T NGCOBO: Hon Speaker and hon members, I am going to be addressing the
area of gender mainstreaming. We are all aware that gender mainstreaming is
a process and it needs a budget as well. In simple terms, gender
mainstreaming refers to incorporating equal opportunities for men and women
into all legislation, policies and programmes in any area and at all
levels. It is a strategy for making the concerns of men and women an
integral part of design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
programmes in all political, economic and societal spheres so that women
and men benefit.

Gender mainstreaming involves mobilising all general policies and measures
specifically for the purpose of achieving gender equality by openly and
actively taking into account, at planning stages, their possible effects on
respective situations of men and women, and here the bias is on women.
While recognising the identities of men and women, there must be some
willingness to establish a balanced distribution of responsibilities
between both.

The promotion of equality must not be confused with the simple objective of
balancing statistics. It is a promotion for long-lasting changes in roles,
institutional practices, the organisation of work and time, personal
development and independence. But it also concerns men and the whole of
society in which it can encourage progress and be a token for a democracy
and diversity.

Portfolio committees of this Parliament have a major role to play in
interrogating those institutions reporting to them on the visibility of
women in their structures and the roles women play, the budget that they
have put in place to ensure that women do get to higher positions,
particularly in domains that have been the realm of men, such as science
and technology, minerals and energy and others. Now is the time to begin to
change gear and begin seriously to address the issues of masculinity as
part of the gender discourse and we have to begin to empower men as they
have also been chained in gender stereotypes, myths and patriarchy.

Let’s work with progressive men so that we are able to change the gender
stereotypes. Let’s empower our children from birth to kindergarten and
beyond. Morrell and Ritcher published a study in 2005 through the eyes of
children on the way they perceived their fathers. There were varying
responses – the good, the bad and the ugly.

We achieved democracy through the efforts of our forebears. Gender
mainstreaming will be a norm and a way of life for our children and
grandchildren. Vote No 1 needs to look into the area of ensuring that
gender mainstreaming becomes a reality so that women of South Africa really
enjoy the democracy that we have. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, with poverty alleviation and transformation
at the top of the South African agenda, we would expect prioritising the
needs and addressing challenges faced by vulnerable groups to be a primary
focus. Programme 3 of the Presidency Budget Vote shows that the Office on
the Status of Women, Children and Disabled Persons received the second
smallest allocation and no real increase.

Even though it is not a service-delivery department, the MF feels that this
office plays a critical role in co-ordinating, monitoring and evaluating
the mainstreaming of gender, disability and children’s issues concerning
policies and programmes of government departments.

It has been established that 100 million children globally and
approximately 170 000 South African children are inducted into child labour
from as young as five years. In all of this, the Office on the Status of
Women, Children and Disabled Persons has a pivotal role to play.

In view of the second report and with specific reference to the horrific
statistics on rape in South Africa, the MF calls for the definition of rape
to include males as victims of rape. From this, we may gather the important
role oversight plays in the reality of South Africa. The MF supports both
the reports of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
Life and Status of Women. I thank you, Madam.

Mr R D PIETERSE: Voorsitter, dankie dat ek ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek wil
dankie sê dat ek toegelaat word om aan hierdie gespreksdebat te kan
deelneem. [Chairperson, thank you that I ... [Interjections.] I want to say
thank you for the fact that I am being allowed the opportunity to
participate in this debate.]

Hon Speaker, as I rise in support of this report, please allow me to raise
two matters of concern from this report. Men, old and young, and their
location in the area covered by this report, are seen and accepted
generally as heads of households. Generally, we are also accepted as
leaders wherever we find ourselves.

As men, we are accepted as heads of households even when we are not the
breadwinners or not working at all. We are accepted as leaders of various
forums, yet our conduct and behaviour is contrary to what is generally
expected of us. Too often we are seen, and sometimes rightfully so, as
molesters, killers, rapists, murderers, and I can go on and on.

We as men are and must be the glue that keeps the families together,
protects them, loves them and cares for them. We are quiet, very quiet, hon
Danny Oliphant, when other men do these wrong things, very often in our
presence or sometimes when these things are reported to us. I think it is
about time that we stand up and say, “not in my name”. I think it is about
time that men who are not guilty of such things do something about that.

We need to report these matters to the relevant authorities and testify
when these matters come to court. We need to expose the few cruel men who
do these wrong things in our name. We need to bridge the gap. Mr Lee, we
need to bridge this political gap that might exist between us and agree
that, regarding matters of this nature, politics must not and will not
divide us.

Secondly and lastly, I just want to quickly touch on the role of the media.
Very often the media portrays us as people who do not have all our senses.
They are led by tabloids. On a daily basis, one can particularly see that
the print media covers death and destruction. Very often, in the centre of
that are men. What are we doing about that?

I think it is about time, and maybe I should just throw down a challenge
that the month of August, which is regarded as Women’s Month, should see us
good men – that we claim to be – getting together to do something to
protect our wives, mothers, children and daughters. [Interjections.] We
need to say to the media: Stop being just tabloids. Please talk about the
positive things that good men are doing. All of us can do something about
this.

Let me repeat what I said much earlier: Next to every good man is a better
woman. We can do something about this if we stand up now and stand
together. Let’s make sure that this report is not another report that will
gather dust. Those of us who claim to be good men, particularly from
Parliament, can start doing something about it. The ANC supports this
report. I thank you. [Applause.]

The ACTING CHIF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, we move:


  That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT – PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF
                         MAGISTRATE MR I X MASIMINI

Ms F I CHOHAN: Madam Speaker, members, I promise not to be too long, seeing
that our numbers are dwindling at this ghostly hour. This is a report on
the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate I X Masimini.

The portfolio committee, having considered the report which was tabled by
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development in terms of section
13(b), reports to the House as follows. The portfolio committee notes that
Mr Masimini had on 24 November 2006 been convicted on a charge of assault
with intent to do grievous bodily harm. He was also charged for a statement
that he made when he applied for appointment to the regional court Bench.
He failed to disclose his criminal status and circumstances during the
interview by the Magistrates Commission.

The Magistrates Commission has found him guilty on three counts of
misconduct, in the sense that he used foul and/or injudicious language in
court. Accordingly, we recommend that the National Assembly resolves to
confirm the provisional suspension of Mr Masimini in terms of section
13(iii)(c) of the Magistrates Act of 1993. I thank you for your time.
[Applause.]

Question put: That the recommendation of the Committee be adopted, namely
that the provisional suspension from Office of Magistrate Mr I X Masimini
be confirmed.

Question agreed to.

Provisional suspension from Office of Mr Masimini accordingly confirmed.

The ACTING CHIF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, we move:

   That the seventeenth Order stands over.

Agreed to.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
                    - STUDY TOUR TO SASOLBURG AND SECUNDA


  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
                       - STUDY TOUR TO ENGEN REFINERY

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Madam Speaker, hon members, as you know, our country is at
its highest peak of a booming economy in many decades. This has expressed
itself as a big challenge in the acquisition of technical skills and
skilled personnel such as engineers, artisans, boilermakers, fitters,
accountants etc. We are bidding for the 2011 Square Kilometre Array project
alongside Australia in the world shortlist of competitors. That is another
challenge in terms of skills acquisition.

In view of the above-mentioned challenges on skills shortage in the field
of science and technology, our portfolio committee decided to accept an
invitation to pay a study visit to Sasol and Engen. In Sasol we visited the
two plants in Sasolburg and Secunda last year. After we had held
discussions with them and after they had shown us around, we found that
they were also facing this big challenge in terms of artisans.
They said to us that they had had a programme which used to train fitters
and turners but that programme had since dissolved because of a lack of
funding from the side of government. Therefore they said they were
struggling with these skills. They appealed to the committee that, if
possible, something should be done.

After we had visited Sasol we were again invited to Engen and a similar
appeal was presented. Our fact-finding mission resulted therefore in us, in
turn, inviting these two companies to Parliament where we sought to address
the problem in a holistic and systematic fashion.
When we convened in Parliament, Engen had brought along their consulting
company which had done an intensive study on the impact of the skills
shortage regarding the 2010 World Cup and beyond. One of their
recommendations was that a strategy should be established to ensure that
there will be retention of the skills required for 2010 and even beyond
this period.

Secondly, they also recommended that, since there are about 140 big
projects that are aimed at partly meeting the requirements of 2010 but also
partly the requirements of the countries in Southern Africa such as
Mozambique and Botswana etc, they felt that these are 140 projects that are
also going to give rise to some small projects that again will put pressure
on skills acquisition. Therefore they recommended that a strategy must be
established whereby the government will probably prioritise some of these
projects, because they felt that if these matters are not prioritised and
if a brilliant strategy is not adopted, we are going to lose the fruits of
2010 in that we will have to import skills, and such skills are usually
exorbitant in cost.

Also, after a project has been completed those skills are not retained,
they disappear. As a result they felt that one of the strategies that
should be adopted for 2010 and beyond is to retain these skills by trying
to establish some local programmes to have people trained within the
country.

Thirdly, they also came with an idea of a model that the Canadians have
adopted whereby they reorientate those people with skills that are not
socioeconomically required, such as arts or biblical skills. They said that
people with these skills could be reorientated, because it is easy to train
a person who already has a university education and to reorientate that
person into, say, any other field, including the field of science.

They felt that, since the Canadians have done this very successfully
therefore that is probably one of the strategies that we can also apply in
South Africa to address the scarce skills because, within the black
community, we have a number of graduates – many thousands. It’s just that
they were trained in skills that are not very useful in the economy. If
those skills can be reorientated into science we can have a very big pool
of innovation and technology that is lying unused.

It is therefore quite satisfying to highlight at this juncture that the
Department of Science and Technology has developed a 10-year plan which is
currently in the process of being tabled before Cabinet for approval. This
plan incorporates a variety of well thought-out programmes, which include,
amongst others, a well-co-ordinated programme linking up relevant
stakeholders such as the National Research Foundation, universities,
Department of Education, Youth into Science Strategy, just to mention a few
of these – with a view to addressing the technical skills shortage,
especially within the historically disadvantaged South Africans but also
with a view to initiating a science system that is financially viable and
self-sustaining, in other words where science is going to have a direct
impact on commercial business.

Therefore we feel, as the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology,
that addressing the issue of skills and what we shared with these two
companies are very important aspects for South Africa in tackling some of
the problems of 2010 and beyond. I would therefore appeal to this
Parliament and the House to adopt these two reports of the portfolio
committee study tour on Sasol and Engen. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

There was no debate.
The ACTING CHIF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we move:

  That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.
Reports accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT, IN TERMS OF SECTION
  231(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION - PROTOCOL ON POLICY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
     FOR NEPAD (NEW PARTNERSHIP FOR AFRICA’S DEVELOPMENT) ICT BROADBAND
               INFRASTRUCTURE FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Speaker, the Nepad protocol is an international agreement
entered into by various African countries for the construction and
maintenance of the submarine cable for a broadband infrastructure network
in the Eastern and Southern Africa. This is a flagship project under the
African Union with the following primary objectives: To eradicate poverty,
to place countries on a path of sustainable growth and development, to halt
the marginalisation of Africa in the global process, to accelerate the
empowerment of women and to reduce the cost to communicate.

International agreements by their very nature cannot be amended but need to
be ratified as they are. Hence today we request Parliament to approve the
Protocol on Policy and Regulatory Framework for Nepad ICT Broadband
Infrastructure for Eastern and Southern Africa.

The portfolio committee met on Tuesday, 19 June 2007, to deliberate on this
matter and decided, amongst other things, to have a post-ratification
process where affected parties and stakeholders will be invited to make
inputs and assess progress on this matter.

The committee was also mindful of the uncertainty within the industry about
the Nepad cable in particular. The committee also engaged the services of
the parliamentary legal services regarding the matter and we are advised
that the protocol will have a minimal impact on our national legislation,
that is the Electronic Communications Act. To quote Adv Jenkins, “I do not
foresee substantial amendments to the said Act from the plain reading of
the protocol at this stage.”

Seven out of the 13 contracting parties need to ratify the protocol before
it enters into force and South Africa is one of them. We therefore
recommend that Parliament ratifies this protocol. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Thank you very much. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Protocol on Policy and Regulatory Framework for Nepad (New Partnership for
Africa’s Development) ICT Broadband Infrastructure for Eastern and Southern
Africa approved. (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

                   ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE FOR WINTER RECESS

The SPEAKER: Before we conclude the business for the day, I would just like
to say one or two things, hon members, the first of which is that, of
course, we have come to the end of a difficult session. I want to promise
you that when you come back the sound system will be up and running.
[Applause.] Unfortunately, it couldn’t be fixed while we are around; it can
only be fixed when we are gone. They would have enough days that they can
use to work in the Chamber. That’s the first thing I would like to promise
you.

Hon members, regrettably, this weekend some of the hon members will be
going away to accompany one of the hon members who has sat with us for some
years in this House, the hon Prince Zulu. We will be accompanying him to
his final resting place with great sadness. I did know him because many
years ago, when I had a constituency office in Mandeni, I came across him.
The lasting impression I personally have of him is that he was a gentleman.
He indeed was a gentleman. It’s good for a person to be with you and to
leave you with a solid, positive impression like that.

Hon members, many people don’t think so, but you and I know that you work
very hard. [Applause.] Hon members work very hard and I therefore really
wish you well when you go to your families, your home bases, and have a
very well-deserved rest! Thank you very much. [Applause.] That finally
concludes the business for the day and the House is ...

The ACTING CHIF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, just before you
adjourn the House, on behalf of members, I would like to convey the same
wishes to yourself and the other presiding officers. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Acting Chief Whip. The House is adjourned.

The House adjourned at 17:51.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses– to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)     Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 21 June 2007:


         (a)     Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
             77)


         (b)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)


         (c)     Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


         (d)     Municipal Fiscal Powers and Functions Bill [B 9B– 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


         (e)     Pension Funds Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2007 (Reprint)]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Proclamation No R.12 published in Government Gazette No 29921
         dated 1 June 2007: Fixing a date on which section 147(1) of the
         Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 45 of 2003), shall come
         into operation.

    (b)     Government Notice No 467 published in Government Gazette No
         29913 dated 1 June 2007: Definition of “Retirement Annuity Fund”
         in section 1 of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (c)     Government Notice No 472 published in Government Gazette No
         29913 dated 1 June 2007: Proviso to paragraph 9(3) of the Fourth
         Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
    (a)     Proclamation No R.7 published in Government Gazette No 29831
         dated 25 April 2007: Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
         Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
         1996).

    (b)     Proclamation No R.10 published in Government Gazette No 29831
        dated 25 April 2007: Extension of the period of operation of
        sections 51 and 52, in terms of the Criminal Law Amendment Act,
        1997 (Act No 1



