---
title: 'National Assembly - 29 May 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-05-29
---

TUESDAY, 29 MAY 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Deputy Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr J M NGUBENI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the ANC has won seven out of the last 10 by-elections
       without giving up a single seat since December last year;


  (2) also notes that in some cases the ANC acquired more than 80% of the
       vote;


  (3) believes that the resounding successes of the ANC are conclusive
       proof that it is the only party of choice for the majority of South
       Africans;


  (4) congratulates the ANC on its election performance throughout the
       country; and


  (5) recommits the ANC to speed up the fight against poverty, hunger,
       disease and unemployment.

[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the threat by the ANC Deputy Chief Whip to the smaller parties
       in Parliament that they will be punished if they fail to support the
       ANC motion concerning the Speaker;


  (2) further notes that the ANC has already punished the FA for joining
       the DA by reducing their speaking time on Votes;


  (3) believes that Parliament is not a personal fiefdom of the ANC to use
       and abuse as they please;


  (4) expresses its belief that all political parties have an obligation to
       protect the institution of Parliament against the bully-boy tactics
       of the hon Deputy Chief Whip of the ANC and his party; and


  5)  calls on the ANC to retract their threats and to encourage all
       parties to consider the matter on its merits.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay that sugar cane was burnt on several farms in
       Mangethe in KwaZulu-Natal, on 25 May 2001;


  (2) calls on the Police to investigate the possibility of arson, and if
       so to bring the perpetrators to book;


  (3) expresses sympathy with those who have suffered damages;


  (4) notes that there is a pending dispute between the Mangethe and
       neighbouring communities over land;


  (5) further notes that the IFP rejects illegal attempts to occupy land;
       and


  (6) calls on all members of those communities to settle their disputes
       through negotiations.
[Applause.]

Mr G C OOSTHUIZEN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the hon Leon, Leader of the DP, has finally seen the
       wisdom of speeding up the land-reform process, tacitly conceding the
       folly of his party in encouraging resistance to this programme; and


  (2) congratulates the DA for embracing the policies of the ANC, and
       accepting the advice of the ANC to encourage its supporters to
       support the process of land-reform for the benefit of our entire
       nation.

[Applause.]

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the lack of co-operation and co-ordination amongst the
           Departments of Transport, of Trade and Industry and of Public
           Enterprises, concerning the restructuring of public enterprises
           and the recapitalisation of the taxi industry;


       (b)  the ANC Government's lack of understanding of the role of
           transport in sustaining economic growth and eliminating poverty;


       (c)  the Government's failure to deliver on black economic
           empowerment and better safety conditions for taxi passengers;
           and


       (d)  the lack of leadership by the responsible Ministers and back-
           stabbing amongst top Government officials competing for the
           glory of envisaged success; and


  (2) urgently requests the President to rectify the problem and, if
       necessary, to get rid of the said Ministers and their directors-
       general.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock the self-proclaimed success by the Director of
       Public Prosecutions, Bulelani Ngcuka, in the fight against terror in
       the Western Cape;


  (2) acknowledges that Mr Ngcuka cannot claim victory whilst there have
       been 130 gang-related deaths since January this year, of which five
       took place over this weekend; and


  (3) calls on the national Government, the provincial government, the
       Minister of Safety and Security and the Director of Public
       Prosecutions to actively engage in productively fighting gang
       violence in South Africa, and specifically in Cape Town.
Miss J E SOSIBO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent breakthrough of the exposure of a syndicate involved
       in fraudulent transactions worth millions of rands of Government's
       money in the Eastern Cape;


  (2) further notes that six Government employees and a number of business
       people are alleged to be the culprits in this fraud;


  (3) believes that fraud and corruption are anti-social evils which must
       be ruthlessly exposed and eradicated;


  (4) commends the nine members of the police unit involved in this
       investigation; and


  (5) calls on members of the Public Service and the public at large to
       assist the Government and the SAPS to root out corruption wherever it
       rears its ugly head.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes a motion filed by ACDP Councillor Ivan Kirsten in the Cape Town
       Unicity Council for a change to be made to the city's interim
       Integrated Development Plan;


  (2) further notes that he requested that the words, ``the promotion of
       alternative lifestyles'' be replaced with ``the promotion of a family-
       friendly environment'';


  (3) welcomes the ACDP's call for the council to dissociate itself from
       attempts to legitimise prostitution, by opposing the creation of a
       red light district;


  (4) further welcomes the initiative by an alliance of religious leaders
       who have demanded an urgent clampdown on the city's growing
       prostitution and child-sex industry;


  (5) also notes that the social impact of increasing promiscuity and moral
       filth, and the consequent levels of sexual exploitation of women and
       children, is devastating; and


  (6) advises the mayor of Cape Town and his council to heed the call by
       the Christian, Muslim and Jewish communities who demanded an end to
       the promotion of Cape Town as a homosexual sex haven.

[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) believes that -
       (a)  the SA Communication Services is not doing enough to communicate
           Government programmes to ordinary South Africans in an impartial
           and apolitical manner and on time;


       (b)  it has become increasingly difficult to access Government
           information; and


       (c)  the agency is not visible enough in relation to the role it is
           supposed to play; and


  (2) urges the head of the SACS to provide a detailed report to Parliament
       in relation to the agency's activities.

Mr J S MGIDI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that Sars continues to be one of the democratic dispensation's
       success stories with its ever-increasing effectiveness in tax
       collection;
  (2) also notes that during its recent two-month long tax compliance
       campaign Sars collected R183 million from tax evaders;


  (3) commends the tireless efforts of Sars, the Minister of Finance and
       the Treasury to maintain and step up the fight against tax evasion;
       and


  (4) calls on all law-abiding and patriotic citizens to pay their taxes
       timeously.

[Applause.]

Mr D K MALULEKE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that ever since the statement by the European Aeronautic
       Defence and Space Company that it assisted 30 VIPs, including
       politicians, to acquire Mercedes-Benz vehicles, a cloud of suspicion
       has hung over Parliament;


  (2) therefore resolves to call upon any MPs who were assisted in this
       manner to declare the circumstances under which they received these
       vehicles; and


  (3) further insists that the EADS should make a statement naming the
       persons it assisted to acquire vehicles so that the full facts become
       known.

[Interjections.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the coming of the new democratic Government was seen by everyone
           as the beginning of a great transformation in society and the
           economic sector;


       (b)  in respect of fishing and harvesting the resources of the
           oceans, there was great expectation that black citizens would be
           accommodated in a meaningful way;


       (c)  the question of quotas was supposed to have been resolved and
           settled; and


       (d)  those in Sea Fisheries who were found guilty of malpractice in
           court are still in their posts, and that changes did not take
           place as they should have; and


  (2) therefore calls on the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
       to give the matter of quota allocations his most urgent attention so
       that equity can finally be obtained in sea fisheries.

Ms X C MAKASI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Paul Harris award is to be bestowed today on Ma
       Sisulu, who is a South African stalwart and torchbearer, by the
       Rotary Club of Johannesburg;


  (2) further notes that -


       (a)  this award is the Rotary Club's highest international award; and


       (b)  it goes to a person who has served her country with diligence
           and honour; and


  (3) commends the Rotary Club and congratulates Ma Sisulu and wishes her
       and her family well for the future.

[Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock that -


       (a)  the ANC-led Government in the Eastern Cape once again failed to
           protect the children and those dependent on social services due
           to its inability to exercise control over the province's
           finances; and


       (b)  an amount of R45,8 million was stolen from the people of the
           Eastern Cape by 29 officials who were involved in 315 fraudulent
           transactions, while the province's infrastructure is falling
           apart due to a lack of money;


  (2) also notes that, according to Captain Lionel Hughes, the total amount
       stolen could be as high as R450 million; and


  (3) calls on the Government to -


       (a)  eradicate crime and corruption amongst Government employees, as
           promised by the Minister for the Public Service and
           Administration; and


       (b)  set up a special task team to investigate the matter and to deal
           with the perpetrators as a matter of urgency.

Mr J T MASEKA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the comments by the National Director of Public
       Prosecutions, Bulelani Ngcuka, yesterday to the Portfolio Committee
       on Justice and Constitutional Development;


  (2) further notes that it is a shame that Mr Ngcuka would report to
       Parliament on aspects of the arms deal investigation whilst the
       Standing Committee on Public Accounts has not been informed on
       progress with the investigation;


  (3) expresses its concern that Mr Ngcuka commented that some of the
       allegations of corruption in the deal had been found to be
       ``rubbish''; and
  (4) believes that such comments indicate prejudgement of the outcome of
       the investigation before it has been finalised, and would seem to
       close down certain avenues of investigation while important evidence
       may still surface.

Mr M S MANIE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that South Africa is hosting a Conference on the International
       Intergovernmental Consultative Group on Anti-Doping in sport as well
       as an executive meeting of the World Anti-Doping Agency this week;


  (2) acknowledges the significance of these two meetings in the campaign
       to combat the abuse of illegal performance-enhancing drugs in sport;
       and


  (3) recognises the presence of the international delegates to both
       meetings in this House today and wishes them success in their
       deliberations.
                               ABUSE OF WOMEN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the shockingly high levels of abuse of women by their partners,
       as highlighted in a recent study by the Medical Research Council's
       gender and health group;


  (2) further notes that the main findings of the report were that
       emotional, financial and physical abuse are common features of
       relationships and that many women have been raped by their partners;


  (3) condemns the violence and abuse perpetrated by men against their
       partners;


  (4) commits itself to fighting the abuse of women through whatever means
       are available to it; and


  (5) calls on all members of the House to make the eradication of abuse a
       priority in their constituency work.

Agreed to.

                               NAZARETH HOUSE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms C DUDLEY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) commends Nazareth House for the wonderful work it has been doing by
       caring for indigent elderly people and orphans since 1880, while
       noting that the first HIV-positive baby arrived at Nazareth House in
       1992 and today it cares for 47 Aids orphans, a number that will soon
       increase to 62;


  (2) notes that the children at the house have all been abandoned by their
       parents and were placed there by the courts;
  (3) notes that many of the children are disabled and have other problems
       such as foetal alcohol syndrome;


  (4) congratulates Nazareth House and members of the Harare community on
       the jointly planned project that will open in Khayelitsha in July;


  (5) acknowledges that the Lizo Nobanda Daycare Centre for HIV-positive
       children is an attempt to stem the tide of abandoned babies by caring
       for such children so that their mothers can work and by offering home-
       based care for mothers and grandmothers who look after infected
       children; and


  (6) further acknowledges, with approval and gratitude, that Nazareth
       House intends opening a hospice facility for adults with HIV/Aids to
       be run in conjunction with its care of the frail elderly, thereby
       relieving the burden on state hospitals and existing hospice
       facilities.

Agreed to.
                      WELCOMING OF VISITORS IN GALLERY

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, today we
recognise in the visitors gallery a great many of our sporting athletes who
represent our country. We may even have a number of Sports Ministers from
different countries, who are here. We would like to welcome all of them to
the National Assembly. [Applause.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 18 - Sport and Recreation South Africa

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Mr Chairperson, hon members, it is
indeed an honour to address this august House in this my second budget
speech as Minister of Sport and Recreation. Much has happened over the past
year, and it is hard to believe that 12 months have already passed since I
addressed hon members from this podium.

Allow me, first of all, to deviate from my core business here this
afternoon by drawing hon members' attention to the presence in the House of
several of my colleagues from different countries, along with their senior
officials and other dignitaries, who are in South Africa to attend the
meetings of the International Intergovernmental Consultative Group on Anti-
Doping in Sport and the World Anti-Doping Agency. I would like to welcome
them warmly to our country and to Parliament this afternoon.

We are proud to host these meetings and trust that their brief sojourn in
South Africa will be enjoyable and fruitful, and that they will return home
as good ambassadors for our wonderful country. I also trust that the work
that they will be doing here will go a long way to rid sport of one of the
greatest threats that faces its continued existence in its present form. Of
course, we cannot allow doping to prevail, for humankind will be robbed of
one of its greatest assets, sport, should we not succeed in combating this
evil.

I would also like to welcome to Parliament chief executive officers,
presidents of national and provincial sports federations, captains of teams
and individual sportspersons who are in the gallery this afternoon. I am
happy to see that they are interested in witnessing, first-hand, how we are
fighting their cause in Government.

My address here today will relate primarily to sport's contribution to the
policy thrust identified by the President during his speech at the opening
of Parliament in February this year, and especially in his reference to
``building a nation united in action for change''. In this regard I shall
be focusing on the role of sport and recreation in addressing this
objective, for I believe that we are ideally located to play a significant
part in this context.

I am sure that nobody needs to be reminded of the potential role of sport
in nation-building. Indeed, we often lament the lost chances of the 1995
Rugby World Cup in helping to cement our fledgling democracy. I would want
to believe that we have made sufficient progress since then to harness
sport's full potential in that regard. The fact that the rugby test on 16
June 2001 between the Springboks and the French National Team at Ellis Park
will constitute part of the Youth Day celebrations, is a clear testimony
that we have made significant progress toward unity and, indeed, toward
transformation.

Safa will also host a match in Durban on 17 June 2001 as part of the Youth
Day celebrations, and the players will be visiting Umlazi as part of the
event. I would like to congratulate the presidents and executives of the
Sarfu and Safu, on their commitment to Youth Day, and I trust that the
rugby and soccer-loving public will buy into that positive development.

I have no illusions that if sport and recreation can serve as a medium for
change, it can just as easily serve to maintain the status quo. Allow me to
say unequivocally, therefore, that I shall be uncompromising in the coming
year to ensure that sport serves as an agent of change in our country. I
shall challenge any sports federation that undermines these efforts,
relentlessly. Hon members will recall that at one stage sport was the
leading protagonist for change in this country. I am sorry to say that we
have lost that advantage and would like to give notice that I am committed
to turning that trend around.

During the course of 2000 several of the major sports federations set
targets for achieving representivity in their teams. I shall be examining
their performances in the near future. New targets will have to be set to
ensure that we proceed progressively and rapidly towards our goal of total
representivity in line with the demographics of the country, an objective
to which I am committed. I shall be engaging all the national federations
shortly, with a view to measuring their performances and extracting from
them new commitments for the year ahead.

Moreover, I shall not only be focusing on the major federations as I have
done up till now. I shall also be engaging the smaller ones with a view to
setting similar targets to which I shall hold them accountable and use any
means at my disposal to ensure that they comply.

Transformation in sport involves more than just the attainment of unity - I
think that we have now passed that stage of unity. It involves a paradigm
shift in which nonracialism, democracy and representivity become
fundamental principles that inform practice. I will no longer tolerate a
situation in which conformity to only the minimum representivity conditions
becomes the norm. The practice of replacing a black player in a team by
another black player to meet these minimum criteria cannot be allowed to
continue as standard practice. A relative team can comprise more than three
black players even though we insist on this number as a minimum at the
moment.

The recent Super 12 series provided clear proof of the depth of black
talent in rugby circles. Any number of black players can qualify for a
Springbok team, and I wish to laud, first of all, Rudolf Strawley for
including three black players at all times when he was playing the Super
12. [Applause.] I also wish to laud Harry Viljoen for having included seven
blacks in the Springbok training camp. I trust that this will translate
into a Springbok team that will see similar levels of representivity.
[Applause.] Players of the calibre of Deon Kayser, Adrian Jacobs, Ricardo
Laubscher and Wiley Human must surely be given opportunities now. I am
impressed with Sarfu's Vision 2003 document, and will monitor their
progress toward actualising the objectives set therein.

I want to issue a stern warning as well against the practice in certain
federations - and they know who they are - of using the principle of
democracy simplistically to exclude blacks from positions in their
management structures. Democracy in the South African sports context is
more than just a simple numbers game. It is obvious that in terms of
membership and number of clubs, white clubs will still dominate. That
relates to our past history. When numbers are used to vote predominantly
white executive committees into power, we have lost the spirit, not only of
transformation in South Africa, but also of reconciliation and nonracism.
It is a facade that I will challenge vigorously.

As I mentioned, I shall be hosting a conference on transformation in sport
later this year and I will spell out my intentions in this regard in that
forum. I gave notice of this at the recent General Assembly of the Sports
Commission, which is the parliament of South African sport, and dare I say
that I received large-scale support for that initiative. My department will
also host a colloquium at the World Anti-Racism Conference later this year
in Durban, in which the question of racism in sport will receive
prominence.

We are hoping to involve some of the world's leading protagonists of
nonracism in sport, and our programme will feature a soccer match between a
European under-23 team and a South African under-23 team under the banner
of ``red-carding racism in sport''. I trust that I will enjoy the support
of the members. So we will red-card racism and red-card the members to my
left-hand side.

I have recently appointed a ministerial task team to advise me on ways and
means to improve the performances of our athletes and teams in
international sports competitions. I am convinced that we can better our
performances if we pool our scarce resources to prepare our athletes for
participation in international competitions.

It makes no sense to me to have separate structures preparing the same
athletes that participate in different international competitions. Such a
practice, while being economically unsound, serves only to sow confusion
amongst our athletes. We can ill-afford the luxury of this level of
fragmentation.

I am encouraged by the degree of consensus that has emerged in the
preliminary report of the task team against such fragmentation. This bodes
well for the preparation of our sports teams in future. I look forward to
receiving the final report of the task team.

In this context I would like to applaud the efforts of Dr Joe Phaahla and
the members of the task team for the sterling work that they are doing.
Their initial reflections on how to divide the scarce pool of resources
available for sport and recreation are encouraging indeed. I can only
concur that Government and the private sector will have to work together if
we are going to make any headway in international sport. Moreover, we will
have to be sober in considering the manner in which we divide the
relatively small resource pool between the many potential claimants for
support.

It is very unrealistic to give specific or priority funding for high
performance to all the national federations. It is a recipe for mediocrity.
We will have to prioritise and decide on supporting, more substantially,
those sports that have a reasonable chance of bringing glory and honour to
South Africa in the international arenas. I am not saying that we should
not fund the other sports. Such a dispensation will fly in the face of my
efforts of getting more people to participate in wholesome physical
activity.

I am referring, rather, to our efforts to achieve success in high-
performance sports. With regard to our efforts to achieve success in these
sports, we will have to set criteria for accessing resources in this
category - factors such as the profile of the sport within South Africa and
abroad; its strategic importance to us as a country; our own performance in
the sport internationally; the success of our disadvantaged people, ie
women, disadvantaged groups and rural communities; and the activities that
the sport concerned take forward.

While I am convinced that the proposal of the task team will go a long way
to improving the competitiveness of our sports teams, I would also like to
appeal to the South African public to be realistic in their expectations,
for we can never successfully challenge other countries whose funding in
sport and recreation outstrips ours by far.

Sports and Recreation South Africa and the sports committee have been hard
at work revising our funding policy, the major changes of which relate to
the introduction of an outcomes and performance-based approach, as opposed
to a compliance one. This is, clearly, in line with the direction which
Government has taken in respect of resource allocation.

Allow me to express concern about the slow rate of progress in promoting a
more equitable dispensation for women in sport in our country. Despite the
efforts by the chairperson of the portfolio committee, women politicians in
the provinces and the technical intergovernmental committee on sport to
address this problem, hardly any headway has been made in addressing this
very urgent matter.

For me changes in this crucial sphere must be prioritised, and I shall be
focusing attention on this matter during this financial year. I appeal to
all role-players to contribute to ensuring that women take their rightful
place in all spheres of sport and recreation in our country.

I am encouraged by the commitment that I have witnessed in the fledgling
female boxing domain in South Africa and abroad. And I am hopeful that
women such as Miss Precious Baloyi, who umpired in the recent Davis Cup tie
between South Africa and Yugoslavia, Valerie Dorset from the USA, who
judged the Lewis-Rahman fight at Carnival City and our own Siya Vabaza who
also judged an international fight involving Zolani Patelo, can inspire
other women to emulate their pioneering spirit.

I am of the opinion that sport and recreation has been capacitated in the
past year, to the extent that we have been provided with resources that we
could only have dreamt of before. The access that we have been afforded in
poverty relief, infrastructure creation and the Jobs Summit, has positioned
us, amongst major role-players in the public sector, to tackle one of the
biggest challenges of our times in this country, namely poverty. In our
quest to access these resources we have argued that the building of sport
and recreation facilities in disadvantaged communities can contribute to
temporary and permanent job creation, income generation and, hence, poverty
relief.

We are committed to making a success of this project over the next three
years, with a view to securing these funds, as part of our baseline budget
beyond 2004, to facilitate delivery in an area in which there is also a
huge backlog in our country. We shall, therefore, be contributing to the
resolution of the twin problems of poverty and the shortage of sports
facilities, that exist in disadvantaged communities. We have been granted
R40 million in the first year of the project, R96 million in the second
year and R129 million in the third year, provided we are successful in each
of the three years. I am committed to ensuring that success.

Last year I spoke about my intention to bring sport and recreation into the
mainstream of Government efforts aimed at working for change in our
country. I believe that our building for sport and recreation project is
aimed at doing exactly that in the context of our stated intention of
integrated planning and delivery. Ours will be a concerted effort, along
with those of our sister departments, to prioritise the poor and
disadvantaged, and to contribute to rural development and urban renewal.

We shall be building and upgrading sports facilities in each of the
provinces, using labour-intensive methods in which we will engage local
communities. In the first year of the project we shall have reached 33% of
the poverty nodes identified for urgent intervention by the President, and
we shall cover 100% of them over the ensuing two years.

I would like to urge members of this House to become involved in these
projects in their constituencies, to ensure that our investments are sound
and that the communities, especially the rural women involved, will indeed
benefit. Moreover, our people must take ownership of the facilities to
guard them against being vandalised.

We are also planning to have the facilities appropriately named after
veterans of the anti-apartheid struggle, as sport's contribution to
symbolic reparation for the suffering of our people under that order.
Surely we can never name any of our facilities ``Douglas Gibson''.
[Interjections.]

In his response to the debate on his state of nation address, the President
mandated the departments responsible for sport and recreation ...
[Interjections] ... education, arts and culture and the Youth Commission to
design programmes that will engage the youth constructively. We have risen
to that challenge and, as Sport and Recreation, we have developed a
comprehensive programme that should provide many opportunities on an
ongoing basis for participation in constructive activities.

We shall be involved side by side with the Youth Commission, as part of
this initiative, in celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Soweto
uprisings with a substantial sports programme that, we have intimated
earlier, will culminate in a rugby test match between South Africa and
France on 16 June at Ellis Park.

In our broader programme, we have also engaged the United Schools Sports
Association of SA substantially and have ensured, through this initiative,
that we also address the problem of HIV/Aids through their ``Love-Life
Games''. This programme will be implemented throughout the country, from
the local through to the regional, provincial and national levels.

In the latter regard also, members will agree with me that school sport is
an issue that has remained unresolved for too long. My colleague the
Minister of Education and I have come to an agreement that we shall assume
joint responsibility for school sport and physical education. The
Department of Education will assume responsibility for the curricular
aspects of physical education and school sport, including interschool sport
at the local and, maybe, at the regional level, while the Department of
Sport and Recreation will assume responsibility for representative school
sport at provincial, national and international level.

We are still grappling with the problem of resourcing this important
venture and we will have to be innovative in finding solutions to this
problem. I intend calling a national school sports indaba later this year,
in which all stakeholders will have the opportunity to deliberate on a way
forward. I call on Ussasa, teacher unions, sports coaches, Sassu and even
parents to assist me in making this indaba a success and to participate in
it vigorously. We are also calling on all schools, including the former
Model C schools.

The past few months have been historical for the sports movement. We have
witnessed the dissolution of the National Sports Council and the handing
over of the baton, which they carried so successfully along with their
predecessors, Sacos, the pioneers of nonracial sport, to the SA Sports
Commission. This event certainly marked the end of an era in our sports
history and we need to pay homage to all those stalwarts, both in Sacos and
the NSC, who sacrificed so much to ensure that nonracial sport prevailed
and that it made the contribution that it did, to the liberation of our
people from the shackles of apartheid. I shall not even attempt to single
out any individuals who played a significant role in these struggles, for
that list is too long, and I am fearful of leaving out people who
contributed to this team effort. However, I would like to acknowledge some
of our compatriots who have passed on such as Hassan Howa, Morgan Naidoo, M
N Pather, Colin Clarke and Uncle Bill Jardine, amongst others.
[Interjections.] Louis Luyt?
The meeting earlier this month of the SA Sports Commission's general
assembly, represents another significant milestone in our sports history,
and judging from the turnout and lively debate at that forum, I am
convinced that we have a winning formula that will ensure that every
sport's person in our country has access to a structure through which to
make his or her voice heard. Moreover, the general assembly will serve as a
watchdog that will ensure that the Sports Commission delivers on its
mandate.

While I am sure there is room for improvement, the Sports Commission is
fast beginning to show its mettle. They have successfully launched the SA
Indigenous Games at a captivating event at a most appropriate venue, the
Basotho Cultural Village in Qwaqwa, in the Free State, earlier this year,
and fulfilling a long-held desire of the President to see these activities
that were facing extinction, being revived. The indigenous games will not
only involve more South Africans in wholesome physical activity, but will
also ensure that we preserve a very important part of our culture.

We must insist that some of these indigenous sports that are common to the
South African region should become part of Zone 6 games. Thereafter, we can
strive to take them to the All Africa Games and, in that manner, also
ensure that we make a contribution to an African recovery in which we are
accorded the necessary recognition for our rich cultural history. The
Eastern Cape province has just launched their own chapter of the indigenous
games, and I would like to congratulate them for that and to encourage all
other provinces that have not done so yet, to follow suit.

The Sports Commission is involved in scientific support to athletes
preparing for participation in international competitions, like the
Commonwealth Games, that will be held in Manchester next year and also the
South African Games that are coming in September this year. This fits in
well with the proposal of the Ministerial Task Team for a developmental
approach to international participation.

We have also witnessed the establishment of a distribution agency for
allocating funds that have accrued from the National Lottery to
nongovernmental agencies in sport and recreation. Sport and recreation, as
members are aware, has been identified as one of the good causes that will
benefit from the proceeds of the National Lottery Fund. I would like,
therefore, to urge all sports structures and clubs to access these funds,
to promote their activities, especially in the disadvantaged areas. The
distribution agency has put out a call for proposals to be made, and I know
that some of our clubs do not have the capacity to make those proposals.
The Sports Commission is there to assist them, so that they can access
those funds.

We have had an eventful sports year during 2000-2001. The highlight was
most certainly the Sydney Olympic and Paralympic Games in which our teams
competed. In the Olympic Games our athletes managed to reach a record
number of 28 finals, but were, unfortunately, only able to win five medals
- two silver and three bronze - against some of the fiercest competition
that we have ever witnessed. Our Paralympians did us proud in capturing 13
gold, 12 silver and 13 bronze medals and, therefore, endearing themselves
to the South African public. [Applause.] In the gallery now we also have
one of those gold medalist, Zanele Situ, sitting right there. [Applause.]
We are very proud of all of them. We have also said goodbye to Penny Heyns,
who has been the darling of our swimming for years. She has retired from
competitive swimming. [Applause.] We shall miss this icon in South African
sport and we wish her well in her future plans. We also thank the sponsors
that have made our participation possible.

Our cricketers continue to enjoy success and they have become the first
team in history to beat the West Indies on home soil in both the one-day
international and test series, and we have the captain of our Proteas
national cricket team, Shaun Pollock sitting up there. We acknowledge him.
[Applause.] He is not on his own, there are other cricketers who are
sitting with him. Roger Telemachus and Paul Adams are sitting there in the
gallery with him this afternoon. [Applause.] The Sharks made it to the
finals of the Super 12 series but, unfortunately, lost to the Brumbies. The
Tri-Nations series for 2001 looms large and we wish our team well in their
campaign. Bafana Bafana must be congratulated on their performances during
the past year, and allow me also to congratulate the Buccaneers on their
success in what must surely have been one of the most closely contested and
 exciting league competitions in years. Congratulations to Orlando Pirates.
[Applause.]  Allow me to congratulate Thabo Mngomeni and Desiree Ellis on
their nominations for soccer awards by CAF.

Our annual Presidential Sports Awards function was very special this year,
and featured a more representative cross-section of people than ever
before. People who were awarded Presidential Sports Awards include Tap Tap
Makhatini, Mono Badela, Coetie Neethling, Patson Banda and our own Zanele
Situ, who is there. I would like to honour more of these Sacos stalwarts in
next year's ceremony, including people like Frank van de Horst, Joe
Ebrahim, Reggie Feldman and Harry Hendricks. I also think it is high time
we honour the likes of Denis Brutus who must surely stand out as an icon in
the early days of the sports struggle.

I have spoken about the Cricket World Cup that is coming to our country and
we hope that it will be the biggest event that comes to our country. The
portfolio committee will be engaging with them shortly, but allow me to say
that we must endeavour to utilise the opportunities that the World Cup
represents to market our country abroad. I would also, of course, like to
urge the organising committee to give serious consideration to taking some
games of the Cricket World Cup to disadvantaged communities like
Chatsworth, Alice, Zwide and Galeshewe.

Bafana Bafana is one point away from qualifying for the second World Cup in
a row. We need one point and our guys will be off to Korea and Japan, and
we wish them well. We are also gearing ourselves up for the World Cup of
2010 and I am confident that this time we will pull it off. We will be able
to run a successful campaign and tournament. I would like to commend Danny
Jordaan and Irvin Khoza for the sterling work they put into the campaign.
Despite the fact we were cruelly denied victory, their excellent work
served as a valuable marketing tool for our country. [Applause.] I would
also like to give Charles Dempsey, who scuppered our chances so
shamelessly, a red card for his efforts.

Nocsa will also field a team in the Winter Olympics and in Athens in 2004
and they are already involved in different programmes. We also have Dr Sam
Ramsamy, who is the President, in the public gallery and we want to
acknowledge Sam. [Applause.]

I have been working very vigorously, investigating the alleged
mismanagement of funds by Athletics South Africa. Today I can report that I
have gathered all the information that will allow me to decide on an
appropriate course of action in accordance with my public undertaking in
this regard.

The King Commission will present its final report to me shortly and this is
something we are proud of. We are the only country to have done this and we
must also applaud Judge King, who is with us here today, for the sterling
work that he has done. [Applause.]

Lastly, once again I would be failing in my duty if I did not convey the
condolences of this House to the families of those loyal supporters who
died so tragically at the Orlando Pirates versus Kaizer Chiefs game at
Ellis Park. Our thoughts remain with them and we trust that they will find
comfort in the knowledge that we will do everything in our power to ensure
that such a disaster never happens again.

I would like to take this opportunity also to thank the hon the President,
the Deputy President, my colleagues in Cabinet, the officials in their
departments and hon members of Parliament, as well as the diplomatic corps
and many other countries who rallied around us so speedily to ensure that
the families and victims received the necessary support to lessen their
pain. The incident left the entire nation traumatised, but we remained
strong during these times of potential weakness.

Roy and Althea Nation, the parents of the youngest victim of that tragedy,
Rosshwin Nation, are with us in the public gallery today to see for
themselves how Parliament shares in their pain. They are up there in the
public gallery. [Applause.]

The Commission of Inquiry, led by the able Judge Ngoepe, has started its
work and I feel confident that his recommendations will contribute to
making our stadia safe havens. Supporters will then be able to support
their clubs.

In conclusion, I should also thank the chairperson of the portfolio
committee, Sis Ruth Bhengu - as I normally call her - and her committee for
the sterling work they have done. I also wish to thank the staff of my
Ministry headed by the HOD, Prof Hendrick Suss, sitting over there. I also
wish to thank the members of Minmec - and we have one of them here, the MEC
for sport from the Western Cape - and the macro bodies and their
leadership, who are here with us today.

We have the Canadian Minister of Sport, Mr Dennis Codera here with us. We
also have an Australian here among us, as well as Advocate Sonn and Gerald
Majola from the United Cricket Board. We also have Rodney Berman from
boxing and Mr Koos Basson, who has come here with the whole Western
Province Currie Cup team. They are also here with us. [Applause.]

We have Mr Jacky Abrahams, the President of Boland, Gert Smal, the Western
Province coach, Dr Ishmael Jakoet, Mr Leonard Cheune and Duncan Crowie. And
have I mentioned the cricketers? Amin Dassie and Craig Smith from cricket
are also among us. We have students from Blouvlei school and Fairview
primary up there in the public gallery. [Applause.]

All these people have come to see how Government ensures that it fights for
their cause, and that it draws larger and larger numbers of young people
into sport and gets the nation to play.
I want to give my colleagues on my left another red card. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members while we are on the point
of acknowledging our sports talent, allow me to say that the most devious
spinbowler in Parliament is none other than the hon the Minister himself.
The hon Mr Lee, who is now about to come to the podium, and myself were
involved in a very thrilling last-minute partnership that enabled
Parliament to score a victory against the spin doctors, who are really the
people from the press.

Mnr T D LEE: Voorsitter, dames en here, ek is van die Oos-Kaap, en as ek so
baie blou sien voel ek geïntimideer, veral as ek nog die grote Gert Smal
ook sien, is ek eers geïntimideer. [Tussenwerpsels.] Maar hierdie mense
hieronder intimideer my glad nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek sien kans vir hulle.
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, ladies and gentlemen, I am from the Eastern Cape,
and when I see so much blue I feel intimidated, especially when I also see
the enormous Gert Smal, I am even more intimidated. [Interjections.] But
these people down here do not intimidate me at all. [Interjections.] I can
deal with them. [Interjections.]]

In an era where the importance of sport as regards national issues such as
nation building is being recognised and where big fortunes can be made by
outstanding sportsmen and women, where the potential exists for the
talented poor to make it big in the world of sports, we need to pose
serious questions to ourselves. How equipped is the sporting talent to
fulfil their infinite potential? If they are not, how can we as
administrators facilitate the attainment of this goal? Are we as
politicians or as administrators in a position to criticise them for not
seizing the moment? No, I am afraid not, for in this country of ours some
sports administrators have come to regard their own interests as more
important than those of the athletes.

Our country's sporting image is repeatedly tainted by one unfortunate
incident after the other. We had the match-fixing scandal in cricket. We
had a tennis boss calling one of our country's most successful tennis
players and someone who is indeed doing something for the development of
sport, too white to be a role model. We had our players in our national
cricket team smoking dagga in the West Indies. We had the allegations of
corruption that are being levelled at top ASA officials and then, of
course, we have the stupifying decision by ASA selectors not to include
athletes in the squad for the world athletics championships later this year
because at 25 years of age, they are deemed to be too old - this while the
President of ASA, Mr Chuene, is not too old to run in the prestigious
London and Boston marathons.

These problems are scaring potential investors off. We need to mindful of
this crucial factor. Without the necessary financial injection into our
development programmes and personal sponsorships, the quality of our
country's athletes will in fact deteriorate. These incidents also point to
the fact that there is a serious problem with the administration of our
country's sport and it needs to be addressed. But I fear that we lack the
political will to do so and I am glad that the hon the Minister mentioned
that he is looking at what I supplied him with.

I pose one question which I believe that ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Are you rising on a point of order,
hon Ncinane?
Mr I Z NCINANE: Hon Chairperson, I wanted to ask if the hon member is
prepared to take a question? [Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: I am not prepared to take a question and I do not have eight
tickets for you, sir!

One question which I want to pose - and which I believe is but the tip of
the iceberg - relates to a missing $10 000 or R71 000 that was given to ASA
by the Japanese Athletics Federation for South Africa's participation in
the Acorn Relay some years ago. Somewhere between Japan and South Africa
that money went missing. The question is: What happened to that money?

In 1994 is ASA 'n donasie van R2,1 miljoen deur die internasionale
amateurorganisasie aangebied vir die ontwikkeling van histories benadeelde
gemeenskappe. Ek sal graag wil weet hoekom dié aanbod nie opgeneem is nie,
terwyl 'n skool soos Slanghoek NGK Primêr naby Rawsonville in die Wes-Kaap,
wat maar een van die talle histories benadeelde skole is wat jaarliks
tientalle atlete vir die Boland provinsiale sportspanne oplewer, self die
koste van hul atlete se deelname aan provinsiale byeenkomste moet delg.
[Tussenwerpsels.]
Dit is 'n skande, dat ons ons jong atlete laat betaal om hul provinsies te
verteenwoordig. 'n Duidelike boodskap word hiermee aan talle onbevoorregte,
talentvolle jong mense gestuur, naamlik dat hulle talentvol genoeg is om
provinsiale spanne te haal, maar nie ryk genoeg om in provinsiale kleure
deel te neem nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In 1994 ASA was offered a donation of R2,1 million by the international
amateur organisation for the development of historically disadvantaged
communities. I would like to know why this offer was not taken up, when a
school such as Slanghoek NGK Primary near Rawsonville in the Western Cape,
which is only one of many historically disadvantaged schools who annually
produce dozens of athletes for the Boland provincial sports teams, has to
carry the costs for their athletes' participation in the provincial
gatherings. [Interjections.]

It is a disgrace that we make our young athletes pay to represent their
provinces. A clear message is being sent to many underprivileged, talented
young people, namely that they are talented enough to make the provincial
teams but not rich enough to play in provincial colours.]
I am posing another question: Are we doing enough to develop the enormous
potential of our athletes? Again, the answer is: No. As long as we continue
to racialise, politicise and maladminister sport in this country, I can
assure hon members of this House that we will continue to face the same
issues in sport for quite a long time.

We spend countless hours wondering why our teams and athletes - with the
exception of a few, and here I must really mention Pollock and his team -
are not delivering the performance we know they are capable of. The answer
is simple: We do not invest in our sportsmen and our sportswomen. To
support this I want to quote an example, and the example is Ian Syster, a
young man from the Cape. I am glad that he is here today. He found it
difficult to attract assistance in his preparation for the SA Marathon
Championship. Ian was triumphant despite the fact that he was only armed
with his personal sacrifice and determination to succeed, the undying
support of his coach, George Benjamin, who is also present here, and a pair
of borrowed running shoes. He won the title.

Where were these development structures that were supposed to assist the
Ian Systers of this country? Can anyone account as to how the money
intended for development programmes and support is being appropriated? We
should stop fooling ourselves into thinking that this country of ours will
produce its fair share of world-class performers if we are not prepared to
invest in our athletes.

Investment amounts to more than the mere availability of funds for
development programmes. It implies a responsibility on the part of our
Ministry of Sport and Recreation to ensure that these funds are correctly
applied. It implies that our athletes should be the ones to benefit and not
the administrators.

Daar is egter meer aan hierdie aangeleentheid. Ons moet dringend 'n
intensiewe veldtog loods om ons nasionale en internasionale sportlui en
sportkodes te bemark. Is daar enigeen buite atletiekgeledere wat weet wie
Dikaledi Morapane en Paul Gorries is? Wie van ons vandag teenwoordig weet
wie hierdie jong atlete is? Ek is seker nie baie van ons nie.

Laat my dus toe om hulle kortliks aan u bekend te stel. Hulle is jongmense
wat met harde werk en deursettingsvermoë besig is om die landskap van
naelloop in ons land te verander. Op meriete, en meriete alleen, het hulle
hul weg gebaan om hulle ons land se voorste naellopers te maak. Wat die
Dikaledi Morapane's en Paul Gorriesse van ons land eintlik wil vertel, is
dat hulle geen spesiale vergunning nodig het om die boonste sport te bereik
nie. Wat hulle wel nodig het, is voldoende ontwikkelingstrukture wat
funksioneer en wat werk. Hulle het 'n kans en tyd nodig om tot hul eie reg
te kom.

Ons moet ook die gewoonte staak om talentvolle jong swart sportlui as
kwotaspelers te keur, want ons is besig om die Breyton Paulses en die
Makhaya Ntini's van ons land se teenwoordigheid in ons land se nasionale
sportspanne te verkleineer. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[There is, however, more to this matter. We should immediately launch an
intensive campaign to market our national and international sports codes
and sports people. Is there anyone outside athletics who knows who Dikaledi
Morapane and Paul Gorries are? Who of us present today knows who these
young athletes are? I am sure not many of us do.

Allow me to briefly introduce them to you. They are young people who, with
hard work and perseverance, are changing the landscape of sprinting in our
country. On merit, and merit alone, they have paved their way to make
themselves the best sprinters in the country. What the Dikaledi Morapane's
and Paul Gorries' of our country are actually saying is that they do not
need any special concession to get to the top. What they do need is
sufficient development structures which function properly. What they need
is a chance and time to come into their own.

We should stop die habit of choosing talented young black sports people as
quota players, because we are belittling the representivity of the Breyton
Paulse's and the Makhaya Ntini's in the country's national sports teams.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Ms N R BHENGU: Chairperson, let me acknowledge the presence of the Sports
Ministers from different countries, senior officials and dignitaries, MECs
from provinces, sports administrators and athletes in attendance today.

The main objective of the Department of Sport and Recreation in South
Africa is to transform and ensure the development of sport in our country.
Our President, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, refers to this process as ``building a
nation united in action for change''.

For this programme to succeed, this Parliament has a responsibility to
create an enabling environment for building a nation. In creating that
enabling environment, this House has this year repealed as unconstitutional
the Boxing and Wrestling Act of 1954, and has passed a more constitutional
Bill, the SA Boxing Bill. We have also passed the SA Sports Commission
Amendment Bill.

The initial idea was that the Department of Sport and Recreation was going
to be abolished after the establishment of the Sports Commission, as is the
case in Australia from where the Sports Commission model was adopted. After
thorough consideration of South African conditions, particularly around the
laws governing sports, it was considered and felt that it would not be
correct to abolish the department when we still have apartheid-related
sports laws.

The repealing of discriminatory laws and the putting in place of
constitutional laws is an ongoing process. It was also realised that we
cannot afford to put in place the Sports Commission in place without
providing a nurturing environment for it to find its feet. A department of
sport and recreation is therefore a vital structure for providing that
nurturing environment.

We commend the Minister of Sport and Recreation in South Africa for playing
a leading role in this regard. The DP argues that the department should
have been abolished, as per the initial idea. This kind of thinking is not
surprising because it is based on a lack of understanding of the processes
of development.

The SA Sports Commission has a different role to play. Firstly, it has to
provide direction to sports federations and, secondly, it plays a leading
role in ensuring that programmes of the sports federations in South Africa
are in line with the vision of the Sports Commission and the country. The
Commission also co-ordinates programmes regarding the building of sports
facilities and the eradication of poverty through sport. The Sports
Commission also interacts with the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
Recreation for purposes of understanding the needs of the people as
reported to the portfolio committee by the public whom we represent as
parliamentarians. It also brings to the notice of the portfolio committee
issues that need the intervention of the portfolio committee and Parliament
and ensures that South Africa produces the best athletes in the world. The
Sports Commission also facilitates the development of the capacity of
sports federations and ensures that South Africa excels in sport.

The SA Sports Commission opened its doors in April 2000, absorbing staff
from the NSC, and some from the Department of Sport and Recreation. The CEO
for the Sports Commission was also appointed around that time. It is with
pride that we speak today of a Sports Commission that has developed a clear
programme of action and presented it to the portfolio committee. This
commission was launched on 15 March 2000. At that launch, the CEO spelt out
to the whole world the direction of the Sports Commission. We commend the
work of the chairperson of the SA Sports Commission, Mr Gideon Sam and his
colleagues, and the CEO, Dr Joe Phaahla and his team, as well as the backup
support from the Minister, Mr Ngconde Balfour, the chief director, Prof
Denver Hendricks, and officials of the department.

On 6 March 2001, the CEO of the Sports Commission, Dr Joe Phaahla,
presented a progress report to the portfolio committee, including the
future direction of the commission. It was clear in that presentation that
the commission is steadily making progress. The portfolio committee raised
its concern around the personnel budget of the Sports Commission. That
concern was also linked to the fact that the sports commission had absorbed
staff from both the NSC and Sport and the department.

We asked the CEO to evaluate the performance of the Sports Commission after
its first year, and conduct a staff audit to satisfy the concerns of the
portfolio committee around the budget for personnel. That task could not be
achieved within a short period. Those amongst us who have project
management and evaluation skills would agree with me in saying that that
kind of evaluation needs enough time.

The CEO will be reporting back to the portfolio committee on this issue.
The ANC is, therefore, unconditionally supporting the budget for sport and
recreation. We must, however, point out to this House that there is still
some overlapping of functions between the department and the SA Sports
Commission. We would like to see a clear distinction and division of tasks
between the department and the Sports Commission.

The portfolio committee will further engage the Minister and the CEO of the
Sports Commission on this issue. The portfolio committee has an oversight
role to play. This includes ensuring that there are no sporting codes in
this country that can be denied access to any sports facility in South
Africa. [Interjections.]

In April this year, Safa had to relocate a World Cup qualifying match
scheduled to be played at Newlands Stadium between our national squad,
Bafana Bafana, and Zimbabwe. This was because Safa had to apply to the
council for a permit to use Newlands Stadium and Safa refused to do so,
believing that it is unconstitutional for the council not to repeal their
discriminatory by-laws, and not to make facilities accessible to all
sporting codes. [Interjections.]

The committee invited all stakeholders involved in this matter, including
the mayor of Cape Town, Mr Peter Marais, for the purpose of gathering
information around this issue, and to facilitate a process of ensuring that
all sporting codes and supporters are not denied access to certain sports
facilities in this country. It is unfortunate that the mayor did not view
this as a serious matter. He chose to publicly ridicule the portfolio
committee through the media.

We are public representatives, charged with the responsibility of
addressing the needs of the public we represent. We, therefore, cannot sit
down and fold our arms when sports people are denied their constitutional
rights of access to sports facilities. The matter of Newlands Stadium is
not over. Councils throughout the country who have not repealed their
discriminatory by-laws should speed up that process and allow the nation to
play.

The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation undertook provincial study
tours to the Eastern Cape, the Free State, the Northern Cape and North
West. In all these provincial visits, we found good programmes that are in
line with the transformation agenda. We want to commend the MECs and their
departmental staff for the sterling work that is being done.

My colleagues will elaborate on the different initiatives undertaken by the
provinces around sport. We must, however, point out that the weakness of
one province could be the strength of another. It would, therefore, be
important for MECs of sport and recreation to establish exchange programmes
between their provinces so as to learn from one another. It is not only
from other countries that we can learn. There is a lot of creativity and
skills in South Africa.

Different sporting federations have presented their transformation
programmes to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation. Sarfu has
presented to us a plan called ``Vision 2003''. This is a good plan that is
aimed at addressing concrete and fundamental issues in the development of
rugby in this country. The problem with the plan concerns its
implementation. It needs to be bought into by provincial rugby unions.

Sarfu as a national body for rugby does not have control and power over the
provincial rugby unions. There is more at provincial level. How does a
national body that has limited powers ensure that provinces implement a
programme that is developed at national level? This is what was highlighted
by Sarfu when they presented Vision 2003 to us.

This situation, therefore, poses a challenge to the standing committees of
all sports in the provinces to understand national transformation
programmes of federations, and to engage their provincial structures in the
same way as the Portfolio Committee of Sport and Recreation does. This will
help in ensuring that we are not presented with plans, time and again, that
are not implemented by lower structures of federations.

Sihlalo, siyayibonga imikhandlu yohulumeni basekhaya, kakhulukazi ngeqhaza
lokwakha izinkundla zemidlalo. Kodwa sifisa ukukubeka ngokusobala ukuthi
kunomkhuba ongemuhle wokubhekelela imiphakathi yasemadolobheni ngaphezu
kweyasemakhaya. Sifisa ukukhumbuza imikhandlu yohulumeni basekhaya ukuthi
yinye iNingizimu Afrika, nokuthi nemiphakathi yasemakhaya iyingxenye yaleyo
Ningizimu Afrika. Ngakho-ke, le miphakathi kumele inikezwe izidingo zayo
ngendlela engabandlululi.

Izinga lezinkundla zemidlalo ezakhiwa emakhaya liseqophelweni eliphansi
kakhulu. Ezinye zalezi zincane kunalokho okuvumelekile, okwenza ukuthi
umdlali ojwayele ukudlala kuleyo nkundla encane ehluleke ukudlala uma
esefakwe enkundleni yokudlala enkulu, evulekile.

Sicela ukuthi imikhandlu isebenzisane nezakhiwo zamaqembu ezemidlalo ukuze
kwakhiwe izinkundla ezihambisana nohlelo lokuthuthukiswa kwezemidlalo.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, we thank local governments for playing a role in building
sports fields. We wish to mention that there is the bad habit of serving
the urban communities better than the rural communities. We wish to remind
local governments that South Africa is one and that the rural communities
are part of South Africa. These communities should have their needs
provided for in a nondiscriminatory manner.

The sports fields that are built in the rural areas are of a low standard.
Some are even smaller than what is acceptable. This makes it difficult for
a player who is used to play on a small sports field to cope with players
who play on big sports fields.

We ask local councils to work together with sports teams so that the sports
fields that they build will be in line with the plan to improve sports.]

It would be irresponsible not to raise issues that have negatively affected
the image of sport in South Africa. These include the match-fixing scandal,
the Ellis Park stampede and dagga smoking by members of our national
cricket team.

On the Ellis Park issue, we want to commend the work of the crisis
committee, all hon members of Parliament and also all our religious
fraternity for the work done during the cleansing ceremony. It was a
painful experience which will remain a part of our history. We commend the
work done by Kaiser Chiefs and Orlando Pirates.

The safety of our players and fans during matches is vitally important. It
is worrying to note that in two months Africa has suffered five similar
disasters where people died, having left their homes to entertain
themselves with sports. We call on all stakeholders in sport to come
together and find meaningful solutions to these problems.
With regard to match-fixing and the use of dagga by our athletes, we want
to remind our players that they are our role-models; they are role-models
to our youth; they are South African ambassadors and they are national
assets, especially those who play in our national teams.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, I must blow the
whistle on you now. [Laughter.]

Ms N R BHENGU: The ANC believes that Parliament should provide enabling
conditions.

The ANC supports the budget. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Note that I did not show the
hon member the red card. I only blew the whistle. [Laughter.]

Mr E T FERREIRA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to commend the Minister on
the exemplary way in which he is leading his department. He is a sincere,
humble person who mixes equally well with Presidents and paupers, and seems
to be everywhere all the time. One will often find him at the portfolio
committee meetings in the morning in Cape Town, at the Ministers' briefing
in the afternoon in Pretoria, and in Durban at a soccer match in the
evening. I suspect that he has been cloned, and I want to call on the Mail
& Guardian to investigate the matter. [Laughter.]

Minister Balfour is a great ambassador for Parliament, Cabinet and South
Africa, and he is a good example of how rotten political parties can
sometimes produce very fine people. He has been accused of interference in
sport at times, but one has to admit that his intervention has more often
than not led to an improvement in a particular situation.

The IFP will be supporting the budget on Sport and Recreation. We do not
necessarily believe that Government is investing enough in sport, but see
this budget as a step forward, especially the intention of investing more
money in sport over the next three years.

We are very pleased about the R40 million to be spent on the improvement of
existing facilities and the building of new multi-purpose ones. Our visit
to Cuba earlier this year was quite an eye-opener as far as sporting
facilities are concerned. In Cuba they have sporting facilities on
virtually every street corner. They are all very basic - nothing fancy, no
high technology equipment - yet the Cubans are the best sporting nation in
the world.

South Africans seem to believe that in order to become a successful
sporting nation, we need exorbitant and high- technology facilities. The
Cuban experience tells us that this is not true. What our people need is
commitment and pride in their country which, with all due respect, is sadly
lacking in many of our sportspeople. Many of our top sportsmen and women,
unfortunately, feel very little for their country - it is simply about
money. They find it so easy not to make themselves available for national
teams, as their international clubs pay them so much more.

During a visit to the Northern Cape last year we were told by a sports club
that a certain top sportsman was invited there to spend a weekend coaching
youngsters, and be honoured by the local people. The club was told by the
sportsman's agent that he would do it for R50 000, plus expenses. Is this
not quite a sad state of affairs? Surely, we are not against sportspeople
being paid well for what they do, but do they not have a moral obligation
to put a little back into a society that has been supporting them all the
way?

In San Nicholas, a small town outside Havana, we went to a small, very
basic wrestling gym, only to find a current world wrestling champion
coaching the youngsters. When we spoke to him, we found out that he does it
a few times a week. He explained to us that he comes from the very same
community and the very same gym, and that it goes without saying that he
had to put something back into the community. Do the majority of our
sportsmen and women have such an attitude? I would love to think so, but
would not put all my money on it.

It is of the utmost importance that we develop a national pride in our
sports teams and athletes. A prerequisite is, of course, that our teams and
athletes must be successful. No one is really interested in a constant
loser. The Minister should consider the launching of a national sports
patriot of the month and year award by the Ministry. This award could be
presented to the team or athlete that did the most to advance national
pride in a given month. From the monthly winners an annual award could be
made at the end of the year.
The IFP is very happy about the South African traditional games that were
very successfully held last year. The Sports Commission needs to be
commended for their effort, and we would like to appeal to them not to lose
their grip on the initiative. Would it not be wonderful if, over the next
12 or 18 months, we could, for instance, have traditional games in all the
nine provinces.

We are very excited about the Cricket World Cup of 2003 being played in
South Africa. We are concerned, however, that very few matches will be
played in traditional black areas, and apparently none of the very
prominent matches will be played in traditional black areas. We are quite
aware of the fact that the traditional black areas, for historical reasons,
do not have the facilities that can possibly accommodate 30 000 or 40 000
people. But I am sure that one can make a plan and there is still time to
remedy that specific situation.

Another issue I would like to address is the issue of Nocsa. We are in full
support that bodies like Nocsa should be independent, and that they should
formulate their own policies. This does not, however, mean that they are
not accountable to the public and Parliament as the representatives of the
public. Unfortunately our friend Mr Ramsamy seems to have become a law unto
himself, with disastrous consequences for the country.

At the recent Olympic Games our country was embarrassed by our baseball
team being thrashed time and again. They clearly were not up to taking part
in the Olympic Games. Our men's hockey team, who are the champions of
Africa, were, however, left at home. We hope and trust that Mr Ramsamy's
will is pulled into line before he embarrasses us again. We will not
support Government interference in sport, but at the same time we cannot
allow people with ulterior motives to harm a national asset like sport.

The final issue I would like to mention is that Government needs to invest
much more in amateur sporting codes, particularly school sport. Very few
top sportsmen and women reach great heights without having started at a
very young and junior level. An investment in amateur and school sport is
an investment in future Olympic Games. [Applause.]

Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Mr Chairperson, hon members of this House, hon Ministers
present here today and more specifically the Minister of Sport and
Recreation, hon guests, I want to salute the sportspeople present here
today. I specifically want to salute Zanele, the medalist who is with us
here today and who, unfortunately, because of many challenges that we still
face, I will not be able to see, and she will not be able to see me either.
[Applause.] But that is one of the challenges that I will be talking about.

Today's debate is a very important one to me because of the role that sport
has in uniting the nation and building a nonracial society. And it is for
this reason that the ANC will support this budget.

The hon the President, Thabo Mbeki, in his article in The ANC Today, re-
emphasises the direct relevance of sport and recreation to our continuing
common struggle for the reconstruction and development of our country, and
the opportunity that sport gives us to tell the world how far we are
progressing to build this nonracial society. We are indeed making some
progress in many areas, but we acknowledge that we still have to improve in
other sectors. We still need to do a lot to level the imbalances of the
past and ensure that our teams are more representative and reflect the
demographics of our country.
The Government policy on sport recognises the part that sport plays in
redressing gender inequalities and discrimination against people with
disabilities and the minorities. One of the priorities, as stipulated in
the White Paper on sport, is to provide funds for the creation and
upgrading of basic multi-purpose sporting facilities in disadvantaged
areas. All facilities should allow access to all users. The challenge, in
South Africa, is not only the shortage of these facilities, but where they
are, and they are not where they are most needed.

While the Department of Sport and Recreation is challenged with the
programme of redressing the inequalities of the past, the challenge to
redress the issue of disabled young men and women is even more complex. It
is even more complex because of the attitudes towards people with
disabilities and the perceptions about these people.

I want to talk about some of the problems that make it difficult for people
with disabilities to join the nation at play. The first problem is the lack
of rehabilitation services in the disadvantaged areas. Many people with
disabilities need some form of rehabilitation or habilitation to perform in
sports. For me, as a person with a physical disability who is confined to a
wheelchair, some rehabilitation is needed. I needed to be taught how to use
the wheelchair. And if I am not given this opportunity, it means that I am
not given an opportunity to participate in sport.

It is, therefore, crucial that we have community-based rehabilitation
centres so that young men and women who are disabled are ready to join the
nation at play. Therefore, there is a need for the hon the Minister of
Sport and Recreation to involve the Department of Health.

The second problem is that there are no well-established clubs in the
townships. Well-established clubs are in the white suburbs and many of
these clubs make it difficult for poor black people to travel to such
places. Where they can afford the membership fees, transport to take them
to such areas is a problem.

It is a problem because transport is not accessible. It is a problem
because the drivers still have an attitude. One needs to have a driver who
is very considerate to transport you, your wheelchair, your assistant and
your sporting equipment. And I am probably talking about people who survive
on a disability grant, who cannot afford this extra expense.

The third problem is that young disabled people in the mainstream schools
cannot participate in sport because there is no provision for their
participation. A shotput or a javelin coach is unable to coach a person in
a wheelchair, because he needs special training. Sponsors are reluctant to
assist clubs in townships, because there is no good return for them to
invest. The tendency is to fund the more elite clubs. There is not much
commitment to develop the disadvantaged rural areas.

The other problem is the cost of the sporting equipment. For me to get a
wheelchair to participate in sport, I need at least R15 000. And that is
not one of the best wheelchairs. This is the case because we import our
sporting wheelchairs, and this is an opportunity for the Minister to
challenge our technology partners to be more innovative and also recognise
some of the companies of disabled people who are involved in some of these
initiatives. The Department of Sport and Recreation is, however, committed
to redressing these inequalities.

Prior to 1994 there were four organisations which represented people with
disabilities - physical, mental, the deaf and the blind. Napcosa was
established in 1994 to represent the disabled fraternity in sport and
recreation in South Africa. I am particularly happy that there is now a
restructuring process in this regard. Many problems were identified with
Napcosa and amongst those was that there was a lack of an effective club
structure. There were no clubs on the ground to inform Napcosa.

The other problems were the inadequate provision for sport at school, the
marginalisation of rural communities, the poor quality of administrators,
the shortage of funds for both administration and training, no cohesion
between school sport and disabled sport, no communication with Ussasa and
LSEN, no awareness, lack of female participants, and a loss of talent
amongst the disabled who leave school. If one is a disabled child and one
leaves school, the only place where one can participate is some special
school, or at work if one gets employed by some company which has a club.
Otherwise, one is lost and one's talent is gone.

There is a perception that money raised by Napcosa was not equitably
distributed, and the decision of the hon the Minister and the department to
restructure Napcosa is very welcome. We welcome Dissa, Disability Sport
South Africa, as an interim structure. We also welcome the Ministry's and
the department's recognition of the South African Federal Council on
Disability as a consensus-seeking forum among various disability
organisations. It will ensure that disabled people are involved in deciding
how they want to be integrated. I also want to challenge Disabled People
South Africa, which is the disability rights movement, that the struggle is
not over. There are still many challenges ahead.

Nothing about us, without us. The ANC understands this slogan. The ANC-led
Government in the Free State has shown understanding of this slogan. A
consultative process where disabled people participate actively is in
place. Disabled people together with the Department of Sport and Recreation
are engaged in discussions to establish a unified sporting structure in the
province, and I believe that this budget will go a long way towards
addressing many of the concerns raised here today. [Applause.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Mr Chairperson, I would like to welcome, first of all, the
foreign dignitaries, Ministers of Sport, our own Minister of Sport, the
provincial Minister, Mr Piet Meyer, other foreign dignitaries, our sports
community and other hon members.

My DA colleague, the hon Mr Donald Lee, highlighted some of the major
concerns we have in the sport and recreation arena. As a member of this
patriotic and democratic alliance, I now take the opportunity to provide
this House and the ANC-led Government with what we believe to be viable
alternatives.

Although this year's sport budget is incrementally better than last year's,
it is clear that sport and recreation is still not a major priority within
the ANC-led Government. We believe that if Government would invest more in
sport and recreation, then it would need to spend less on safety and
security, on health and on social development.

This is based on the sole premise that by getting more South Africans to
play sport, especially youth and school sport, more South Africans will
develop a greater appreciation for the rule of law, more South Africans
will be healthy, and less of our people will be dependent on the social
welfare system of this country. Yet, the ANC-led Government can afford to
spend as much as it does on defence packages and lavish jets.

We feel that, without a proper audit of both public and private sector
funding on sport and recreation, we cannot accurately establish what basic
needs are not being met. Without the proper auditing of financial accounts
of even our most organised sports federations, Sport and Recreation South
Africa cannot accurately account for the transfer payments from Government
to certain national sports federations.

Considering that it is estimated that, collectively, public and private
sector funding of sport amounts to approximately R2 billion, it begs the
question: How much of this has been spent appropriately when we see so many
sports people like Ian Syster and others without proper support and
resources from Government? We need to establish sporting codes. How much
has, in fact, been spent on the high performance development of
participants and how much has, in fact, been spent on administrations and
ivory towers?

The days of struggle bookkeeping must come to an end. Sport and Recreation
South Africa and the Sports Commission must build the capacity of sports
federations, even down at club level, to meet the basic requirements of the
Public Finance Management Act.

Yes, we agree that the Sports Commission should be downsized and we feel
that an initiative should be taken, for example, to apply the R23 million
labour bill of the Sports Commission more effectively on facilities, for
example. However, we have one concern about the facilities programme and
that is that we are running the risk of having unsustainable facilities not
being managed properly, as was the case with the RDP funding of sports
facilities under the previous Minister.

The R40 million budgeted for this project is good and the MTEF budget
projections are fine. We have no problem with that. But is it sustainable?
Can we say that where there are facilities already available, for example,
the parks and recreation areas that we have under the control of
municipalities and the sports fields at schools, that we do not have enough
facilities, especially if we do not have a database of these facilities? We
need a database that takes into account both the local sports facilities
and amenities and those at schools before we start throwing money at the
problem without making sure that those facilities are sustainable.

On the Newlands issue, need I say anything more than that the ANC branch in
Claremont were the originators of the objections to that issue?
[Interjections.] The Minister and the mayor have dealt with the matter. The
legal opinion of Parliament says very clearly that Parliament cannot summon
the mayor. They have not given him a chance to accept a reasonable
invitation. [Interjections.] So let us not quarrel about this any longer.

Regarding the sports programme that the Ministry is contributing to the
presidential youth/ development programme, we should ask the National Youth
Commission whether Government has accepted the youth policy which it
submitted to Government in 1997. They have not adopted the youth policy
that was submitted in 1997! How can one contribute to a youth programme
that would simply be ignored by Cabinet? I think that we need to take sport
more seriously. The Minister needs to convince his colleagues about that.
[Applause.]
Mr J T LOUW: Madam Speaker, I would like to offer just a little advice to
the DA and the DP. Please send people who understand sport to the sports
committee. [Interjections.] Donald Lee does not look like someone who has
ever touched or kicked a ball in his life. [Laughter.] Craig Morkel is
confused and the problem with him is that the more he tries to think, the
more he gets confused. [Laughter.] The man has a little brain, he cannot
even think for himself. That is the problem. This is the type of people
that we have to deal with in the committee. It is a struggle. We teach them
each and every day.

Sport has generally been regarded as a unifying cause all over the world.
We are the first ones in South Africa to have experienced this phenomenon.
We witnessed it when we hosted the Rugby World Cup in 1994. We spoke with
one voice as a country and as a sporting nation. We were seating side by
side cheering our heroes to a historic victory. That was a historic
sporting victory after a historic political victory, in 1994.

The historic sporting event that I have just mentioned was televised by all
the broadcasting companies in the country. Even someone without a decoder
was able to gain access to the excitement of the game. That historic moment
should have played a catalyst role in the transformation of sport in the
country, and demonstrated to the world that South Africa can organise and
host any major sporting tournament.

South Africa also played host to many other international events, inter
alia, the African Cup of Nations and the 7th All-Africa Games, the cricket
one-day international games and many others. The highlight of these events
was, surely, the two African sports events, viz the African Cup of Nations
games and the 7th All-Africa Games. These games were important to South
Africa because they signified the acceptance of South Africa in the African
sporting arena. South Africa was finally home where it belongs in Africa.

What was also significant, especially about the 7th All-Africa Games, was
that the games sought to bring Africa together as one continent. Everything
about the games was African. The athletes' village that was constructed to
accommodate all athletes was built in Alexandra. This speaks volumes about
the security measures that were put in place by the organisers of these
games.

The hosting of all these games in South Africa served as a catalyst for
South Africa to bid to host the Soccer World Cup in 2006. South Africa's
bid was one of the best soccer bids from the African continent. That was
demonstrated when South Africa was short-listed with Germany for the final
decision. We lost the bid to Germany not because our bid was not good
enough, but because one old man saw fit to give his dying vote to Germany.
That was Charles Dempsey. The fact that we were the only African country
competing against a powerful country like Germany means that South Africa
and Africa in general have what it takes to compete against the best in the
world.

Safa has already started with its preparation for the 2010 World Cup soccer
bid. The 2010 World Cup will be held, for the first time in the history of
the World Cup, in the African continent. This bid will, in many respects,
be different from the previous one, because whichever country wins the bid
will have to show the world that Africa is capable of hosting any major
sporting tournament. The country that wins the bid will also have to dispel
the myth that the decision to bring the World Cup to Africa was not to do
Africa a favour, but rather to show the powers that be that it was long
overdue for the World Cup to be hosted in Africa. South Africa prides
itself on having the best sporting infrastructure in the world. We have the
best stadiums, hotels and transport system. We can provide anything that
Fifa demands from us. Without being arrogant, I can safely say that we are
the best in Africa.

South Africa will do Africa proud by hosting the World Cup in 2010.
Therefore, we must not rest on our laurels and take things for granted and
think the fact that South Africa was short-listed with Germany will
persuade Fifa to give us the World Cup. Instead we must forget about the
2006 bid and start afresh. The bid committee or Safa for that matter should
consider the following when they plan for the 2010 bid campaign: The
provincial and local governments should be included from the planning
stages of the bid and each of these structures should know what role to
play, because in the previous bid these structures did not know exactly
what their roles were; the campaign should also include rural areas;
Parliament and the committee on sports should be constantly kept up to date
on the developments of the bid; SMMEs should be involved in the selling of
the bid merchandise and that they should also be involved to an extent in
the marketing of the bid campaign; and the provincial spread of the
stadiums is very important. In case Safa do not know, there is also a
stadium in Kimberly. [Interjections.] And, that stadium can accommodate any
major international sporting event.

An HON MEMBER: A big hole stadium. [Laughter.]

Mr J T LOUW: Madam Speaker, during the 2006 bid South Africa was besieged
with many problems and, to some extent, those problems also contributed to
our failure to be awarded the 2006 bid. One cannot say for sure whether
those problems have been solved now.

Safa should seriously look at the following areas. The level of refereeing
in the country is a cause for concern. Some of the decisions taken by the
referees in the past months or so were absolutely appalling, to say the
least. If Safa is serious about avoiding disasters in soccer, this is one
disaster they must avoid at all costs. The safety of our stadia is also
important. There should be the right number of tickets for the right number
of seats. The easy accessibility of emergency services, both inside and
outside the stadia, is also important.

South Africa was been given the right to host another prestigious event,
namely the Cricket World Cup in 2003. This is further proof of the
confidence that the sporting world has in our country. Even the Hansie
Cronjé match-fixing scandal did not discourage the world cricket body from
awarding this event to our country.

Cricket has achieved many successes over the past years. South Africa is
currently rated number two behind Australia in the one day cricket
internationals. The historic win over the West Indies recently was no mean
feat. While the world celebrated this historic victory by the Proteas, the
behaviour of certain Protea players was both unbecoming and absolutely
intolerable. There is nothing wrong with players celebrating victories.
But, if players indulge in drug-taking, then this becomes very serious.

These players are role models to millions of young and old players in the
country. What message are they sending out to these youngsters, who are
looking up to them for sporting advice and inspiration? I personally feel
that the penalties meted out to these players did not take into account the
damage that the actions of these players did and will do to our youth in
future.
In his address to this House earlier this year, the hon the President
directed the Ministers of Sport and Recreation, of Arts, Culture, Science
and Technology and of Education to champion a programme so as to encourage
and promote indigenous sport. The promotion of indigenous sport must be
separate and not at the expense of Olympic and other sporting codes. We
must continue to support and promote these sports. What is important about
these games is that they do not require a large financial outlay for
infrastructure and expensive kits for players. Apart from the impact that
these games will have in encouraging greater numbers of people to become
involved in sport, they will also give impetus to a matter that is central
to our rebirth as a nation, which is the issue of our national identity.

It is important that we must first become South Africans before we can
become citizens of the world. When we as a nation embrace these sports,
both black and white, which are enjoyed by all of us across the colour
line, it will help us to define ourselves firmly as South Africans and
thus, in reality, give us better capacity to absorb and respond to cultures
without becoming disoriented as individuals. This will also add immensely
to the common nonracial effort to build a sense of African identity,
consciousness and confidence, which is so critical to the success of the
African Renaissance and the accomplishment of the objective of the African
Century.

I am happy to announce that indigenous sports have been launched in two
provinces, namely the Free State and the Eastern Cape. The process to
launch these games in other provinces is currently underway. The Department
of Sport and Recreation has the backing of all the provinces in this
regard.

The Presidential Sports Award ceremony was held on 23 March 2000. For the
first time in the history of sport in our country, some of our legends were
honoured. Among those who were honoured were Jomo Sono, ``Tap Tap''
Makhathini and others. These men and women are the forgotten heroes and
heroines of our sport in South Africa. We commend the hon the President for
this bold initiative of restoring the respect and dignity of these sporting
legends. South African sport is what it is because of them. We salute them.

Another issue that has been a source of concern to the committee is the
broadcasting rights of sport of national interest. It is indeed well and
good to talk about taking part in sport as a country. It is good to talk
about sport as a unifying factor. It is very good for our youngsters to
have heroes and heroines in sport as role models, but this comes to nothing
if millions of our people are not able to see their sporting heroes and
heroines on TV. Those who are in rural areas who are lucky enough to own a
TV cannot even watch their teams on TV, because the public broadcaster
fails to televise these games. We cannot allow this to happen. It must
stop.

In an effort to address this issue, the committee had public hearings with
all stakeholders in the broadcasting industry. I am happy to announce that
the Department of Sport and Recreation has agreed on a process to speed up
this matter. We will be failing in our duties if we do not address this
matter urgently. We hope that the hon the Minister of Sport and Recreation
will continue to engage the three broadcasters with a view to making it
possible for the sport of millions to be watched by millions, not only by a
tiny privileged minority.

We want to make it clear to the broadcasters that we cannot wait forever on
this issue. This issue is important to us. This matter cannot be left to
the broadcasters alone. Our people have a right to watch their teams on TV
without having to fork out thousands of rands to buy decoders. We want some
results in the next six months, failing which we will be left with no
option but to explore other options at our disposal to speed up this
process. This must not be viewed as a threat, but rather as a reality.

Another matter that the hon the Minister of Sport and Recreation has to pay
attention to ... [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Speaker, hon members, the key objectives and
programmes of Sport and Recreation South Africa have been clearly
articulated by the hon the Minister. Several of these objectives have been
transferred, in terms of the South African Sports Commission Act of 1998,
to the commission. To realise these objectives, R23 million has been
budgeted for the commission to execute these responsibilities.

The immense role of the Sports Commission in sport and recreation cannot be
emphasised more. After the presentation to the portfolio committee, the
commission was requested to re-examine its budget proposals as a major
percentage had been budgeted for personnel. It would have been ideal for
the portfolio committee to engage the commission before today's Vote, but
unfortunately, this was not possible. We look forward to engaging the
commission in the near future.

Sport and Recreation South Africa needs to be commended for spending 92,6%
of their budget for the 2000-01 financial year. At the same time, it faces
one of its greatest challenges, as it implements a three-year facility
development project. In this financial year, R40 million has been set aside
for this project, with the focus on alleviating unemployment through a
labour- intensive approach to the provision of facilities, especially in
rural areas.

The provincial departments and organs of local government will play a
crucial role in the implementation of these projects. The capacity of the
unit in charge of this project needs to be closely monitored and
adjustments must be made as the need arises, to ensure that the overall
objectives are achieved.

The role of district councils, local municipalities and metropolitan
councils in respect of the longer-term maintenance and management of
facilities must be clearly spelt out. Too often the good intentions of the
hon the Minister's department are stifled by a lack of commitment from this
sphere of government.

Study tours to provinces have shown that facilities are often vandalised by
the community or not utilised at all. At the same time, we have local
government authorities who fail their communities by not maintaining these
facilities. The establishment of management committees at provincial level
to monitor projects and ensure community consultation and participation is
welcomed, in order to ensure community ownership.

Ultimately, the success of Sport and Recreation South Africa will not be
measured only by the number of facilities built in a financial year, but
more importantly by substantially increasing the number of South Africans
participating in sport and recreational activities.
On the subject of creating sport and recreation opportunities for all South
Africans, we wish to draw the Minister's attention to the insufficient
response from sport bodies. They are requesting access to the funds of the
national lottery. We call on the department to create mechanisms to ensure
that sport and recreation bodies in civil society, and ultimately from the
previously disadvantaged communities, benefit from this funding in terms of
infrastructure and development.

A major percentage of this Vote is geared towards transfer payments for
sport, the Sports Commission, the SA Institute for Drug Free Sport and
national sports federations. The increase in the amount allocated to the SA
Institute for Drug Free Sport, although small, is welcomed. The high
standards and successes of the institute in stamping out drugs and doping
in South African sport can only be maintained and expanded with sufficient
funding. A lack of capacity due to underfunding could lead to embarrassing
incidents for the South African nation in the international sports arena.

The UDM further welcomes the need identified by the Minister's department
for sports administrators to undergo training, so as to ensure financial
accountability in their federations. Rumours and allegations of
mismanagement of money in certain federations are damaging to sport.
Intervening when such allegations are made, administrators should, however,
follow the set procedures.

If any official administrator is found guilty of corruption or the
embezzlement of funds, such a person should be declared unfit to hold
office in any sports federation and criminal proceedings must be instituted
against the individual concerned. We should always guard against political
posturing when dealing with these issues.

The image of South African sport is a thorny issue. Firstly, there are the
undeniable incidents of racism and racial thinking that still occur. The
whole Newlands debate comes to mind, which has yet to be resolved.
Furthermore, we face the challenge of hosting big events. In this regard we
anxiously await the outcome of the judicial commission of inquiry into the
Ellis Park tragedy.

Finally, the image of South African sport is determined by our sportsmen
and women who must act as role models to our youth. To be a sports star is
not only an achievement, but also an honour and privilege that carries with
it a duty to the community.

I would like to compliment the Minister on his handling of his portfolio
which can be characterised as inclusive rather than exclusive, transcending
political divides. As long as he continues in this fashion, he can be
assured of our support.

The UDM supports the Vote. [Applause.]

Mnr R D PIETERSE: Mevrou die Speaker, miskien moet ek net eers 'n draai
maak sodat mense die trui kan sien wat ek aanhet. [Applous.]
[Tussenwerpsels.] [Gelag.]

Ek wil begin deur oom Jannie geluk te wens, ek verstaan hy verlaat ons
Vrydag en word ambassadeur in Griekeland. Ek wil hom ook waarsku, 'n ander
verteenwoordiger wat ons gestuur het, mnr De Klerk, het met 'n ander man se
vrou teruggekom. Oom Jannie se vrou het hom deur dik en dun bygestaan en hy
moet sy hande van 'n ander man se vrou afhou, want hy bly ons Oom Jannie.
[Gelag.] [Applous.] [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dit is vir my 'n absolute voorreg om aan die debat oor begrotingspos 18,
Sport en Ontspanning, deel te neem. In dié debat sal ons die vraag
beantwoord of 'n beter lewe vir almal bereik gaan word en of dit aan die
kom is. Ek wil graag hulde bring aan ons sportmense ... [Tussenwerpsels.]
Agb lede moet stilbly, dan gaan hulle iets leer.

Ek wil graag hulde bring aan al ons sportmense wat ons land die afgelope 12
maande met trots gedien het. Ja, almal het nie teruggekom met medaljes of
het eerste plekke behaal nie. Dit is manne en vroue, veral vroue, wat ons
dag na dag, week na week en male sonder tal gelok het na die
sportbyeenkomste, vasgehou het voor die beeldradio of ons ore vasgedruk
teen die radio gehou het. Ek praat veral van ons mense op die platteland
waar daar 'n tekort aan seine is om meer as drie radiostasies of meer as
een beeldradiokanaal te ontvang.

Baie van ons sportsterre en atlete waarop ons trots is, kom van die
platteland en tog kan baie van ons mense hulle nie op beeldradio sien of
selfs oor die radio hoor nie. Ek wil daarom veral 'n beroep doen op die
Minister van Kommunikasie en Icasa om dringend na die uitdagings op die
platteland om te sien en oplossing te bespoedig. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr R D PIETERSE: Madam Speaker, perhaps I should first turn around so that
people can see the jersey I am wearing. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

I want to begin by congratulating Uncle Jannie, whom I understand will be
leaving us on Friday to become the ambassador in Greece. I also want to
warn him that another representative we sent, Mr De Klerk, returned with
another man's wife. Uncle Jannie's wife has stood by him through thick and
thin and he must keep his hands off other men's wives, because he will
always be our Uncle Jannie. [Applause.] [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

It is an absolute privilege for me to participate in the debate on Vote 18,
Sport and Recreation. In this debate we will answer the question as to
whether a better life for all is going to be achieved and whether it is on
its way. I would like to pay tribute to our sportspeople ...
[Interjections.] Hon members must keep quiet, then they will learn
something.

I would like to pay tribute to all our sportspeople who served our country
with pride during the past 12 months. Yes, not everyone returned with
medals or achieved first places. These are men and women, particularly
women, who day after day, week after week and countless times attracted us
to the sports meetings, captivated us in front of the television or kept
our ears pressed against the radio. I am particularly talking about our
people in the rural areas where there is a shortage of signals to receive
more than three radio stations or more than one television channel.

Many of our sporting stars and athletes of whom we are proud come from the
rural areas and yet many of our people cannot see them on television or
even hear about them on the radio. I therefore want to appeal in particular
to the Minister of Communications and Icasa urgently to see to the
challenges in the rural areas and expedite a solution.]

Let my quote the people's president, President Thabo Mbeki, when he said on
9 February 2001:


  The social sector also has its own targeted programme of action focused
  on the social upliftment of, especially, the most disadvantaged in our
  society. It will, therefore, implement coordinated programmes in the
  nodal rural and urban areas we have identified which, among other things,
  will address such issues as housing, water, sanitation, health, including
  HIV/Aids, pension pay-outs, household food security and nutrition,
  poverty alleviation, including the provision of certain amounts of free
  services, home affairs services, education and training and sport and
  culture.

President Mbeki het hom vele male uitgespreek oor sport en ontspanning en
ek het die hoogste waardering vir sy intense belangstelling in die wel en
weë van ons sportmense. Terwyl ons atlete en sportsterre in die algemeen
goed vaar, moet ons aanvaar alles is nie wel in sport nie.

Wat wel waar is en soos die agb Minister genoem het, is dat Orlando Pirates
die liga-titel van Suid-Afrikaanse sokker ingepalm het. Dit is die soort
sokker wat aan ons voorgesit is, dit was opwindend en daarom kon die
eienaarskap van die titel eers in die laaste wedstryd beslis word. Ek wil
ook my stem byvoeg en sê ``welgedaan, Pirates''.

Kom ons kyk vinnig na die uitdagings wat ons in die gesig staar. Eerstens,
die tragedie wat hom op Ellispark afgespeel het. Wat het ons geleer en wat
doen ons om toe te sien dat só 'n voorval hom nooit weer in ons geskiedenis
sal herhaal nie?

Ek wil ook my kommer uitspreek oor die PSL en die SA Sokkervereniging. Dit
lyk of die probleme nooit ophou nie. Uit mediadekking lyk dit veral of die
mense om die verkeerde redes in die nuus is. Ek wil die Minister vra om
asseblief na die probleme in die PSL te kyk, want dit lyk of dié mense nie
na hulself kan kyk nie. Dit is volwassenes en ek dink dikwels hul gedrag is
niks beter as dié van kinders nie.

Terwyl Ria en Natasha skitterende werk in en vir mansokker doen, kan ek nie
dieselfde sê van die SA Sokkervereniging en vrouesokker nie. Daar sal baie
verskonings aangebied word vir die stand van sake in vrouesokker, maar ek
wil dit duidelik stel dat ek nie in verskonings belangstel nie. Dis 'n
skande wat in vrouesokker gebeur en iets daadwerkliks moet gedoen word.

Die ander skande is natuurlik dat sokker moet aansoek doen vir 'n dompas
wanneer hulle op Nuweland wil speel. Ek het vertroulik verneem die
Nuwelandrusie gaan nie soseer oor sokker nie, maar eerder oor 'n politieke
party se standpunt oor Zimbabwe. Agb lede moet onthou Zimbabwe moes op 5
Mei teen Suid-Afrika gespeel het. Daar is politieke partye, en een met 'n
verskriklike groot mond so groot soos Kimberley se gat, wat natuurlik baie
praat oor Zimbabwe en Suid-Afrika se standpunt oor Zimbabwe.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

In die algemeen het vroue in sport nie dieselfde ondersteuning gekry as
mans nie en dít moet beslis aangepak word. So kan dinge regtig nie aangaan
nie.

Skolesport het ook sy hoeveelheid probleme en kort dringend aandag. Slegs
'n paar dae gelede het 'n stokou debat weer opgevlam: hoort skolesport in
Stellenbosch en omgewing tuis in 'n grensomgewing in die Boland of in die
Westelike Provinsie? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[President Mbeki has expressed himself numerous times on sport and
recreation and I have the highest regard for his intense interest in the
welfare of our sportspeople. While our athletes and sports stars are
generally doing well, we must accept that all is not well in sport.

What is indeed true, and as the hon the Minister mentioned, is that Orlando
Pirates won the league title of South African soccer. This is the type of
soccer we are presented with, it was exciting and therefore the ownership
of the title could only be decided in the last match. I also want to add my
voice and say ``well done, Pirates''.

Let us look quickly at the challenges we are facing. Firstly, the tragedy
which took place at Ellis Park. What did we learn and what are we doing to
see to it that such an incident will never repeat itself in our history?

I also want to express my concern about the PSL and the SA Football
Association. It seems that the problems never stop. From the media coverage
it appears in particular that the people are in the news for the wrong
reasons. I want to ask the Minister please to look at the problems in the
PSL, because it looks as if these people cannot look after themselves.
These are adults and I think their behaviour is often no better than that
of children.

While Ria and Natasha are doing excellent work in and for men's soccer, I
cannot say the same for the SA Football Association and women's soccer.
Many excuses will be presented for the state of affairs in women's soccer,
but I want to state clearly that I am not interested in excuses. What is
happening in women's soccer is a disgrace and something decisive must be
done.

The other disgrace is of course that soccer must apply for a ``dompas''
whenever they want to play at Newlands. I have learnt confidentially that
the Newlands argument is not so much about soccer, but rather about a
political party's position on Zimbabwe. Hon members must remember that
Zimbabwe was to have played against South Africa on 5 May. There are
political parties, and one with a very big mouth as large as the big hole
in Kimberley, which naturally has a great deal to say about Zimbabwe and
South Africa's position on Zimbabwe. [Interjections.]

In general women in sport have not received the same support as men, and
this must certainly be addressed. Things truly cannot go on like this.

School sport also has its problems and requires urgent attention. Only a
few days ago an age-old debate flared up again: does school sport in the
Stellenbosch area belong in a border area in the Boland or in the Western
Province?]

The only people who suffer from that unnecessary debate are those we all
claim are the future that we care about. More importantly, schools in the
rural areas lack facilities. The only schools that might have facilities
are the previously white schools, and they are so far away from us that we
find it difficult to use them.

Rassisme is nog met ons en speel 'n beduidende rol in die lewe van
sportmense. Wanneer ons probleme aanpak, moet ons die probleem op sy naam
noem. Wanneer 'n swart sportman een swak wedstryd het, word hy dadelik
gepos, maar wanneer 'n wit sportman swak speel, word hy in die span gehou,
wat ookal gebeur. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die enigste manier ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek wens agb lede wil stilbly. Die
enigste manier waarop hy nie gekies word nie, is wanneer hy bedank of sê hy
is nie beskikbaar nie. Ek wil daarom hulde bring aan die rugbyspan van die
Boland-rugbyunie wat weer eens leiding gegee het en male sonder tal 'n span
op die veld gestuur het met nie minder nie as sewe swart spelers en steeds
oorweldigend mededingend was.

Die onsin wat baie van die mense kwytraak wanneer hulle van die swart
spelers in die span praat as swak, is absoluut twak, en dit is nie
aanvaarbaar nie. Al die unies met hulle miljoene rande kan by Rudi Joubert
en die hele Boland unie gaan leer hoe vasberadenheid, geloof in hul
spelers, ongeag velkleur, en geloof om bo uit te kom 'n wenformule is.

Ek kan ongelukkig nie dieselfde sê van die ander unies nie. Met die Super-
12 span is dit veel erger. Arme Breyten Paulse is die enigste swart speler
in die Stormers, en hy is nie 'n swak speler nie. Hy is die beste wat 'n
mens kry in die land, en nie net in die land nie, maar ook in die wêreld in
sy posisie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hy is nie meer 'n swak speler nie, en daarom
moet ander swart spelers inkom. [Tussenwerpsels.] Kom ons sê hy is die
beste vleuel wat daar is. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Quinton Davids speel vir 'n paar minute, dan moet hy voorgee om beseer te
wees, want een van die getelde spelers moet inkom. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit is
'n skande. Dit is 'n absolute skande. [Tussenwerpsels.] Krieket het
dieselfde probleem. [Tussenwerpsels.] Daardie lid moet stilbly.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Die mense kan sy reuk optel dié kant. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Van ons mense maak 'n ongelukkige fout, en dadelik hoor 'n mens sulke
wolffluitjies wat sê: hang hom, gooi hom uit vir ewig, want hy wil mos nie
hoor nie. Die leiers van die koor is bekende rassiste. Die leier van die
koor van die tweegatjakkalse is 'n bekende ``huursoldaat'' wat nie so lank
gelede sy land verlaat het toe dit moeilik gegaan het nie. Hy het in
Australië gaan geldmaak, en toe ander mense die land beter gemaak het,
terugkom, en voor in die ry kom staan. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die krieketspelers ter sprake het skuld beken, en aanvaar onvoorwaardelik
dat hulle verkeerd gedoen het op die Wes-Indiese toer. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Hulle is gestraf, en wil aangaan met hul lewens. [Tussenwerpsels.] Kom ons
gun hulle dat hulle kan aangaan met hul lewens. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hulle is
ons mense, ons kinders, ons broers en ons sporthelde. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die
onderskeie federasies moet hulle rolle speel om die sportsoorte te
verteenwoordig ten opsigte van die probleme waarmee hulle te kampe het.
[Tussenwerpsels.]
Daar is ook 'n ander probleem wat ek wil uitlig. Die wêreldbeker vir
krieket kom na Suid-Afrika toe in 2003. Hoeveel van die velde is in ons
swart gebiede? Niks nie.

Mnr J H MOMBERG: Boland!

Mnr R D PIETERSE: Dit is 'n ou storie wat aankom. Hulle weet lankal die
krieket kom hiernatoe. Hulle kon lankal dit reggemaak het.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Waarom is daar nog niks gedoen nie? [Tussenwerpsels.]
Hoeveel jare na eenwording is daar nog nie kwaliteitfasiliteite in ons
areas nie? Ek is moeg daarvoor om gedurig stories te hoor dat ek geduldig
moet wees. [Tussenwerpsels.] Iets drasties moet gedoen word.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Somtyds lyk dit of die amptenare meer in die nuus is as
die sportsterre. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Racism is still with us and plays a significant role in the lives of
sportspeople. When we address problems, we must name the problems. When a
black sportsman has one bad match, he is immediately dropped, but when a
white sportsman plays badly, he is kept in the team no matter what.
[Interjections.]

The only way ... [Interjections.] I wish hon members would keep quiet. The
only way he does not get chosen, is when he resigns or says he is not
available. I therefore want to pay tribute to the rugby team of the Boland
Rugby Union, which once again took the lead and countless times sent a team
onto the field with no less than seven black players and was still
tremendously competitive.

The nonsense that many people come up with when they talk about the black
players in the team being weak, is absolute rubbish, and it is not
acceptable. All the unions with their millions of rands can go to Rudi
Joubert and the entire Boland union to learn how determination, faith in
one's players, irrespective of skin colour, and faith in getting to the top
are a winning formula.

I can unfortunately not say the same for the other unions. Things are far
worse with the Super 12 team. Poor Breyten Paulse is the only black player
in the Stormers, and he is not a bad player. He is the best one finds in
the country, and not only in the country, but also in the world in his
position. [Interjections.] He is no longer a bad player, and therefore
other black players must come in. [Interjections.] Let us say he is the
best wing that there is. [Interjections.]

Quinton Davids plays for a few minutes, then he must pretend he is injured,
because one of the recognised players must come in. [Interjections.] That
is a disgrace. It is an absolute disgrace. [Interjections.] Cricket has the
same problem. [Interjections.] That member must keep quiet.
[Interjections.] The people can sniff him out on this side.
[Interjections.]

Some of our people make an unfortunate mistake, and immediately one hears
wolf whistles which say: hang him, throw him out forever, because he does
not want to listen. The leaders of the choir are well-known racists. The
leader of the choir of hypocrites is a well-known ``mercenary'' who left
his country not long ago when times were difficult. He went to make money
in Australia, and when other people had made the country better, he
returned and came to stand at the front of the queue. [Interjections.]

The cricket players involved admitted guilt, and accept unconditionally
that they did something wrong on the West Indian tour. [Interjections.]
They were punished, and want to go on with their lives. [Interjections.]
Let us allow them to go on with their lives. [Interjections.] They are our
people, our children, our brothers and our sporting heroes.
[Interjections.] The various federations must play their role to represent
the sports with regard to the problems which they have to deal with.
[Interjections.]

There is another problem I want to single out. The Cricket World Cup is
coming to South Africa in 2003. How many of the fields are in our black
areas? None.

Mr J H MOMBERG: Boland!

Mr R D PIETERSE: This is an old story which is emerging again. They have
known for a long time that the cricket was coming here. They could have
corrected this a long time ago. [Interjections.] Why has nothing been done
yet? [Interjections.] How many years after unification are there still no
quality facilities in our areas? I am tired of hearing stories to the
effect that I must be patient. [Interjections.] Something drastic must be
done. [Interjections.] It sometimes appears that the officials are in the
news more often than the sports stars.]

The broadcasting of sport of national interest is also not receiving the
necessary attention that it deserves. I want to appeal to the Minister and
his department to deal with this issue as soon as possible. Hon members
have to remember that the federations and sports promoters approach the
broadcasters, and not the other way round. They do all these unacceptable
things. They sign contracts with broadcasters that will make it difficult
for an agreement between all role-players. The debate on the issue of
broadcasting has been going on for too long. The question is: How to reach
the time frames?

The ANC supports the Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, I should kick off by
congratulating the hon the Minister for his commitment and dedication to
his department. [Applause.] Testimony to this is the number of people who
have come here just to listen to the debate on his budget this afternoon.

There is no doubt that sport and recreation, as a focus of development and
nation-building, play a crucial role in promoting and uniting the South
African nation. It was in sport that racial barriers were broken despite
the fact that resource distribution, in relation to sports facilities, were
skewed in favour of one race in the past.

Today the same still applies, not only in racial terms, but also in
geographical terms. Sport and recreation facilities are concentrated mainly
in urban areas. It is sad that in rural areas there are minimal and below
standard basic sport and recreational facilities. As a result, this impacts
negatively on the mental and physical development of our youth.

It has been well-researched and documented that the availability of sport
and recreational facilities in local communities assists to discourage
youth from indulging in destructive activities. In short, sport and
recreational facilities focus youth away from drugs, crime and unwanted
pregnancies as a result of boredom.

The Government should make sport and recreation its priority if it is to
have a healthy nation committed to a healthy lifestyle. This area of sport
and recreation should be seen as a window of opportunity by the Government
to interact with the private sector in developing the natural talents of
our sportsmen and women and youth in particular.

Tekanyetsokabo ya lefapha le e tshwanetse go okediwa, bogolosegolo fa go
lebelelwa mabaka a a umakilweng fa godimo. Kopo ke gore a Puso e tsibogele
go itumedisa baswa mo metshamekong, go ba faposa mo kotsing ya ditlamorago
tse di tlhakatlhakaneng le tse di tswang kwa mebileng. Bagolo le bona ba
tsee metshameko tsia, ba itse fa go tshameka go alafa mebele e e omeletseng
e bile ba rotloetse baswa go nna le seabe mo go yona.

UCDP e ema tekanyetsokabo e nokeng. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[The Vote for this department should be increased, especially when taking
into consideration the reasons stated above. We humbly submit that the
Government should be eager to support the youth, more especially in sport
and recreation, in order to keep them from indulging in destructive
activities in the streets. Sport and recreational facilities focus the
youth away from drugs, crime and boredom. The Government should involve
adults in sport and recreational activities so that they should stay
healthy. This will encourage the youth to participate in sport and
recreation.

The UCDP supports this Vote.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Speaker, I just want to deal with a few areas that
were raised by opposition party members, in particular Mr Lee and Mr
Morkel. The issues that they just raised are issues in which the hon
members claim that there is corruption in Athletics South Africa.
[Interjections.] The Minister invited the hon members to present a document
to that effect. They, however, first went public and said that they had
given the Minister the document, without giving it to him. We accepted
that. [Interjections.] It took that hon member 15 minutes before he could
table the document, because he knew for a fact that there was no substance
in what he was presenting.

Mr T D LEE: That is not what the Minister said.

Mr H P CHAUKE: That member should be quiet! It took him 15 minutes to
present it. But it is very clear and I understand where the hon member
comes from. [Interjections.] The last time we raised this issue of South
African athletics, we made it very clear to him that the one thing that he
must never forget, is that he and Morkel are part and parcel of the people
who have created the problems that we are trying to address today.
[Interjections.]

But we are not going to be diverted, because we in the ANC do have a policy
on sport and recreation. That is why one sees the development that is
taking place in sport today. [Interjections.] South Africa is now regarded
as one of the best countries when it comes to sport, because we in the ANC
have a policy. [Interjections.]

Where is the hon Morkel and the hon Lee's policies? They have been changing
parties like socks. [Laughter.] They do not have a policy. They do not
understand what they are doing. [Applause.] Where are their masters? They
are supposed to be here listening to the hon members. Where are they? They
are caucusing outside. They left the hon members here. [Interjections.]

The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation has set up a committee to
deal with the issue of racism in sport. Morkel and Lee are part of that
committee, but surprisingly today, while we are supposed to be concluding
the report that will be tabled to the Speaker, they say to us that the
portfolio committee does not have the right to call the mayor of Cape Town.
The reason for this is very clear. These hon members serve their masters,
and they do not have a backbone. [Interjections.] They are not sure of what
they are doing. [Interjections.]

On the one hand we are trying to address this issue, but on the other he is
saying to hell with the portfolio committee. We are not going to accept
that. We are going to engage him and that hon member, so that at the end of
the day there should be nobody who goes public and undermines Parliament
and its role. [Interjections.] Well, he is making noise because his boss is
not here. [Laughter.]

The other problem that we are having is one individual, Mr Lee. Abe
Williams was behaving exactly like him - where is Abe Williams now? We are
going to give Mr Lee time to sit down and think. We will lock him up
somewhere and leave him there, and when he comes out he will be able to
think positively. We will be dealing with him. [Applause.]

In the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation we know which parties
are very positive. The hon member Frolick from the UDM contributes, because
he understands the background we come from. Some of the hon members - I do
not know what colour I can give them - have changed. They have even ran
away from their own people, whom they are supposed to be serving.

Another problem that we definitelyÿ.ÿ.ÿ. [Interjections.]

Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it permissible for
the hon Lee to call Mr Chauke a racist?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Lee, you cannot call another hon member a
racist. If you did call the hon member a racist, please withdraw.

An HON MEMBERS: And he must get out!

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, I did use the word, and I withdraw.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you.

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! No, no, I do not want a speech, hon member.
[Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, I want to address you on a point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! No. Hon Lee, the reason you came to the
microphone was because I asked you to come and withdraw. So, if you had a
point of order to raise, that is a separate matter. Could you just take
your seat right now, because I have dealt with the point of order which was
raised.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Speaker, one of the areas that we definitely have to
address in this department is the question of facilities. It is very clear
that ... [Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, can I now address you on a point of order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! What is the point of order?
Mr T D LEE: The point of order is: During his speech, Mr Chauke said that I
would land where Mr Abe Williams is, implying that I am a thief. That is
the implication. Is that parliamentary?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Is he implying that you are a crook? Hon member,
I will look at the Hansard, and then rule on that matter. Hon Chauke,
please proceed.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Speaker ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Madam Speaker, at the same time, the hon speaker
threatened Mr Lee with the following words: ``We are going to lock you up
in a place, and there you will sit.'' Is the hon member threatening Mr Lee?
[Interjections.]

HON MEMBERS: No, no!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! Can we have some order, please. Hon
Moorcroft, I listened very carefully to the hon Mr Chauke when he was
saying what you are referring to. The impression I got was different from
yours. However, in order for me to be able to give a well-considered
ruling, I would rather go and look at the Hansard and I will come back with
a ruling.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Speaker, one of the areas that the department needs to
address as soon as possible is the question of facilities. For example, in
Soweto we have a population of about 5 million people, with only one
stadium. That stadium was used as far back as more than 50 years ago.

So, what we must then do is divert our resources, definitely to try and
address the imbalances that were created by apartheid. It was during the
apartheid years, when our people were not represented in government, that
when they asked for facilities to be provided, tractors came and scrapped
the grounds without fencing them or anything. Only two poles were put there
and it was said that these were facilities that were right for them. So,
these are some of the issues that we have to try and address as speedily as
possible.

I am quite happy that even the UCDP today realises that there is a need for
this Government to begin to provide facilities where they are needed.
During the Bophuthatswana bantustan they built very big stadia, some in Odi
and Mafikeng, very far removed from the communities. Those facilities, as I
am speaking now, are just standing empty, and it is up to those federations
in those provinces to start coming up with programmes that will engage
communities, so that they can begin to use those facilities in those areas.

Another area that we must deal with is the role of local government when it
comes to the provision of sports facilities, because they are directly ...
[Interjections.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Like the Western Cape!

Mr H P CHAUKE: No, not like the Western Cape, Mr Morkel! When I talk about
local government he always jumps up because he knows for a fact that he is
trying to please certain people. And we are not going to accept that. We do
not have a country and a province, separately. His behaviour clearly says
to us that we have a country and a province somewhere. So, we have to do
away with some of those things.

So, we are calling on local government to immediately, as my chairperson
has said, repeal those apartheid by-laws that denied our people
participation in sport, and to use facilities in sport.

Again, I am happy to learn that the department has come up with the
programme that begins to address the needs of the youth, because if one
goes around from here to the airport, what does one see outside? Young
people are occupying a small space next to the freeway, because there are
no facilities in Cape Town, Gugulethu, Langa and Khayelitsha.
[Interjections.]

Where is Green Point Stadium? What is the condition of Athlone Stadium
today? This Government is beginning to address them. We are putting money
there, so that the Athlone Stadium can be developed and our people can
participate there. [Applause.] What did they do during apartheid? They have
done nothing! They offered us nothing. Hon Morkel and hon Lee were
oppressed like me, but I am surprised that today they are the ones who are
making noise, and all that. Their masters are just watching them to ensure
that they are doing a very good job. [Applause.]

An HON MEMBER: Bobbejaanspanner! [Monkey wrench!]

Mr H P CHAUKE: On the question of the poverty relief fund that is put up by
the department, I think it came at the right time when the department
needed that money. That money will be used to built those facilities. We
are going to build them in the townships and in the villages, and at the
same time we will be creating jobs for our people who will be working on
those projects.

We support this Vote. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Mr Chairperson, I want to thank hon
members who have participated in this debate. I cannot respond to all the
issues they have raised, but I have taken note of their comments. Some of
the comments are ludicrous, especially those coming from some of the
bobbejaanspanners around here. [Laughter.] I do not have the time to answer
those questions. But it is nice to see the hon Seremane away from a bus
stop. [Laughter.] I should mention that we are looking at all these issues
that they have raised, and we will respond in time with the Department of
Sport and Recreation, to ensure that these issues are addressed.

Hon member Mr Mzondeki should be assured that the issue of disabled people
is an issue that we are looking into, and I am hoping that, with his
contribution and that of the paralympic team, we will be able to really
look into some of those matters.

School sport remains a matter very close to our hearts, and we will try our
best to make sure that we address that. All members have spoken about the
Sports Commission, and I will endeavour to look into the budget to see how
we can adjust the budget of the Sports Commission to suit the needs of
sportspeople in South Africa.

The hon member Mr Frolick is right about our overall budget and I thank him
very much for noticing that. We only had 1,8% of savings and that was due
to positions that were not filled, which we are now going to fill. I am
very proud that in the first year we were able to utilise our budget like
that.

With regard to the issue of transfer payments and financial accountability,
I have addressed the ASA issue. I am going to look into it. I have all the
documentation and I do not want to be listening to cheap shots from members
to my left. I have made a commitment and I will stick to that commitment.

About women' soccer, we will look into that matter, as well as the issue of
sport broadcasting, which is an area of concern because lots of people do
write us letters about that. On the Newlands issue, the chairperson has
addressed that and I hope that the portfolio committee will be able to
address it in its totality, and that they will be able to get the Mayor of
Cape Town to come to the portfolio committee. I have persuaded him many
times to do this, and I hope he gets it into his head to do exactly what is
asked of him.

Lastly, I should also mention that we had a number of prominent
sportspeople who have passed away during this period of time. Khaya Majola
is one of them; Tony Naidoo and Peter Mkata are the other ones. They have
really played a sterling role in our sport, and we will always think of
them whenever we do anything in sport.
I think I have covered quite a number of things. There is a function at the
V & A Waterfront, because we are combining the reception for this Vote with
the one for those international people that have arrived. So if members
want ukulahl' umlenze [to dance.] They must please feel free to come to the
Waterfront for that purpose. They will be most welcome.

Lastly, on the issue of facilities we have, fortunately, employed a new
director of facilities. He is here with us, Mr Solomon Phango. He will be
giving a report on all the facilities that they are dealing with to the
portfolio committee within the next month, and we will be able to know
exactly where each facility will be. We will make sure that these
facilities are in the right places. Local government and municipalities
will be engaged, to make sure that they maintain them and make them their
own.

I thank the hon members very much for their attention this evening, and I
hope that they will listen to the next Vote that is coming up. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 26 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Speaker, hon
members, may I start by quoting from a book by Mark Kurlansky entitled COD:
A Biography of the Fish that changed the world. Cod is what they call
``kabeljou'' in Europe, and I quote:


  the tremendously influential British scientific philosopher Thomas Henry
  Huxley, was appointed to three British fishing commissions. (His)
  commission established the tradition in government of ignoring the
  observations of fishermen. It reported: ``Fishermen, as a class, are
  exceedingly unobservant of anything about fish which is not absolutely
  forced upon them by their daily avocations.''


  Huxley delivered an address explaining why overfishing was an
  unscientific and erroneous fear. ``Any tendency to over-fishing will meet
  with its natural check in the diminution of the supply this check will
  always come into operation long before anything like permanent exhaustion
  has occurred.


  For the next 100 years, Huxley's influence would be reflected in Canadian
  government policy. An 1885 report by L Z Joncas in the Canadian Ministry
  of Agriculture stated: ``The question here arises: Would not the Canadian
  fisheries soon be exhausted if they were worked on a much larger scale? I
  say it is impossible, not merely to exhaust them, but even noticeably to
  lessen their number by the means now used for their capture. For the last
  three hundred years fishing has gone on in the Gulf of St Lawrence and
  although enormous quantities of fish have been caught, there are no
  indications of exhaustion.''

In the 19th century it was a fashionable European belief that nature was
indestructible, that clean air was limitless, that the planet's forests was
always infinite, that wild life could be killed in large numbers without
any danger of extinction and that it was impossible to overfish.

One hundred years later, in 1992, the Canadian cod fisheries of Labrador
and Newfoundland collapsed. The fish were no more. Canada was forced to
impose a total allowable catch of zero. A moratorium was imposed, banning
all fishing and as I speak, almost 10 years later, the Canadian stocks have
not recovered.

The EU learned this lesson even later as a result of a generation of greed
and neglect. This year the EU was forced to reduce the total allowable
catch for cod from 81 000 tons to 46 000 tons, a reduction of almost 50%.
As I speak, the fishing fleets of Spain and other EU nations stand idle.

The lesson for us is glaring. We South Africans must act while we can.
Destroy beloved and life-giving nature and it is gone forever. The EU has
now requested the right to fish in South African waters. Our response is a
very short: ``No''. [Applause.]

As a result of careful management of our natural resources, South Africa's
total allowable catch for hake - our most valuable fishery - has increased
in the last decade from 138 000 tons to 166 000 tons. It increased from 150
000 tons last year to 166 000 tons this year. We can take pride in the
knowledge that ours is about the best managed fish stocks in the world.

The insecurity, unpredictability and unfairness characterising this
industry will soon be a thing of the past. At last we have brought to an
end the system in which fishing enterprises had to apply for rights each
and every year in a ``tata-ma chance, tata-ma quota'' fashion.

To this end, beginning with the 2001 to 2002 season, we will be issuing
long-term rights and these will vary from three to six years: for
mariculture the rights will be up to 15 years. Furthermore, black economic
empowerment will be boosted. Already more than 50% of the pelagics sector
is black owned. We think this should serve as a guide for the entire
fishing industry to achieve over the the next few years.

In the 2001 allocation of rights, 56% of all rights were granted to new
entrants. A portion of the total allowable catch will be placed in what we
refer to as an equity pool. Only companies that have transformed will be
eligible for an increase in their quota from this pool. In this way
transformation will be rewarded.

Subsistence fishers, those people living along the coastline, no longer
need to go through the complicated and costly process of applying for
quotas. Already this year 2 431 subsistence permits were issued at the
local level and I am proud to say that for the first time in history a
large number of women have been directly issued with fishing permits.

The growth of mariculture will be given greater priority. Since 1998 the
number of permitted mariculture establishments has grown from 19 to 40, and
over the next year it will grow by a further 20. The department predicts
that this year the yield from abalone farms, particularly perlemoen, will
exceed the yield from the harvesting of wild abalone. Next month I will be
requesting Parliament for authorisation to issue the first permit for the
establishment of a salmon farm in South Africa. [Interjections.]

The war on illegal activity against those who plunder our natural heritage
will be intensified. Between August 2000 and April 2001 alone 900 persons
were arrested, 68 701 abalone worth R8 million were confiscated, 13 000
rock lobsters were confiscated, spot fines worth R127 000 were issued and
39 vehicles were confiscated. I wish to congratulate officials of the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism who, on 12 April, arrested
the skipper of a foreign-owned boat carrying poached Patagonian toothfish
worth R6 million off Cape Agulhas. The SA Navy gave crucial support in this
operation. The request for assistance came from Australia, from whose
waters the poaching had taken place. The importance of protecting our fish
stocks cannot be left to chance. We South Africans must act while we can.

South Africa enjoys the third highest level of biodiversity in the world.
Our parks, mountains, rivers, wetlands and the 3 000 km coastline, our wild
animals and flowers are our pride and the property of the generations yet
to come. From an economic point of view their value is beyond calculation.
Our country's rich natural heritage is vast and staggering in its
proportions. For example, over 3 700 marine species occur in South Africa
and nowhere else in the world. And the Cape floristic region is so unique
that it has been designated as one of the earth's six plant kingdoms. No
other country is host to an entire plant kingdom. So, we South Africans
must act while we can.

In order to do justice to this enormous heritage, we are unfolding a
holistic bioregional approach to conservation. This strategic intervention
in nature conservation is massive and unprecedented. It involves at least
22 initiatives. At the core of the conservation strategy are our protected
areas, mainly in the form of parks. Since 1994, when we came into
government, parks under the SA National Parks have expanded by 227 000
hectares. There is no other comparable period in the entire history of
national parks that expansion took place at this rate.

I take pride in announcing that in a special Gazette, which was published
today, we effect 21 land transfers into national parks. These includes the
incorporation of the Tokai and Cecilia forests into the Cape Peninsula
National Park. [Applause.] Plans are afoot for the incorporation of the
Qwaqwa National Park - it is the so-called national park because it was in
Qwaqwa, which was a country at the time - into the Golden Gate National
Park. The Manyeleti and Letaba Nature Reserves will be incorporated into
the Kruger National Park and the Mkambati Nature Reserve into the proposed
Pondoland National Park.

We have also proposed to the Northern Province that Nylsvlei, a wetland of
global significance, be declared a new national park. The consolidation of
the Greater St Lucia Wetlands Park, with its 280 km coastline and World
Heritage Site status, is progressing on schedule. As early as August this
year we will be relocating elephants back into the Lake St Lucia area.
Nature knows no boundaries.

Following the success of the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park, on 10 November
2000, the governments of South Africa, Mozambique and Zimbabwe signed an
agreement to establish the Gaza-Kruger-Gonarezhou Transfrontier Park. This
will be the world's greatest animal kingdom, encompassing an area of 40 000
km2. This is now recognised as the world's biggest conservation and
ecotourism project. This year, we will take the first steps to remove a 120
km stretch of fence that separates South Africa from Mozambique. This year,
we will also start translocating the first of 1 000 elephants from the
Kruger National Park to Mozambique - the biggest operation of its kind in
the world.

An agreement is to be signed in the next few months between South Africa
and Namibia to establish a transfrontier park which incorporates the
Richtersveld and the Ais-Ais National Parks and which will include the
famous Fish River Canyon. Just 12 days from today, I will be signing an
agreement with Lesotho to establish the Drakensberg-Maluti Transfrontier
Conservation Area. The integrity of a great African mountain, which was
divided by colonialism, is to be restored. [Applause.] The Global
Environmental Fund has allocated R120 million for this project. The
transfrontier initiatives that I have mentioned are an important component
of the African Renaissance. They will also be an integral part of the
Millennium Africa Recovery Programme - Marp.

South Africa's valuable 3 000 km coastline must be guarded with jealousy.
Currently, 1 350 people are employed in poverty relief projects that are
aimed at the rehabilitation of the coast. And, in today's special Gazette
we declared Walker Bay in Hermanus the country's first whale sanctuary
which provides a safe haven for the giants of the ocean during calfing
season. This places a strict prohibition on the use of private boats, jet-
skis, etc in the bay.
In the Gazette, today, we again published draft regulations aimed at
prohibiting the driving of 4x4 and other private vehicles on all beaches.
[Interjections.] On the Wild Coast, the state has proceeded to crack down
on persons who have erected illegal holiday cottages. Forty-six summonses
have been served on illegal cottage owners, eight have been demolished and
27 arrests have been made. We must act while we can.

The responsible disposal and recycling of the titanic volumes of waste that
we produce must remain a priority. Mountains of waste continue to mushroom
everywhere. Litter and filth continue to plague us. We must act before it
is too late. This year, Government will spend R31,5 million on funding 20
poverty relief projects and employing 1 892 people. That is aimed at
cleaning up our country. The regulations prohibiting the production and
distribution of thin plastic carrier bags are now being discussed by
Nedlac, at the request of the the plastic bag producers and organised
labour. While we respect due process, Government remains committed to
ridding our environment of this terrible blight.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend Collect a Can for
recycling as much as 63% of the cans that are used in South Africa. This is
a world record. The sterling work being done is a source of pride to our
country. The Collect a Can project obviates the need for government
regulation of the use of cans. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for
other products. This year, we will pay more attention to products like
tyres, glass bottles, PET containers, building rubble and medical waste.

Air pollution in some parts of our country has reached hazardous
proportions. The people in the Durban South Industrial Basin, the Sasolburg-
Vanderbijlpark complex and elsewhere are paying a high price for economic
growth. Industrial development does not have to be accompanied by denial of
clean air for our citizens. A start has been made in the Durban South
Industrial Basin. Together with community organisations, trade unions and
industry, Government is implementing a package of measures to improve the
air quality. It is our view that this should include the banning of dirty
fuels and strict control over toxic emissions. This week, we published new
proposed standards in which a drastic reduction in the emission of toxic
gases is proposed. This is aimed at reducing the sulphur dioxide content of
the atmosphere by 50%. We must act before it is too late.

The phenomenon of global warming caused by the emission of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases must continue to receive our attention. It is
now common cause that the 1990's was the warmest decade in recorded
history. South Africa calls on the industrialised nations to end the delay
on setting emission reduction targets.

The USA has a special responsibility as it alone accounts for 25% of all
greenhouse gas emissions. We will continue to play our part internationally
in the search for a solution. In the past week Cabinet held in-depth
discussions on global warming and Government departments have been asked to
work on a response strategy to mitigate the effects of climate change.

We will continue with the vigorous thrust of the past two years to boost
tourism. The Celebrate South Africa Campaign in the UK, under the
leadership of High Commissioner Carolus, takes our international marketing
campaign to new and globally competitive heights. This complements the
establishment of the Circle of Sunshine in the UK and also in France,
Germany and the Netherlands. These are composed largely of South Africans
living abroad, but who wish to promote their motherland.

New investments in tourism continue to flow in. In December last year,
seven concessions were awarded for the building and operation of tourism
facilities in the Kruger National Park. In November last year, investment
opportunities potentially worth R1 billion in the greater St Lucia Wetlands
Park were announced. These concessions will be awarded this year.
Similarly, the new alignment of the N2 along the Wild Coast, and the
establishment of the Pondoland National Park will open up investment
opportunities as part of the Wild Coast SDI.

The new Sandton Convention Centre opened its doors six months ago and
construction of a new convention centre in Cape Town is already under way.
On 6 June this year, which is next week, the soil-turning ceremony for the
new Kruger Mpumalanga International Airport will take place.

Our initiatives are beginning to pay off. More than 2,8 million foreigners
visited South Africa between January and June 2000. In that period,
overseas arrivals increased by 4,4%. South Africa is aggressively marketing
itself as a world-class destination for meetings and conventions. This
industry contributed R20 billion to the GDP in 2000. We are now ranked
number 21 in the world in this lucrative global market. There is no reason
why we should not rapidly move into the top 10.

In the past year township tours have been gaining in popularity. I want to
congratulate the portfolio committee on holding its annual meeting with the
department at a marvellous Gugulethu venue. In addition, the department
itself held its management training session at Moretele Park in Mamelodi.

Excellent progress was made in making the 2001 Tourism Indaba, which was
held in Durban last month, more representative. The number of black-owned
enterprises represented increased from 34 in 2000 to 149 in 2001 - an
increase of about 400%. The road to making the ownership patterns of the
tourism industry representative is still long. But we are making progress
every day.

The United Nations General Assembly bestowed a great honour on South Africa
by accepting our invitation to hold the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable
Development in Johannesburg. As the Johannesburg world summit will be the
biggest global gathering of its kind, it poses a challenge, but also a
unique opportunity for us. South Africa's endorsement as host country for
the historic World Summit on Sustainable Development is significant and an
enormous opportunity to lead the global campaign to craft a sustainable
blueprint for the future. Such a blueprint must put at the very centre, the
deliberate and relentless fight to eradicate poverty and to ensure
development for all.

The issues that are critical towards ensuring a better life for the
developing nations of the world in general, and the African continent in
particular, must occupy centre stage at this conference, which is about the
planet and its people. Due to the deep significance of the summit to the
planet, I do hope that this House will create an opportunity for a special
debate on this matter. I have already put such a request to the chairperson
of the portfolio committee. May I assure the House that no effort will be
spared to do full justice to the enormous responsibility that the world has
placed on our shoulders.

Finally, the work that I report on today was made possible by the
assistance of Deputy Minister Mabudafhasi and the capable and dedicated
team in the department, led by the Director-General, Chippy Olver. I thank
the department for their support. As in previous years, members of the
Ministry have continued to provide an outstanding service. But it is
important for me to report to the National Assembly that the Portfolio
Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism has been extremely active in
supporting, encouraging and overseeing the work of the department. I found
members of the committee taking a keen interest in all aspects of the
portfolio and often making valuable suggestions. For this, I thank
Chairperson Gwen Mahlangu and members of the committee. [Applause.]

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Madam Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to follow the hon
the Minister and we in these benches would like to commend him for a well
balanced speech and for the many exciting initiatives which he gave notice
of in his speech. In particular, we welcome his announcement that our
fishing stocks will continue to be managed on a sustainable yield basis and
that includes our shellfish stocks. Sustainability of the important fishing
industry must, after all, be a priority for this Government and all
governments.

The announcements that he made about the transfrontier parks and the
continued initiatives there are to be welcomed. These are indeed some of
the most exciting developments in conservation that we have seen in recent
years.

Some years ago there was a popular song about love and marriage. According
to the words of the song, love and marriage go together like a horse and
carriage. One cannot have one without the other. So it is or should be with
environmental conservation and tourism. The two should complement each
other. It is because of the beauty of our unique environment that our
tourist industry, which the hon Minister dealt with, if it is properly
managed, holds such promise of success.

But, basic to this success is caring for the conservation of our fragile
environment. It was for this reason that we perused with great interest a
document from the Department entitled: A Bioregional Approach to South
Africa's Protected Areas. This document reveals plans by the hon Minister
to increase the size of the protected areas in South Africa from the
current 6% to 8% of the terrestrial surface and from 5% to 20% of the
marine environment. It seeks to establish a comprehensive and
representative system of protected areas as well as sustainable financing
mechanisms.

My concern lies with these financing mechanisms and I shall return to them
shortly. Firstly, let me congratulate the hon Minister on this initiative.
Our protected areas represent a shop window of our conservation effort. In
many ways, they form the backbone of our tourist industry. Unfortunately,
we have thus far failed to meet the internationally accepted ideal of
setting aside 10% of our entire land area for conservation. The hon
Minister's scheme will, however, bring us to within 2% of this ideal and,
if successfully achieved, it will hold huge benefits for both conservation
and tourism, and will represent one of the most important achievements of
this hon Minister and his department.

But, and there always has to be a but, there are serious problems to be
overcome in financing this scheme. In order to increase the size of our
land area that is under protection by 2%, we will need to add another 2 360
000 hectares to the 11 800 000 hectares already enjoying conservation
status. Let me just repeat those figures. There are almost 12 million
hectares already with conservation status in the country today. In order to
increase that by the necessary 2%, or the proposed 2%, we will need to add
almost 2,5 million hectares to that amount.

If we accept that the state is unlikely to acquire this land at any figure
less than R1 000 per hectare, and I take that as a ballpark figure, then we
see that in today's prices, the cost of the land alone will be in the
vicinity of R2 billion to R2,5 billion. It is a staggering figure. It does
not include the administration costs or the provision of infrastructure or
any subsidiary costs.

The question must arise: Where does the department hope to raise the money
required to purchase this land? The document names three possible sources,
the Government itself, the private sector and the donor community. What is
the likelihood of success? If we start with the private sector and the
donor community, we must acknowledge that they have made sterling efforts
in the past. The contributions made by organisations such as the World
Wildlife Fund for Nature and the international forum for animal welfare
have been enormous, but they have many commitments and they cannot
realistically be expected to increase their present contribution by a
significant amount.

The same holds good for the private sector. It and the NGOs may well be
persuaded to increase, perhaps even to double, their present contribution,
but given the size of the required amount of funding needed, even this will
not make a significant impression. This leaves Government at the end of the
day to shoulder the main burden. Unfortunately their track record in this
department thus far has not been all that encouraging. In Programme 7 of
the budget before us, the state has provided R8 million for the purchase of
land. This translates roughly into 8 000 hectares which, although welcome -
and I am not trying to knock this contribution, I am just looking at it in
terms of the relative need - is much less than even 1% of what is going to
be required.

There is a definite problem there, but what about the provincial
governments? Could they not be persuaded to come to the party? As far back
as 1998 the Kumleben Board of Inquiry revealed that provincial protected
areas were in dire financial difficulties, so much so that in certain
provinces there have been massive retrenchments of staff. In KwaZulu-Natal
alone, for example, some 700 employees have either been retrenched or are
about to be retrenched. This has led to a great deal of unhappiness and
uncertainty. Employees in that province have become demoralised. Elsewhere
there have been losses of highly qualified administrators and research
workers. There would be, under these circumstances, very little chance of
significant contributions coming from the provinces.

The responsibility therefore clearly rests with central Government. We in
these benches want the initiatives to succeed, but we do foresee these
difficulties on the path ahead. Perhaps the hon Minister will either prove
my arithmetic wrong or he will allay my fears about the availability of
funding. Either way we will welcome it, because we need to increase the
protected areas in the way proposed. We are the last generation for whom
this possibility exists. In another 20 or 30 years it will be too late. The
Minister's comments will therefore be much appreciated.

The DP supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Ms G L MAHLANGU: Madam Speaker, I am very happy about the kind words of the
Minister. The men and women that I work with who are really committed to
environmental affairs and tourism made everything possible. What pleases me
more is that I thought Mr Moorcroft and I only worked together, but I
realised this afternoon that we share the same music, that song goes: ``You
can't have one without the other.'' [Laughter.]

I want to thank the Minister for the plan that he has outlined this
afternoon. I am pleased to see that the department and departmental
officials took most of the issues that we raised in the portfolio committee
during the last two years seriously.

The 21st century offers the human race a unique challenge, a challenge that
we in South Africa earnestly look forward to for providing a context for
each discussion by the international community. As a human race we have
been faced with environmental problems. But scarcely have the countries of
the world addressed these problems collectively until the latter part of
the last century. This is what is unique about these challenges.

The Rio Summit held in July 1992 was undoubtedly one of the greatest
gatherings of world leaders. Many delegates left the summit feeling that
the occasion had marked a new beginning, a new realism and a new
accommodation between the rich north and the poor south. A significant
number of people saw such an accommodation as possible and necessary, but
as we now know, almost a decade on, it will not come easily.

The industrial North dominates the order of the global agenda and this is
not poor South rhetoric. For example, the way that economic development is
conventionally understood suggests that the north prefigures the south as a
market for goods and services. It is only a matter of time before access to
the goods enjoyed by consumers in the north is widened to include many in
the south. Yet, this view of development is increasingly inadequate. In the
1970s limits to growth were judged to be shortages in materials and food
shortfalls.

However, from the perspective of the 1990s, the view is different. Today it
is the externalities of growth which provide the limits. Patterns of
consumption are driven by effective demand in the north, but the outcome of
increased consumption of resources in the form of changes in climate and
biodiversity is felt throughout the globe.

In addition, and this is very critical, there is a wide and increasing
divergence between northern environmental agendas and the developmental
agenda shared by most in the poor south. The meeting of UNCED (UN
Conference on Environment and Development) in Rio in July 1992 only served
to emphasise these differences. In Rio the central issues of poverty, trade
and debt crises were neglected by most northern governments. As a result
the outcome of Rio was a set of commitments which were impressive, but
failed to secure the necessary financial basis for the transfer of funds
from the north to the south.

We have, of course, moved on from Rio, and we are heading to Johannesburg.
The debt crisis is in the foreground of the global environmental agenda
because poverty has important environmental dimensions, for instance a
rural household's lack of fertile land on which to make an adequate living
or an urban household's lack of safe and sufficient water supplies. This
relationship between poverty and the environment is hardly one that is
drawn out in the global environmental agenda. It is hoped that Johannesburg
will make a shift in this direction. I should not dwell much on this
because my colleagues will be dealing with it.

We have come a long way in improving environmental problems, in looking at
environmental problems and improving environmental legislation from the
Connep process up to the National Environmental Management Act. It is also
important for us to inform hon members that we have passed another piece of
legislation today, the South African Weather Service Bill. We are now faced
with the Johannesburg Earth Summit where, amongst other things, we should
showcase our successes since our commitment to the Rio Summit. My
colleagues will deal with that in detail.

In the Northern Cape we still have 15 000 asbestos sufferers. On average 12
people a month die in the area of Prieska. Some of them are in hospital
suffering from asbestosis, a disease that destroys the lungs and eventually
kills the victims.
We still talk about Thor Chemicals. The community of the Cato Ridge area is
still waiting for us to address their plight. We think about Cele, Ngcobo
and Dlamini who have sacrificed their lives by working for Thor Chemicals
in the Cato Ridge area.

In 1995 we had the Macassar disaster. Whenever I drive past Macassar to
entertain myself - when I have time to do so, to the Strand beachfront - I
always feel very ashamed, because there are so many questions that we have
still not answered.

In some areas today, these potentially dangerous chemicals and products
continue to be stored or transported to warehouses, even within residential
areas, threatening disasters like fires, explosions, leakages and exposure
of communities to harmful gases.

The above incident cannot reside in a South Africa which has the
environment as a right contained in the Bill of Rights of our Constitution,
nor where the National Environmental Management Act - commonly known as
Nema - is in operation and in place, an Act which dictates that workers
have a right to be informed about the dangers they are exposed to in their
work situation. They further have a right to refuse to work under those
conditions. This Act still calls for the polluter case principle. A big
question is: Are the polluters paying? Are we able to enforce what we are
legislating?

At the second International Tourism Forum held in Indonesia in September
1996, we as South Africa joined tourism policy-makers in resolving that the
development of tourism should be aimed at raising the wellbeing of local
communities, promoting mutual understanding to achieve peace, the
conservation of nature and the environment and the preservation of
traditions, as well as social, cultural and religious values.

The big question is whether communities and host communities are benefiting
from tourist activities. This afternoon we have with us in the gallery some
of the disadvantaged players in the tourism industry. These are the people
we speak about on the podiums of Parliament, on whom we call to come and
participate. However, as soon as they come, we do not give them the market.
We still support the rich people. We do not use their taxis and combis.
Some of them have been trained as tour guides and tour operators. They
cannot use that experience, because they are shut out by existing
businesses.

South Africa is a very rich country, both through tourism and its
environment. We should be able to create employment and business
opportunities for South Africans, thus promoting and ensuring a better life
for all.

At the end of the conference of the of the ATA, the Africa Travel
Association, David Saunders said the following, which was actually meant
for the Minister:


  A visit to South Africa can truly be a dream, a dream of a lifetime, a
  dream come true. It is a country full of cultural diversity, marvellous
  scenery, fantastic wildlife and magical diversity. South Africa's diverse
  culture comes alive in its multi-ethnic heritage: arts, cuisine and
  sports. South Africa is a destination bustling with friendly people,
  people of poetry, dance and song.

I would like to conclude by quoting the President:


  The majority of people present in this Chamber are South Africans.
  Outwardly we are a people of many colours, races, cultures, languages and
  ethnic origins, yet we are tied to one another by a million visible and
  invisible threads. We share a common destiny from which none of us can
  escape, because together we are human, we are South Africans, we are
  Africans.

I want to take this opportunity to wish all the members of the portfolio
committee excellent deliberations in this debate.

The ANC will be supporting this budget. [Applause.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chairperson, hon members, firstly, I would like to thank
the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and his department, led
by Dr Oliver, for a job well done, especially on tourism. One can go
anywhere in the rural areas and they will tell one about tourism. They will
say that they want to develop tourism. It is because of the work that we
have done, especially on the Welcome Campaign.

We want to thank the Minister for helping the disadvantaged communities to
be part of the exhibition at the Durban Tourism Indaba, with the
involvement of all the provincial tourism authorities of course. There is
still room for improvement on this. That was the beginning. We still need
more people who come from rural areas to promote rural tourism, and others
to promote township tourism, as the Minister has rightly said here.

The launch of the Welcome Campaign has created awareness among all South
Africans about the importance of tourism.

Ngesikhathi sikhula uma umuntu ethi ukhuluma ngendaba yokuvakasha,
kwakuyaye kuthiwe uyakhenka. Intombazane ayiyi ndawo iyakhenka! Kodwa
namhlanje uma ukhuluma ngokuvasha sewuyakwazi nokusho ukuthi ingane yami
ayikho, ivakashile, baku-Tour. I-Tourism sekuyigama nje elihle kanti kuqala
besithi ukukhenka. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[When we were young, when a person talked about tourism, he was thought to
be a runaway. A girl was not allowed to go anywhere, because then she would
be a runaway. Today one can talk about tourism. One could even say that
one's child is away, he is on a tour. Tourism is a good term now. In the
past it meant to run away.]

We commend the department for having allocated the sum of R175 million for
poverty relief in 2001-02. An amount of R50 million has been set aside for
local tourism infrastructure. We would like to see rural areas, especially
in KwaZulu-Natal, accessing such funds, not only in KwaZulu, but also in
the Eastern Cape and all other provinces which have rural areas. Tour
guides will have to be thoroughly trained, particularly in the local
history and culture, also regarding the care of the disadvantaged and
disabled community.

Ilungu elihloniphekile uMnu uMzondeki ukhulume kabanzi ngokuba nabantu
abanenhliziyo yokukwazi ukunakekela abantu bakithi abakhubazekile ukuze
bakwazi ukubathatha. Siyabona ezokuvakasha kuleyo ndawo zisaqhuga, ekutheni
kube khona abantu abaphelezelayo, bavakashiswe kahle abantu abeswele futhi
abakhubazekile. Ngiyathanda ukukuphakamisa lokhu. (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[The hon Mr Mzondeki spoke at length about the importance of having people
who have the patience to care for our disabled people and who could even
carry them. We know that tourism is still lagging behind in that area.
There are no people to accompany disabled tourists. I would like to put
this on record.]

This reflects that the department is efficiently operating within the scope
of the Batho Pele programme, and other related programmes aimed at
addressing social inequities. The poverty-relief programme will have to
consider the impact of these projects on the quality of life of the poor
people within the community.

The problem is how to access these funds. Not everybody knows how to draw
up a business plan. As I have said earlier, everybody now talks about
tourism, but the problem is funding. Funds are there in the department, but
how to dig them up is the problem. The capacity of the department to
support tourism through the creation of additional high-level posts will,
indeed, shape the envisaged focus on promoting growth in tourism.

I want to touch on marine and coastal management. The IFP would like to
applaud the department for having put out a tender for new vessels that
will patrol the fishing reserves in the exclusive economic zone. This move
will protect these areas from illegal fishing activities.

The intention to establish a rights allocation unit is a step in the right
direction. This will help most disadvantaged fishers whose livelihood
solely depends on fishing, but are denied access by stringent bureaucracy.
Since the known annual limit of 500 applications has risen to 11 000
applications, this co-ordination unit will reflect that there is a sense of
urgency in resolving the plight of disadvantaged communities, and black
economic empowerment will be boosted.

We want the Minister to state the position of the subsistence fisherman. Of
course he has stated this as he was delivering his speech, so that issue
has been dealt with. We, however, want him to elaborate on the role of the
poverty-relief programme in this regard.

The hosting of the 2002 Johannesburg Earth Summit by the department in
particular, and South Africa in general, indicates that the UN itself has
recognised the environmental strategies of the department and the country
to be in line with universal sustainable development strategies. The IFP,
therefore, compliments the department on having received such accolades
from the international community.

Agenda 21 remains a fundamental programme of action for achieving
sustainable development that requires integration of the economic, social
and environmental components, enabling the poor to achieve sustainable
livelihood. It should provide an integration factor that allows policies to
address issues of development, sustainable resource, management and poverty
eradication, recognising the role of the indigenous people and their
communities in the programme of sustainable development.

Over many years indigenous people have evolved a holistic traditional,
scientific knowledge of land and the environment. Their ability to practice
sustainable development on lands has been limited by economic, social and
historical factors. Indigenous people should actively participate in the
conference. Indigenous people should be put on the agenda, especially on
food, drinks, plants and seeds.

Local authorities have a key role to play in making sustainable development
happen. They need to be engaged in this conference. After the conference
South Africa and Africa must benefit from it, especially in respect of
poverty alleviation.

There are so many conventions in this department. South Africa is a
signatory to a variety of the international agreements dealing with
environmental issues. May I mention a few - the Montreal Protocol on
substances that deplete the ozone layer, which is based on the Convention
on the Control of Transborder Movement of Hazardous Waste and Disposal, the
Ramsa Convention, Convention on Wetlands, the UN Framework Convention on
Climatic Change, Sustainable Development on RioPlus10 and Agenda 21, which
is what I have dealt with right now.

I know Mr Minister has a tight schedule, but we would appreciate if he
could find time to make a statement on these protocols for the benefit of
those who are listening at home and for all of us. I salute the Minister,
because we have touched on some of the matters that he would love to look
at during the presentations this morning in our portfolio committee
deliberations.
I would also like to touch on the global warming and the globalisation
problem, which have effects on floods and drought conditions. During the
floods homes are damaged and destroyed, leaving a multitude of people
homeless. Current reports show that in countries in Africa and South
Africa, hundreds of people have been displaced. The floods also destroy
sanitary facilities, sewerage pipes are blocked, resulting in a leakage of
human waste. This results in cholera outbreaks. Drought conditions, on the
other hand, cause food and water shortages. Generally, lack of water is a
problem. People have no choice but to use unsafe sources of water which
have a high concentration of pollutants. This also results in cholera
outbreaks. I am raising these points to support the sustainable development
concept.

Lastly, I touch on programme 7, the outsourcing of biodiversity and the
heritage. In 1999 South Africa and Botswana signed a historic agreement to
manage the Gemsbok Park and the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park agreement. The
Minister has said that nature knows no boundary.

Izilwane ziyazinqamulela nje zishone laphaya. [Animals just cross over to
that side freely.]

We have our own boundaries, but what he did was very good.

Ngithi kuNgqongqoshe ngeke ngiqede ngingakhulumanga ngendawo yase-St Lucia
Wetlands Park. [I would like to inform the hon the Minister that I will not
conclude my speech without talking about the St Lucia Wetlands.]

People there will benefit from the funds that have been allocated. I am
saying Viva St Lucia, Viva! [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms S B NQODI: Mr Chairperson, one of the most important focuses of
Government debates, over and above the monetary allocation to different
ministerial programmes in a given financial year, is the constant
monitoring of Government spending and savings in such a way that there is a
clear reflection on and illustration of the country's economic performance,
and that its impacts on the lives of ordinary people is understood,
especially by members of this House.

As a committee, we welcome with excitement the outcome of the international
bidding process for the hosting of the ten-year review of the first earth
summit conference held in Rio. The Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable
Development in September 2002 is the outcome of that bidding process. To a
large extent, let me hasten to say that the topic allocated to me by the
chairperson of this committee is nothing else but an elaboration on the
2002 summit with the aim of shedding more light and understanding to
members of this House.

Unlike the Rio Conference, which specifically focused on the environment,
this will be a multisectoral conference focusing on sustainable
development, central to which will be the intensive debate on poverty
alleviation and its eradication throughout the world, especially in Africa.
The conference will be discussing issues that cut across all Ministries and
departments at all levels of Government, with the aim of looking at what is
actually happening in people's lives. In all the different sectors of our
society we know that this conference will be relevant.

The summit comes with challenges which we will have to handle tactfully as
a nation and as a hosting country, bearing in mind that its success and
failure will definitely have long-lasting effects on the image of this
country, subregionally, regionally and globally. Although as a country we
were not part of the Earth Summit Conference in Rio 10 years ago, today, as
a member state of the UN after the 1994 elections, and as a signatory to
most of its agreements, citations and conventions, it is imperative that we
also table our national review on the Rio commitments. Having won the
bidding for hosting the conference, it is incumbent on us to start
embarking immediately on a rigorous public awareness campaign and thorough
planning, preparation and involvement of all stakeholders during the 18
months we have to prepare for this summit.

The summit is said to be the biggest ever convention the world has seen. It
is also expected to be five times bigger than the recent World Aids
Conference in Durban. Definitely, this is a big challenge and a mammoth
task facing us as a nation.

Members of this House are to intensify Goverment's public awareness
campaigns not only in their constituencies, but also in their daily
interaction with people within the country and abroad, especially during
our visits to different countries, as we usually do for different missions
and agendas on our trips. This also goes further to challenge even the very
level of our debates, which most of the time, deliberately or
undeliberately, give a negative portrayal of this country's Government as
soon as they end up in mischievous hands, leading to distorted
interpretations by the rightwing media.

If we are all committed, as members of Parliament, to the major challenges
facing our very existence and the livelihoods of the majority of the people
that we represent, I am sure that we will all agree that the root of all
evil in Africa as a whole - unlike in the western and northern hemispheres
of the global world, where money is an influential evil - is persistent,
ruthless poverty from the cradle to the grave. Fortunately, the summit will
give us, as a country and as a continent, a wonderful opportunity to put on
the summit agenda poverty eradication and alleviation as an African agenda,
to seek a solution from the international world for the simple reason that
where we are and what we are today, was of our own making. In the process
of preparing this summit as members, one has to work hand in hand with our
Government, especially with our newly configured local government councils,
who are actually the custodians of the implementation of local Agenda 21.

We have to give them the necessary support, where needed, to influence
Government to provide sufficient funding that will enable them and the co-
ordinating structures to rise to the occasion. As from September this year
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism will be embarking on a
national marketing and co-ordinating strategy aimed at monitoring progress
of the the implementation of Agenda 21 at grassroots level.

With regard to the budget implications for the hosting and the preparation
of this summit, I hope this multisectoral conference will not be confined
to one Ministry in Government. According to this department's report to the
committee, there are approximately 14 national Ministries which, through
the approval of the Cabinet, have committed R35 million for this summit. An
amount of R20 million is budgeted for the current year and R15 million for
the next financial year. There is also an amount of R50 million as a
contribution by the Johannesburg City Metropole, 80% of which will be in
kind, covering things such as police support services and transportation.
After the signing of the memorandum of understanding between this
department and Salga in March 2001, the department will be transferring an
amount of about R300 000 to Salga, so as to expedite the process of the
implementation of the local Agenda 21 by the local authorities.

According to the newly appointed chief executive officer of the section 21
company which will be co-ordinating the summit, the total estimated costs
for the summit is in the vicinity of approximately R450 million. I am sure
the question that members have is whether we will be able, as Government,
to raise this capital amount. In response to that, let me reiterate the
fact that since this is a multisectoral conference which is aimed at
focusing on the needs and the interests of all the targeted groups, it is
no mistake that funding will also be sourced from business, corporate
sponsorships and through the persuasion of international donors.

It is also worth noting that, as the hosting country, we shall have to bear
the UN incremental costs, which are the fees paid by the hosting country to
the UN for any UN conference held outside the UN. I believe that it is only
fair also to make a synopsis of the research study conducted by Grant
Thornton and Feinstein when they looked at the spinoffs to be enjoyed by
this country for hosting the summit. It is projected that the conference
will come with an opportunity to create massive wealth benefits.
International spending alone is projected at R530 million at the time of
the conference, with a further expenditure of an additional million rands
that will be generated pre and post the summit.

Again, another projection is that the country's economy will receive a cash
injection of R1,3 billion. [Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the Minister, the department and the
committee for their total commitment to the protection of the environment.

I shall briefly comment on the controversial Coega deep-sea harbour
development. There are three major concerns raised regarding this
development. Firstly, there is a lobby which says that the scheme is not
financially viable; secondly, that the environmental damage done will be a
disaster on its own and, thirdly, that tourism will be dealt a body blow by
this development.

The DA's position is that we will support any development that will create
wealth and jobs, with the major proviso that the environmental impact is
within internationally accepted limits and that any such environmental
impact will be effectively monitored and policed over the entire lifespan
of the development.

As far as the viability of the project is concerned, any development, large
or small, has a risk factor and all developers know that one must take
certain precautions to minimise the risk involved. One way of minimising
the risk is to have an anchor tenant.

However, it certainly does not mean that the development will fail if one
does not have such an anchor tenant. At present the P & O Nedlloyd
container terminal will be located at Coega. The manganese ore facility and
existing oil tanks will also relocate to Coega. Any development takes up to
six years to become profitable and there are examples where large
developments have succeeded without an initial anchor tenant.

The Eastern Cape desperately needs a new growth point to kick-start the
economy and the psychological impact of getting Coega off the ground will,
in itself, be very important for this region. Sceptics say that Coega will
be another Mossgass. This is really proposterous simply because we need
infrastructure in the Eastern Cape and the Mossgass development and its
infrastructure can in no way be compared with the infrastructure that will
be created at Coega.

Obviously, there are opposing views about the viability of this
development, but what is absolutely true is that if we, firstly, keep on
talking this scheme down it could definitely fail. Secondly, any
development such as this does create an environmental impact. The only
solution is to minimise the impact with very strong internationally
acceptable norms and standards.

It is absolutely essential to have a comprehensive environmental management
plan in place. The plan must ensure the safety of the marine reserves,
including the penguin population. The visual impact, as well as air and
land pollution, must be kept within minimum acceptable standards. This is
essential for this development and for any such development throughout our
country.

As far as tourism is concerned, it is a fact that this development is very
close to the Eastern extremity of the Addo Park. Normally one would like
the area around a major tourist attraction such as Addo to be pristine. At
the moment the area in question is anything but pristine. Township
development is taking place in this area. There are factories in this area
and plastic pollution is already a major concern. In the foreseeable future
this area will further develop as a residential and industrial area, with
or without the Coega development.

The Eastern Cape has the potential to become a major tourist destination.
We have the Garden Route, the Tsitsikama Park, the Baviaans and Groendal
wilderness areas, the most beautiful beaches in South Africa, the Addo
Park, the Kwagga Park and the world-renowned Shamwari game farm, as well as
the best hunting and fishing spot in South Africa, Happy Valley.

The relocation of the manganese ore facility and the oil storage tanks will
create a new tourist facility at the existing harbour and beach. To argue
that the Coega project will scuttle tourist development in the Eastern Cape
is simply not true. [Applause.]

Mr M U KALAKO: Mr Chairperson, Minister and hon members, the progress made
by the department since the passing of the National Environmental
Management Act of 1998 is noted and must be commended. To this effect the
money budgeted by the department for the implementation of the Act in 2000-
01 has been increased. We know that the department, at the moment, is busy
with preparations for the Johannesburg Earth Summit 2002, its major theme
being sustainable development.

Having said the above, it is important to note that as recently as last
year South Africa was rated among 10 top toxic hotspots around the world.
It is a challenge for our department to co-ordinate efforts and initiatives
with provincial and local governments, the business sector and community
organisations to address this problem. I am happy that the Minister has
already indicated to us that measures are under way to actually deal with
this problem.

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has already embarked on
education and capacity-building programmes in order to make sure that our
communities are aware of the dangers of pollution and dumping of waste, but
these programmes have not yet reached some local authorities. Some of these
local authorities do not go beyond putting up signs against dumping of
waste.

They have not yet embarked on programmes that will involve communities in
townships, and they have not made them aware that the dumping of waste in
their residential areas is illegal, or given advice on what to do when they
see trucks from companies dumping waste in their areas. The experience in
informal settlements is a cause for concern, because littering, unmanaged
waste and sewerage, and irregular services, all cause land pollution. This
is due to a lack of environmental awareness in these communities.

Another problem that confronts local authorities is the fact that people
create informal settlements in areas or places that were previously used
for dumping. Illegal dumping is often associated with those who are
involved in construction, demolition, remodelling, roofing or waste
management companies. Illegal dumps usually attract more waste, including
hazardous waste such as asbestos. This calls for local authorities to put
in place ordinances that will prevent this from occurring. They should also
make sure that such ordinances are enforced by law-enforcement agencies in
co-operation with communities and NGOs. In this regard, the involvement of
the development forums is essential.

Communities that are usually affected by illegal dumping are in areas with
limited access to convenient and affordable waste disposal facilities or
services and recycling programmes. The other compounding factor, in dealing
with illegal dumping in areas of the poor, is the fact that it is not
regarded as a serious crime, because most of the time law-enforcement
agencies in these areas have to focus on a high rate of gang or related
activities and other serious crimes, such as murder and rape. All levels of
law enforcement, including prosecutors, give low priority to illegal
dumping. In rural areas it is even worse.

In order to deal with this problem of the illegal dumping of waste, we need
co-operation amongst stakeholders, communities, and local authorities,
including the industries which most of the time are guilty of this. Local
politicians, local councillors, members of provincial legislatures or
members of Parliament who are deployed by their parties in these areas,
must make prevention programmes a priority and assist in organising
adequate funding, access to equipment, and make sure that labour resources
are available to these areas of the poor.

RDP forums, because of their nature as nonpolitical forums that are
responsible for development in these areas, must play a central role and
initiate programmes that will prevent illegal dumping. The youth, who are
affected by the high rate of unemployment, must be mobilised to participate
in clean-up campaigns and policing of their areas against illegal dumping.
The youth can also be involved in site maintenance and control of sites
that were previously used as dumping sites. This, together with community
outreach programmes, can go a long way in making sure that illegal dumping
is prevented. [Applause.]

Ms R A NDZANGA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members and hon members of
the public who are observing the proceedings of this House from the
gallery, firstly, I would like to thank the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism for taking us through this Budget Vote. I also want to
thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee, Ms Mahlangu, and the rest
of the committee members for their support and guidance as we deal with
matters concerning this department as discharged to us by this House. We,
in the ANC, support this Budget Vote.

We have taken time to explore and interrogate, among ourselves, as to
whether this department, including resources deployed to it, is used
according to the mandate and the needs of our people. The answer to this
has been yes. The department is doing something regarding some of the
challenges facing just about all sectors of governance and economy in our
country today. As the ANC, we come out in support of this Budget Vote
informed by a number of issues which, to our belief and understanding, are
the demands of the people at grass-roots level.

Allow me to deal with one of these issues that we thought proper to share
with members, so that they can understand how we came to support this
Budget Vote. An area where we, as South Africans, can improve on a lot,
concerns energy generation and, down the line, the responsible use of
electricity and energy in other forms. Our energy generation relies on coal
which, we all know, is a nonrenewable resource. There will come a point in
time where the coal shall not be available any more, thus forcing us to use
other means to generate energy.
As humans of today, aided by technology to a degree, we can predict and
plan with greater accuracy about what the future might bring us. Studies
have recently revealed that our sources of energy may not cope with demands
eight years from now, but our responsible Government knows that alternative
sources have to be sought.

Eskom, a major player in the field of energy supply, has been undertaking
some research on alternative sources of energy. This function largely rests
with the Ministry of Minerals and Energy. But, as this department, we are
working closely with them in ensuring that whatever sources are explored,
we can, to a certain extent, have some influence in making sure that they
are efficient.

The Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, which has sparked both fear and excitement
amongst stakeholders, is one of many sources of energy that are currently
being explored. The discussions, both in the media and public consultation
forums, are duly noted and will be taken into account in making the right
decisions.

Unlike the previous government, the ANC-led Government prides itself on
consulting people in the true sense of the word, and making sure that their
aspirations are incorporated into its programmes. [Applause.] We have the
responsibility to govern and make sure that all South Africans, especially
the rural women, are provided with electricity to ease their burden. In
dealing with the issues of a future energy shortage, we will, however, not
play into the hands of those who flood us with emotional arguments based on
examples not relevant to South Africa. The issue of energy availability is
of national importance, and all will be done to make sure that, as a
country, we are not left in the dark.

We have undertaken to redress the past imbalances and have resolved to
charge the process of strategically entering the global village without
losing sight of our local challenges. The Kyoto Protocol, which was agreed
to in 1997 after many years of negotiations, presents the first step in
bringing about such a global change. This protocol places a primary
responsibility on industrialised countries to reduce the emissions of
greenhouse gases based on the fact that, historically, it is these
countries that played the greatest role in creating problems concerning
climatic changes. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson I wish to commend the hon the Minister on his
address earlier today. In so far as tourism is concerned, the hon the
Minister previously indicated that the growth rate of tourism employment
opportunities was assessed to be 29,4% during the year 2000, following a
negative growth rate of 0,75% during 1999. This was followed the remarkably
high growth rate during 1998 of 27,3%. It is estimated that the tourism
economy created an additional 170 000 new employment opportunities during
2000 - this notwithstanding negative perceptions regarding South Africa in
the foreign press.

I have recently returned from a study trip to Germany, where I learnt of a
particularly damaging report on South Africa on a German Internet site.
Although many German tourists visit South Africa, one can only speculate as
to how many more would have visited us had there not been such negative
reporting. I trust that the Circle of Sunshine initiative will address this
negative perception.

This morning we received a comprehensive briefing concerning next year's
Johannesburg world summit alluded to by previous speakers. The ACDP trusts
that a successful World Summit will not only showcase South Africa, but
will also remove sentiments of Afropessimism.

I wish to join Christian, Muslim and Jewish religious leaders, representing
hundreds of thousands of Capetonians in calling upon the authorities,
particularly the Cape Unicity, to take urgent steps to control, clamp down
on and disassociate itself from any form of sex trade in order to prevent
the sexual exploitation of Cape Town's poverty-stricken women and children
by sex tourists. Sex tourism can never be the answer. I call on the
Minister to adopt a very unwelcome campaign regarding these sex tourists.

In conclusion, the ACDP supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Chairperson, allow me to thank this committee for
recognising the important role of women in this sector by asking the Joint
Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women
to participate in these debates. Malibongwe! [Praise!]
HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Boutros Boutros-Ghali said, and I quote:


  Without progress in the development of women, there can be no true social
  development. Women's rights are not worthy of the name if they exclude
  the female half of humanity. The struggle for women's equality is part of
  the struggle for a better world for all human beings and all societies.

History has taught us that our freedom is only meaningful when there is one
economy for the whole country. Today in South Africa we find two economies
which consist of the wealthiest, who enjoy 80% of the resources, whilst the
majority of South Africans still live in poverty and squalor because some
people are rich. Therefore as women, we need to redirect our energies
towards economic empowerment and liberation. [Applause.]

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must be congratulated
on recognising the central role of women in many of their project-driven
campaigns. Tourism, which is primarily a service and hospitality sector,
holds many opportunities for meaningful involvement by women. Although much
progress has been made, there is further room for even greater
participation of women with the right kind of intervention. Historically,
this sector has been dominated by our colleagues on my left. There have
been many successful initiatives in which women made valuable
contributions. Let me mention but a few.

The European Union funded the Wild Coast's SDI projects, where women set up
leatherworks, manufacturing, not only sandals but also curios, which are
for sale to tourists. We should invite more tourists to visit South Africa.
What is also encouraging is the development of other traditional forms of
crafts and arts as well. Another area of expansion by women has been in the
manufacturing and provision of corporate gifts, which are mostly sold to
tourism establishments for giveaways.

Within the accommodation sector there has been a growth in women-run and
managed establishments, in particular bed-and-breakfast establishments such
as Topele Lekao, where the hon Ellis cannot go because this is mainly for
the young ones. Tope means very young. There is Roundini in Berlin in the
Eastern Cape, whose African restaurants specialise in African cuisine and
African entertainment. There has been a fast-growing boom in the
accommodation and restaurant sector for women's enterprises such as Safika,
Mama Afrika and so on.

But there are terrains where women are still seeking entry, like the upper
end of the tourist echelon. In the Free State a women's empowerment group
project is under way and it aims to develop women-driven enterprises which
will create platforms for women to market their products. Interestingly
enough, the management and delivery of this project is largely in the hands
of women as well, a factor which bodes well for women's enterprises.

Recently, Indaba 2001, which showcases the South African tourism product
offering, saw an increase in the number of black enterprises and the number
of women running enterprises. But there is still scope for increasing black
involvement, particularly in sectors such as conferencing, event
management, tour operations, catering and transport. We have just heard
from the hon the Minister himself, when he was deliberating here, that for
the first time in our history, a large number of women have been directly
issued with fishing permits. Have hon members ever heard of this happening
in the past? [Applause.]

Whilst we encourage the promotion of cultural villages we must make every
effort to ensure that these villages are not merely run by blacks, but are
owned by blacks, the very people whose cultures are being showcased.

If we as women are to be successful, we need to be empowered through the
necessary skills. There are many examples of how women's groups have
managed to make a significant impact with the help of proper support and
skills development. [Interjections.] Those hon members should keep quiet.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members! [Interjections.] Hon
member, your time has expired.

Mrs M M MALUMISE: He has not said so yet. Chairperson, have you said so?
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Yes, hon member, your speaking time
has expired. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, Minister and hon members, tourism is South
Africa's third largest foreign exchange earner and job creator.

According to the South African Yearbook 2000/2001 some 740 000 jobs are
created by the tourism economy and projections are that in 2010 the South
African tourism economy will employ more than 1 million people.

Hotels, guest houses, bed-and-breakfast establishments and over 10 000
restaurants benefit from tourism. For the tourism industry to flourish,
public safety and security have to be tightened. Despite the odd criminal
acts, the world tourism organisation's list of the 40 most popular tourism
destinations rank South Africa as 21st in popularity. Some 6 million
foreigners visit South Africa each year.

With all the revenue thus collected, many people in the rural areas lose
out, even though they make fine artefacts to sell to tourists. Our people
lack training in costing and marketing their articles. They tend to give
them away for almost nothing. Aliens glut the major tourism intersections
such as those at the Hartebeespoort Dam, along the Dr William Nicol Road in
Bryanston and some major flea markets in the city of Johannesburg.

The beauty of the South African scenery is appreciated when one travels by
rail. Unfortunately the average South African cannot afford the exorbitant
fares on the Blue Train, yet the beauty of this country, the gorges and
tunnels, the wildlife frolicking in the countryside here and there, and the
big five is a must for all to behold. The new transfrontier game parks make
Southern Africa a place to come to for relaxation.

We are thankful that the department has done so much for tourism. Trained
tourist guides are being registered with the department, so that tourists
are not taken for a ride. We congratulate the Minister on the recognition
he receives from his colleagues for a job well done.

The UCDP supports the Vote.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, could you please lower
your voices? The level of noise is too high.

Mr J D ARENDSE: Chairperson, Minister, tourism has these days become
synonymous with job creation, and so I would like to speak about one area
that I think deserves much more attention in relation to job creation than
it currently enjoys.

The flora of South Africa is by far the richest of any region of comparable
size. Here in the southern part of Africa, about 10% of the flora of the
world occurs on less than 2% of the world's surface area.

Indeed, with about 24 000 species recorded for South Africa and some of its
neighbours, the country is home to the most diverse and species-rich
temperate flora of the world. South Africa boasts, among other things,
about 4 700 succulent plant species, which represent almost half of the
known succulents of the world, a rich tree abundance of about 1 000
species, nearly 800 grass species, many of which are important pasture
grasses, over 2 000 bulb species and some 500 species of orchids.
On a somewhat larger scale, South Africa is host to two of the six
floristic kingdoms of the world, namely the Cape Floristic Kingdom and the
Paleotropical Floristic Kingdom. The Cape Floristic Kingdom is the smallest
of the six in the world and is world renowned for its many fynbos species
which are restricted to a very small L-shaped area stretching over 250 km
from Vanrhynsdorp in the western part of the Western Cape in a southerly
direction towards Cape Town, and then for about 800 km in an easterly
direction towards Grahamstown in a broken belt 40 km to 150 km wide.

It encompasses an area of some 90 000 km², which is less than 4% of the
area of the southern African subcontinent, but contains almost 44% of the
species of flowering plants known on the subcontinent. Here about 9 000
plant species occur on mostly nutrient-poor soil at a density of about
1 300 species per 10 000 km².

What is even more significant is that the vast majority, more than 70% of
these species, are found nowhere else on earth. They are restricted to this
area with a Mediterranean climate of hot summers and wet, mild winters.
Significantly the Cape Peninsula alone boasts 2 600 of the flowering plant
species, which is more than the total number of species found on the
British Isles.

Almost all of the features of the Cape region are unusual in a global
context. The Cape floral region is characterised by a highly unusual
composition of flowering plants. The flora is dominated by the iris, erica,
protea and restia families. Nowhere else in the world do these families
assume dominance in any regional flora, except in parts of Australia, where
the proteas and restias are also well represented.

The Cape region is economically extremely important in several aspects. The
rooibos tea industry is probably the most important earner of foreign
revenue. The Cape region is also the source of many valuable horticultural
products. These include several bulbs, ie freesias, chincherinchees and
gladioli. Most of the development of these plants has been done in Europe
and they form an important component of the foreign cut-flower trade.

Locally the cut-flower industry is based on wild forms and on locally
developed cultivars of proteas. Another valuable local product is buchu,
which is cultivated for its essential oils used in the flavour and
fragrance industries. Furthermore, the ecotourism value of the spring wild
flowers on the West Coast is of considerable importance as a generator of
foreign income.

The botanical riches of the country are not restricted to the Cape coastal
strip. To the east and north, the Cape Floristic Kingdom is flanked by the
Great Karoo, a vast stretch of climatically severe flat country, rich in
succulents and stunted Karoobossies, and to the east one encounters the
tropical lushness of the KwaZulu-Natal coast and adjacent parts.

The eastern region of South Africa represents one of the richest floral
regions in Africa. An incredible diversity of plants grow in just over 5%
of the country's land. Diversity is also expressed in the richness of
vegetation types, which includes subtropical swamp forests at sea level and
mountain flora at altitudes of 3 300 m.

Spectacular gorges, rolling grasslands and forest patches are typical of
the east coast. Over 10 000 species and 1 300 genera representing 70% of
genera in southern Africa, inhabit this region.
In South Africa small can be big, and this certainly applies to the flora.
For example, the mosses and their relatives are important components of
most ecosystems and contributes significantly to the diversity of life. In
our mountain catchment areas, for example, where mosses are most abundant
and diverse, they intercept, retain and slowly release large volumes of
water into streams, protecting the soil from erosion and decreasing the
loss of water through evaporation. In this way mosses act as sponges and
help to keep our dams full and our streams and rivers, on which many
communities depend for their daily supply of water, perennial.

The arid western parts of South Africa are host to the only internationally
recognised hot spot in the world. A hot spot is an area of high species
diversity that are threatened in one way or another. South Africa's so-
called succulent Karoo biome is immensely rich in succulent species that
have evolved various mechanisms to overcome the periodic and predictable
droughts that ravage this sometimes inhospitable botanical wonderland.

This diversity is illustrated by the fact that the vygie family, the
largest succulent plant family in the world, is exceptionally diversified
in, and largely restricted to, the western parts of South Africa. An
astonishing 23% of the daisies of South Africa occur in the Calvinia area.
Over the past few centuries many of the plant species of South Africa have
entered the world horticultural and floricultural markets, and today our
plants are grown all over the world.

An example is the pelargonium, which is often somewhat erroneously referred
to as geraniums, which grows all over Europe as window box plants. All of
them derive from stock obtained from South Africa. Our flora is not only
extremely rich in terms of numbers of species, it also offers a remarkable
range of diverse and useful growth forms within a context of unique
landscapes of great beauty ... [Time expired.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, in the ugly days of gloom when the dark clouds
of violence and death covered our land, the children of our land sang a
song:


  South Africa, our beautiful land
  We will tell the whole world
  We can bring peace to our land.
We did get some peace - although we could have done with more - and our
country is still beautiful.

The beauty of our land shines like a pearl between the two oceans. When we
host the Earth Summit next year, we shall be learning again and again that
we should become good stewards of God's creation. We are created not to
have dominion over the entire creation, but to be good stewards of it. We
have seen enough of the human propensity for destruction and complete
blindness to the needs of others, particularly generations to come.

The Earth Summit is a very important congress, and we are providentially
hosting it. The whole nation should be part of the congress and should
participate and learn directly from it. Our beautiful country is ideally
suited for tourism. Tourism is the number one earner of foreign exchange,
although our country only gets 1% so far. There is much scope for
development and beneficiation.

Bank owners, who are mostly or mainly white, are the real and ultimate
owners of tourism in this country. This alienates the poor and the
undeveloped. The black Africans, by and large, get only crumbs from the
cake of tourism. They do not yet participate fully in tourism in this
country, in Africa and in the world.

They are not beneficiaries of the commercial side of tourism. We have a
duty to promote tourism and in a very pragmatic, aggressive and deliberate
way to train, equip and support African tourists. If we do not do that, the
end result will boomerang on us. World tourists who are coming in droves to
our country will be the first to realise that the majority of the people of
this land are only spectators - the real players are those who had been at
it from time immemorial.

We have to educate the previously disadvantaged about the value of taking a
holiday and going out to enjoy the beauty of this land. We have to train
our people to gain a foothold in this fast growing sector of our economy.
We have to take tourism from the N1, N2, N3 and N4 freeways, to the people.
After all, most of the overseas tourists, although they are mostly obsessed
with our wildlife, can benefit by seeing and knowing about the lives of the
people in the rural areas of our land.

We should develop the so-called township tourism, as well as village
tourism. Most of our rural areas have an exceptional and unique beauty
which we can share with our tourists, at a small fee, of course. Scenic
beauty plus people development equals prosperity and peace.

Mr M I MOSS: Chairperson, Minister and hon members, I am sitting here
because I am different from the others, but in the same vein I would also
like to say that marine and coastal management, which is also known as the
fishing industry, is also different from last year. There is progress.
[Applause.] I would like to, first and foremost, emphasise and echo the
view of Minister Valli Moosa that marine and coastal management has made
satisfactory progress, and is on track.

A year ago the Minister announced that marine and coastal management would
in future be headed by a deputy director-general, Mr Horst Kleinschmidt,
and predicted good things. The fruits in this regard are clear and visible.
This is good news indeed.

Since the democratically elected Government came into power in 1994, the
ANC committed itself to give priority to transforming the fishing industry
and introducing new players into the industry. There were a few successes
with the introduction of new entrants, but new problems emerged which are
now being addressed. Transformation has been slow, with very little
success.

The difficult and crisis times that marine and coastal management found
itself in was a headache to all stakeholders and role-players. The
department was dragged into many court cases, which affected the whole
industry negatively. This resulted in fishing vessels not being able to go
to sea. Senior officials of the department were held hostage and there were
widespread accusations of corruption inside the department and in the
industry in general. These rumours and accusations still persist, but to a
lesser extent.

Research done on the dangers of different types of working conditions have
proved that the fishing industry is the most dangerous, yet many fishermen
are not covered by the Labour Relations Act. Many employers are known to
want to keep it that way, to ensure that they can exploit workers to the
maximum by giving them low wages and no benefits such as insurance, a
pension fund and other benefits.
Subsistence right allocations were introduced as a pilot programme to
benefit the poorest and the unemployed. It started off very well, and many
jobs were created. Poverty was relieved for many families in the fishing
villages. Unfortunately there were also many problems. Some subsistence
fishers are exploited and get very low prices for their daily catch. They
should get the best possible prices and be free to sell the fish to the
highest possible bidder. Realistic market prices should be the basis for
such sales. A kind of co-operative and storing facilities should be looked
at. This should be available for subsistence fishers.

Small, medium and macro enterprises are also a very important sector in the
industry. The SMMEs will have to be successful as they are crucial players
in the industry. The objectives of the Marine Living Resources Act is
precisely to look at the spread of the resource and at the same time
broaden the participation of and accommodate SMMEs, as well as previously
disadvantaged individuals and companies. The Government has a major role to
play to ensure the aforementioned. Many departments, for example, the
Departments of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, and Trade and Industry,
as well as other institutions and big business need to provide support.
Sufficient access to credit and adhering to sound business principles are
very important in this regard. We cannot allow the SMMEs to go insolvent or
be squeezed out of the market.

Transformation in the fishing industry should be centred around changes in
the ownership of companies and real change in top management positions of
established companies. The Marine Living Resources Act also provides clear
guidelines for industrial and company transformation. Regular surveys and
analysis need to be in place to evaluate transformation, if any, and to
what extent transformation has taken place.

Companies who do not meet the requirements for transformation as prescribed
by the Act should be named and shamed. Resistance to genuine transformation
should coincide with big cuts in quota allocations, even if it means they
will have to quit the industry.

Relations with foreign countries, in as far as fishing rights in our waters
are concerned, need to be looked at and protected with jealousy. We cannot
allow the EU access to our waters while many of our own people do not have
access. [Applause.] The reduction of permits to the many Taiwanese vessels
to enable broader participation of local fishermen also needs attention.
Since fishing is a labour-intensive industry, local participation of
fishermen will ensure maximum local jobs.

In conclusion, after much deliberation, consultation and interaction in
various ways, two discussion papers were introduced. These documents were
workshopped and discussed with all role-players. The first document
resulted in the moratorium on the allocation of fishing rights, which
contributed a lot to ensure growth, confidence and hope for the future.

The documents also looked at long-term rights, which can be between 3 to 15
years, depending on the sector. An independent allocation unit will be in
place and the department's offices will not work with applications anymore.
Compliance will take place with bigger participation of local coastal
communities. Poverty relief was the reason why many of our people cleaned
up the coastline near their villages. The ANC supports this Vote. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues, job creation is
the key element behind Government's active promotion of tourism, and it is
envisaged that the tourism sector is likely to overtake mining, agriculture
and manufacturing in sustaining South Africa's economic development.

Peter Bacon, Managing Director of Sun International Southern Africa,
believes that tourism, the world's largest industry, has the potential in
Southern Africa to grow at more than 5% and could by the year 2010 provide
one out of every 10 jobs in the economy.

Business tourism in particular contributes more than R20 billion to South
Africa's gross domestic product every year, and is the fastest-growing
segment of the tourism market. Johannesburg has won the bid to host the
Johannesburg World Summit - also referred to as the Earth Summit or RioPlus
Ten - to be held in September 2002. The event will be even bigger than the
Rugby World Cup, and will make a substantial contribution to the economy,
with approximately 65 000 people expected to attend the summit. This
includes 2 500 media personnel sending an image of South Africa all over
the world.
Grant Thornton Kessel Feinstein estimate that the average conference
delegate in South Africa spends more than R1 000 a day. Their research
shows that 11 million people attended conferences, exhibitions and related
business events last year, sustaining nearly 250 000 jobs and making up 27%
of the country's GDP. Our exchange rate provides outstanding value for
money and the cherry on top is that almost half of all international
delegates add a tour onto their trips, thus spreading the economic spin-off
around the country.

After the democratic elections in 1994, South Africa experienced a boom in
tourism with an average growth rate of 5% in foreign arrivals. However, the
last two years have shown the figures peaking and remaining fairly static.
This country has so much to offer at such reasonable prices, yet our share
of the world tourism market is a pathetic 5,6%, a mere drop in the ocean.

A group of visiting American travel operators recently blamed this drop on
perceptions about the country. And before the ruling party scream foul or
rather ``sies'' at the mention of crime, other perceptions were also
mentioned, such as health and particularly HIV/Aids, instability within the
Government with reference to phantom plots, land grabs in Zimbabwe and
Afropessimism.

It has been pointed out that South Africa, in terms of attractions, should
be beating Australia hands-down in the tourism field - too bad about rugby.
South African tourism can paint hundreds of London taxis with the South
African flag, and Cheryl Carolus can host a multitude of goodwill concerts
and braais, but unless the above-mentioned perceptions are reversed, our
tourism figures will not rise, jobs will not be created and the
contribution to GDP will diminish.

What we need is national leaders, from the President down, to loudly and
publicly lay those perceptions to rest with a tangible plan of action. The
Luxor example in Egypt is often quoted. After a terrorist attack on
tourists there, plans were announced to deal with the immediate problem and
the root causes.

If our tourism industry is going to grow, we need similar plans to tackle
crime, HIV/Aids, Afropessimism and other damaging perceptions. These need
to be voiced by the President in no uncertain terms and followed up by
Cabinet Ministers and, indeed, all South Africans. They must be publicised
around the world for potential tourists to hear about, and those tourists
must know that we are serious about implementing them. If this is not done,
our infant tourism industry and the much-hoped-for job creation potential
will be stillborn.

I would like to end by paying tribute to our chairperson, who leads and
guides the portfolio committee with enthusiasm, vitality and wisdom.
[Applause.]

Mrs J CHALMERS: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, members of the House, that
great thinker, Albert Einstein, once said:


  The world we live in today has problems which cannot be solved by
  thinking the way we thought when we created them.

The views he expressed are manifestly clear as we look around the world we
live in. Look up and the chances are we will see some aspects of pollution;
look down and we may well view some aspect of land degradation; and look to
the left or right - whether we are in town, on the seashore, in the forests
or out in the veld - and we will see a world very different from the one
presenting to our forebears.

This has always been the case to a degree, the difference now is the
extraordinary rate at which our world is being affected by the way we,
humankind, live out our lives. At the beginning of the Industrial
Revolution, little thought was given to the devastating effects coal mining
would have on the atmosphere. The early inventors of what became the paper
industry could not anticipate its effects on the forests of this world.

Animal and plant species are disappearing from the face of the earth at an
unprecedented rate. It has been estimated that 100 to 300 species vanish
annually. Botanists reckon that up to one third of our plant species could
be at risk. Zoologists predict that perhaps a quarter to half of all animal
species could vanish in he next century.

In South Africa alone up to 400 million tons of topsoil are washed away
every year into rivers, dams and the sea - soil that could and should be
put to productive use. These are resources that are vital to human,
economic and social development. They make up the very air we breathe, the
water we drink and the food that we eat.

It has been said that we are playing roulette with the earth's living
systems, condemning species to extinction and threatening our own survival.
Einstein was right on track when he said that we needed a whole new mindset
in dealing with these fundamental threats to the world's ecosystems.

A new report, released a few weeks ago by the World Resources Institute,
warns that if the planet's coastal zone continues to be extensively
modified or destroyed, its capacity to provide fish, protect homes and
businesses, reduce pollution and erosion, and sustain biological diversity
will be gravely endangered. I am not speaking about some distant future
when the world's and our coastlines will be at risk. I am talking about the
here and the now. Coastal human populations are exploding and, as they
increase, pressures on coastal ecosystems build up. Of that there is no
doubt.

It has been estimated that four out of every 10 people, globally, live
within 100 kilometres of a coast, yet nearly two thirds of all fish
harvested in the world depend on coastal wetlands, mangroves, seagrass beds
and coral reefs. Ninety-five percent of the world's marine fish harvest
comes from coastal waters, but overall, 75% of those fish stocks are
depleted or being fished at their biological limit.

My colleagues have spoken on the fishing issue. I make mention of this
precious species in the context of the fact that they are a vital, but
highly threatened, part of biodiversity and of the global food chain. I
wonder if our children's children will get the chance to taste kingklip or
galjoen, or some of our other offshore species. Even now I hear from
fishing friends that the river mouth and rock species such as elf, leervis,
cob and even tiger, so plentiful even 20 years ago, are seldom caught any
more on their weekend fishing excursions. To them it is sport, but for the
subsistence fisherman this is a critical issue, putting their very
livelihoods at risk.

This is a global crisis not confined to South African coasts and one of
which our Minister - as outlined in his speech today - and our Government
is critically aware. Steps are being taken and put in place to manage and
regulate coastal development - which, for decades, indeed, centuries grew
in a haphazard and ad hoc fashion - in such a way so as to minimise
environmental damage along our shores. There has been a fundamental shift
in thinking about our coast and its resources that has ushered in a new era
of coastal management.

Coastal ecosystems are particularly complex and sensitive to change, and
degradation can rapidly undermine the benefits of development. The new
policy is rooted in the understanding that our coast is a national asset, a
fundamental part of the biodiversity picture belonging to all the people of
South Africa. This policy recognises that our coast is a place of value,
opportunity and potential. It means working in a dedicated and creative way
with communities along the entire length of our coastline. We need also to
ensure that industrial development along our coastline takes very seriously
the requirements of the National Environmental Management Act. Let us not
be beguiled and lured by the prospect of short-term job creation and lose
sight of the damage that such myopic vision can do to truly sustainable
long-term development, with secure long-term job opportunities.

Lastly, South Africa is a signed-up member of the Convention on Biological
Diversity, a convention that became a reality as a result of global
recognition that our environment was in a state of crisis. Now, the
challenge is to convert its vision into concrete action and programmes on
the ground, and not only on the ground.

South Africa, in the past year, has been a motivating force with other
states to put in place an agreement to protect that marvellous bird, the
wandering albatross, and others of its species from being totally decimated
by long-line fishing. I am sad to say, of the 24 species of albatross, 21
have critically shrinking populations. The good news is that some of the
major fishing nations are now signing up to attempt to reverse this
situation, and one would hope that the two other major long-line fishing
nations, Japan and Korea, will also come on board and take action to
preserve and protect these wonderful birds.

Back to earth, it is great to hear of newly formed municipal structures
becoming advised, informed and guided on how to manage their urban
environment in order to minimise the environmental damage caused by too
rapid and ill-planned development. One of my colleagues has been talking
about the mandate of Local Agenda 21, which is being taken up in a very
exciting way by local authorities as they make firm commitments to improve
and extend service delivery in a sustainable way.

We should also make commitments to protecting green lungs and open spaces
in our cities, and take seriously the need to educate and bring on board
our urban and peri-urban communities. We have to realise and accept that
whilst we can, and in many instances have, put in place the best thought-
out legislation and regulations in the world, it is only by the broader
community becoming involved in management and protection of our natural
resources that they will still be there for the next and future
generations. [Applause.]

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Mr Chairperson, I would like to support the Minister and
the department in their effort, as well as the finance they are investing,
to promote tourism in South Africa.

The New NP would also like to congratulate Sisa, Sun International of South
Africa, under the able leadership of Mr Peter Bacon, for winning five of
the 14 world travel awards at the ceremony recently held in Kuala Lumpur in
Malaysia. It was the eighth annual World Travel Award ceremony and
competitors are voted for by travel agents worldwide. These include
facilities like conference centres, casino resorts, airlines and airports,
hotel groups, boutiques, conservation companies, game reserves and luxury
trains.

Mr Bacon believes that tourism, as the world's largest industry, has the
potential in South Africa to grow at more than 5% and could by the year
2010 provide one out of every 10 jobs in the economy. This is a practical
example of a public-private partnership that our country needs. The clear
message from Mr Bacon is that Government can only perform an enabling and
facilitating role, creating the investment environment and conditions for
social stability and that it is up to the industry to stimulate the
markets, develop the infrastructure and create tourism-friendly conditions
which are so vital if South Africa is to become globally competitive in its
quest for the tourism dollar. But the Government should accept its
responsibility to create a safe and crime-free environment for tourists.
This is the positive attitude that South Africa needs from the giants of
tourism and the hospitality industry.
The New NP congratulates Sisa on this magnificent achievement and
encourages other financial giants to follow Mr Bacon's positive and clear
vision for tourism and the hospitality industry in South Africa. I would
also like to acknowledge and wish marine and coastal management well with
all the many difficult issues they are addressing in this industry. Mr
Horst Kleinschmidt especially needs to be mentioned for the huge part he is
playing in an effort to clean up and regularise the industry.

We especially welcome the expansion of Operation Neptune so as to break the
back of the mafia that are plundering our fishing and marine resources so
badly by their poaching. The effort to involve the SA Airforce to undertake
maritime patrols and coastal surveillance operations are welcomed. The
money spent on these operations will be money well spent. We wish them well
in their efforts and in managing the money allocated to the eradication of
this huge problem of poaching. I thank the chairlady for her leadership of
this committee. [Applause.]

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Chairperson, South African tourism has increased
substantially during the past seven years. Today it brings over R20 billion
into our economy annually and is second to manufacturing and mining in its
contribution to the GDP. This results from the fact that our Government has
focused on two broad areas, that is, foreign and domestic tourism. The
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has, indeed, improved in a
number of areas as mentioned by the President in his opening address
earlier this year, and has created new black-owned tourism enterprises and
it is still going strong.

Last year during the budget debate on Environmental Affairs and Tourism the
hon member Mbuyazi and I sharply criticised the unrepresentativeness of the
Indaba 2000. The portfolio committee was in agreement that the situation
could not be tolerated anymore. Following on other members who spoke before
me, I want to congratulate the Minister ... [Applause] ... and the
department for a job well done in the Indaba 2001.

This year's Indaba was also held in Durban in April. We saw a great
improvement. To me, this is a clear indication that indeed, members of
Parliament are taken seriously by the department. We in the portfolio
committee who attended the Indaba 2001 had a special mandate, and that was
to look closely at the participation of SMMEs. Last year only 34 SMMEs
participated in the Indaba and this year 150 participated ... [Applause]
... an increase of about 400%. We have to congratulate the department on
this achievement.

As we moved around the exhibition centre, province by province, stall by
stall, talking to exhibitors, there was excitement and smiles from SMME
participants, who felt that it was a great opportunity that they had been
given by the Government to participate in the Indaba. What we also
discovered is that some of them were not newcomers to this field, but they
had not been given an opportunity before. Some of them had a 20 years
experience, but they had never been exposed or given an opportunity to
exhibit and talk about their own products to international tourist
organisations. We also noticed that the quality of their products was very
high and competitive. The department went out of its way to make this
year's Indaba a great success, for the benefit of the millions of South
Africans who had been deprived of the opportunity to participate in the
tourism sector by the previous regime.

Earlier a group of tour operators who were here - they have just left - and
the tour guides from the black townships of Cape Town, made representations
at the portfolio committee. During these representations we learnt that
some of them are former school principals who, when a call was made by the
Government to black people to enter into the mainstream of the economy
after the democratic elections, responded by investing their savings and
packages in tourism. They went through training and acquired skills to
empower themselves in this field, and bought Kombis in order to participate
in the tourism field.

They expressed their frustration at the meeting and difficulties in making
headway in this field. Some of them have resorted to ferrying children to
and from school in order to make a living, because tourism is still in
white hands and is discriminatory. Tourists come to this country already
booked with established tour operators. The only time that these emerging
tour operators get into contact with international tourists is when these
companies are not interested in a particular route, and perhaps make an
offer to them, which means that they get crumbs and not the real thing.
Today I am happy to say that they are here to say thank you to the
Government of the ANC. We are very proud of the ANC Government for creating
an opportunity for them to participate in the tourism industry.

Some of them are seated in the gallery and others have left, perhaps they
will be joining us later. They are here to support the budget and to say
viva 2001 Indaba! [Applause.] A progressive step in changing the face of
the tourism industry with a wide range of participation of SMMEs and
exhibitions was demonstrated. In this case, I want to acknowledge the good
work done by the department, in particular Mr Moeketse Mosula, who went out
of his way to accommodate all these SMMEs groups and to make sure that they
participated and were partners in that field. [Applause.] The Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, together with their counterparts in the
provinces, shares the responsibilities to subsidise SMMEs in order that
they could to exhibit their products at the Indaba.

However, we still have a long way to go to eliminate the disparities caused
by our painful past, apartheid, to make a better life for all the people. I
want to bring to the attention of the Minister and the department a concern
that was raised by some of the SMMEs exhibitors regarding the fact that
they lacked technological resources. The long-established tourism
businesses had prearranged appointments with international businesses, and
this they do because they have access to the Internet. And I think that
perhaps as a department we can actually try, through working with the
provincial departments, to provide a central point where the SMMEs can
access information where they can also make appointments, because at the
Indaba they just wait for people to come. The established businesses go to
them with prearranged appointments. When we looked at this, we thought that
the department could begin to move a step forward and provide them with
that kind of resource in each province.

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, together with SA
Tourism, formerly Satour, has embarked on a programme to competitively
market South Africa internationally as a preferred destination for
sustainable economic and social empowerment of all South Africans, and to
make tourism the leading economic sector in South Africa. One of the ways
they are doing this is through the initiative of the Circle of Sunshine.
This is an international network of friends, business colleagues and
associates who could be both tourists to South Africa and also key
influencers in shifting perception about South Africa, and encouraging
friends and people to visit South Africa. This is to talk good about South
Africa and not present it as a violent country that people should not
visit. They actually send out a good message about this country. This
network has been launched in London and in other countries, and I know that
dates have been set for this to be launched in other countries as well
during 2001.

The increase of the budget from 5% to 10% for South Africa to be promoted
in Africa is actually welcomed, but I find that it still falls short of
what we are actually spending in the UK and the USA, and we are actually
increasing the budget by 50%. If we want to make the African Renaissance a
reality, we have to spend more money on promoting South Africa in Africa.
[Applause.]

Coming to domestic tourism, for the first time in the history of the South
African Parliament, Minister Valli Moosa took a radical action to transform
the tourism industry by hosting a parliamentary committee meeting, where a
report and review of the department's plan for 2001-2002 took place at the
Thuthuka Cafe in Gugulethu. This is in line with the strong push to ensure
that black South Africans enjoy a stake in tourism's economic growth
sector.

The Government's plan to develop tourism infrastructure and the allocation
of R175 million to a poverty relief project in this financial year, will be
aligned to the Government strategy on rural development, and this will make
tourism a reality to the poor people. We can only be satisfied as this
Parliament, if we see change in peoples' lives, and that should be a
visible change, and not in terms of figures. Government has a
responsibility to put into operation mechanisms that will be biased towards
those historically disadvantaged communities benefiting from this.

Lastly, I just want to mention that, like the Hector Peterson Memorial, the
department will actually be launching a second phase of the memorial
square. I want to mention that the community of Langa, a well-known black
township in Cape Town, and tour operators from the township have expressed
a need for a building in Langa, which is now dilapidated, to be restored.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Chairperson, that building needs to be restored. It
was used by the racist apartheid government as a court for pass laws until
the 80s. We all know that this is actually ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Mr Chairperson, I am
trying to find some points on which I can attack the opposition, as I am
expected to do to earn my keep. [Laughter.]

But while I am thinking about them, let me just say that mention was made
of the ambitious plans that we have to increase the territory under nature
conservation and protection, from 6% of the surface area of the country to
about 8%, in about a decade or so. Bearing in mind that the IUCN (The World
Conservation Union) is of the view that the ideal situation is 10%, we do
not think that we can reach 10% in ten year's time, but we could target 8%.
And, as has been correctly said, this is an enormous amount of land which
could cost a lot of money if all of it is going to be bought at market
value and inflated prices, and such things. The acquisition of this land to
place under protection is a matter which would have to be approached in a
rather complex manner.

The first point to make is that at present one has large tracts of land
which are defined as state forests. That is already in the state's hands,
much of which is administered either by the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry or by various provincial authorities. One also has land which
falls under the Department of Public Works, and hon members would know that
this department is in the process of doing an audit and that the Government
is in the process of doing a review of land use as far as that is
concerned.

Then,of course, not all land under protection necessarily has to be public
land. Private land can also fall under protection. Take, for example, the
whole range of private reserves that we have that are contiguous with the
Kruger National Park. These have, essentially, been incorporated into the
Kruger National Park, although they belong to private people. Sabie Sands,
for example, would be one such case. So there is a whole range of matters.

The point about the R8 million that we have in the budget this year for
land acquisition, is that it is a very novel idea. It is the first time
that we actually have money on the budget to purchase land to incorporate
into a park. And if one looks at the medium-term expenditure framework one
would see that this increases quite substantially over the next three
years. It doubles and trebles and goes up to about R35 million over the
years to come. So it is not just a one-year programme.

The Peace Parks Foundation is of the view that there is untapped
international potential for land acquisition. One must understand that
there is tremendous international support for some of the work we are
doing.

The hon chairperson once again reminded us about the terrible situation as
far as Thor Chemicals is concerned and about the mercury problem that is
experienced there. The department has instructed the company, in terms of
the National Environmental Management Act, to clear up the site and to
dispose of the spent mercury catalyst. We as the department have also
pointed senior counsel in Durban to pursue the case against Thor, as well
as against the present company, as hon members know that ownership has been
changing. The present company is Conica Chemicals - an interesting name. We
will require of them to clean up.

There is no doubt, when one takes their track record into account, that
this is a matter that is going to end up in court. I would like to assure
the House that this is something that we will pursue relentlessly in one
way or another. At the end of the day, if we need to do the clearing up
ourselves as Government, we will do it. But we will pursue the principle of
polluter pays. We cannot leave this matter like that.

On the question of the Macassar disaster, some work has been done regarding
this matter. But let me again assure the House and the chairperson that we
will look into this matter once again and give hon members a detailed
report-back.

The hon Mbuyazi raised the question of access for disabled tourists and
their participation in this industry. What I can report today is that we
recently appointed a new national grading council. We now have a completely
new system and standard for grading hotels and other establishments. Hon
members will remember that one, two and three star grades are awarded.
Importantly, the grading will be taking into account the disabled-
friendliness of an establishment and this will be reflected in the grading
itself. We are of the opinion that we should do this not only because our
democratic Constitution requires that and places an obligation on us, but
we should also do this because it is good for tourism business. Disabled
persons around the world are a very important tourism market. They want to
visit countries that are disabled-friendly, because in some parts of the
world disabled people are just treated like a nuisance. South Africa is
becoming a place which the disabled community globally is beginning to
look.

Recently I had the honour of going to the M C Kharbai School for the Deaf
in Lenasia, which in a way is my hometown. They invited me because they
were launching matric subjects for deaf children in travel and tourism. I
thought that this was a wonderful thing, because when one gets visitors who
are deaf, these young people who are in training now will be in the best
position to make them feel at home. They will act as tour guides, sign
language interpreters and so on.

As far as the Coega development is concerned, I must assure everybody that
up until now all procedures from an environmental point of view have been
followed, and we will ensure that Government is committed to doing a proper
environmental impact assessment, as the Minister of Trade and Industry
himself said in this House. Development which is to happen, will happen in
a manner which minimises negative impact on the environment.

The hon Lerumo Kalako in his speech mentioned a report which rated South
Africa as a toxic hot spot in terms of the so-called dirty dozen of
persistent organic pollutants. This was a report which appeared on the
front page of The Star. I do not know which other newspaper had this
report.

During the time when the very successful international negotiations on
persistent organic pollutants were taking place in Johannesburg in December
last year - and hon members may have seen the reports last week; the world
community has now signed this protocol and South Africa is party to it - we
were quite surprised when we saw this report. This report quoted a
statement issued by the Worldwide Fund for Nature. The Department
immediately contacted the WWF and asked them to give us this information,
because we certainly did not know that South Africa was a toxic hot spot.
The WWF apologised to us in writing for having misled the public and issued
a public statement withdrawing that statement, which was completely
misleading. I just wanted to say that if anybody does mention this, then we
can all confidently say that as far as these toxic substances are
concerned, South Africa is not a hot spot internationally.

I know that my time is up, but may I just say to the hon Ndzanga, who
raised the question of the Pebble Bed Modula Reactor, that the Minister of
Minerals and Energy - and I am not just saying that because she is here -
and I, and our two departments, are working extremely closely on monitoring
the progress as far as this matter is concerned by looking at the
requirements for proper environmental scoping and impact assessment.

We have taken a full report to Cabinet, in the past week, on all of the
processes that are taking place in respect of this matter. As soon as we
complete our internal reporting, we will also inform the public about that
because we think that it serves nobody's interest to pursue the valuable
research work in this field in a nontransparent way. We think that we can
do this quite transparently, without any cost either to the project itself
or anybody else.

Since my time has run out, may I take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to all of those who participated in this debate. It is clear that
a tremendous amount of preparation has gone into it and I can assure hon
members that I and all the bigwigs from the department, who have been
listening to the members, have taken careful note of all of the members'
comments. We will incorporate the suggestions into our work and business
plan for this year.

We are, of course, as is customary - being Environmental Affairs and
Tourism not entertainment and tourism - having entertainment and tourism
this evening. [Laughter.] On behalf of the Chairperson and I, may I invite
all hon members to our party, which takes place not far away from here. I
do not know exactly where it is but the chairperson will give members the
venue. I invite members to come along if they will be doing nothing.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I allowed the
Minister an extra one and half minutes, which was on account of his giving
you the invitation and I hope that you will endorse that.

Somebody has asked me whether the hon Momberg would like to declare the
packages that he has or not. I think that they can refer to the hon Mr
Momberg for that.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 19:01.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             MONDAY, 28 MAY 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation:


     Report of the Department of Sport and Recreation for 1999-2000.

                            TUESDAY, 29 MAY 2001

TABLINGS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 13 -
     Foreign Affairs for 1999-2000 [RP 122-2000].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism on the South African Weather Service Bill [B 54B - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 29 May 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
         having considered the South African Weather Service Bill [B 54B -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) and proposed amendments of the
         National Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and
         Committee Reports, p 516), referred to the Committee, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 54C - 2000].


     Report to be considered.



