---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 October 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-10-26
---

FRIDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____


The House met at 09:01.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S L DITHEBE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the President of the Republic of South Africa, the hon
       Thabo Mbeki, attended the launch of the New Africa Initiative, now
       called the New Partnership for the Development of Africa;


  (2) further notes that South Africa will lead the Peace and Stability
       subcommittee and that the secretariat of the implementation committee
       will be based in Pretoria;


  (3) believes that the strategic position that South Africa holds in this
       new partnership reflects the leadership role that the hon President
       Thabo Mbeki provided in the conceptualisation of this new partnership
       and all that it stands for;


  (4) welcomes the New Partnership for the Development of Africa; and


  (5) commends President Thabo Mbeki for his remarkable contribution to the
       cause of creating a prosperous Africa.
Indeed, Africa's time has come - ke nako ya Afrika. God Bless Africa.
Forward to the African Century! [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with grave concern -


       (a)  the tendency which is creeping into debates in this House in
           terms of which racist hate speech and other unparliamentary
           utterances are becoming ever more prevalent; and


       (b)  that the culprits are mainly but not only members of the ANC,
           and that such conduct impacts negatively on the image and
           conduct of business of Parliament; and


  (2) believes that this negative behaviour should be eradicated forthwith
       in pursuit of the sacred ideals of the Constitution of our country,
       South Africa.

Mr J H SLABBERT: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) learns with shock that nine men allegedly posed as policemen,
       soldiers and traffic officers to commit a spate of robberies at bogus
       roadblocks on the KZN South Coast;


  (2) compliments the Durban police for arresting these hoaxers who roam
       our national roads and put at risk the lives of innocent motorists;


  (3) appreciates the fact that they immediately appeared before the
       magistrate to face their charges; and


  (4) believes and hopes that the law will take its course and put away
       these robbers for a long time.

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock the attack on an elderly farming couple at
       Brookmanspruit in the North West Province, resulting in the wife
       losing her life and the husband being hospitalised in a critical
       condition;


  (2) supports the statement of the Minister of Safety and Security that
       the killing of farmers amounts to sabotage since farmers are a
       lifeline of the country;


  (3) expresses its sympathy to the bereaved and wishes the farmer a full
       and speedy recovery; and
  (4) condemns unequivocally such attacks on the farming community.

[Applause.]

Mr J J DOWRY: Mnr die Voorsitter, hiermee gee ek kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) die Wes-Kaap gelukwens met die inisiatief wat geneem is om 'n
       gedragskode vir landbou saam te stel, wat onder meer voorskrifte
       bevat oor sake soos grondhervorming, verblyfsekerheid en vroueregte,
       en in die toekoms sal dien as maatstaf vir landbou;


  (2) kennis neem dat -


       (a)  dié kode die resultaat is van 18 maande se onderhandelinge
           tussen meer as 40 verskillende organisasies;


       (b)  adv Wallace Mgoqi, hoofkommissaris van grondeise, gesê het die
           kode sal na die res van die land uitgebrei word en dat al die
           landbougemeenskappe daarby sal baatvind; en


  (3) 'n beroep doen om die Regering om die Wes-Kaap te ondersteun met die
       toepassing en monitering van die kode, sodat die inisiatief landwyd
       uitgebrei kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the Western Cape on the initiative taken to compile a
       code of conduct for agriculture which contains, inter alia,
       regulations pertaining to matters such as land reform, security of
       tenure and women's rights, and which will in future serve as a
       yardstick for agriculture;


  (2) notes that -


       (a)  this code is the result of 18 months of negotiations between
           more than 40 separate organisations; and


       (b)  Adv Wallace Mgoqi, Chief Land Claims Commissioner, has said that
           the code will be extended to the rest of the country and that
           all the farming communities will benefit from it; and


  (3) appeals to the Government to support the Western Cape in the
       implementation and monitoring of the code, in order to extend the
       initiative across the country.]

Mr S ABRAM: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -
  (1) notes -


       (a)  media reports on the harassment of an Afrikaans-speaking
           secretary, Ms Sumaya Salem, by some fellow employees and her
           employer since she embraced the religion of Islam three months
           ago;


       (b)  that she was subjected to a disciplinary hearing for
           ``attempting to deliberately incite your fellow colleagues,
           business associates and clients, by arriving at work wearing an
           Osama bin Laden T-shirt, knowing the sensitivity of this
           topic'';


       (c)  that her employer swore at her, telling her that he was sick of
           her and that she must leave the company; and


       (d)  that the employer's business associate shouted at her stating,
           ``You're a white Afrikaner, how can you wear this shirt? How can
           you support these people?''; and


  (2) therefore -


       (a)  calls upon all employers to respect the rights of freedom of
           expression and association of all employees; and


       (b)  assures Ms Sumaya Salem that she and all other employees have
           rights which are statutorily enshrined.

[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr S ABRAM: The employer is a member of the DP. [Applause.]

Mr R D PIETERSE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the statement by the S A Jewish Board of Deputies that the
       Minister of Water Affairs, the hon Ronnie Kasrils, is uninformed
       about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and was using his Jewish
       background to give credibility to the ANC pro-Palestinian stance;


  (2) wishes to restate the ANC position that the lasting solution to the
       Middle East crisis lies in the upholding of the right of the
       Palestinian people to a nation state and the right of Israelis to
       exist within secured borders;


  (3) believes that the attainment of these noble objectives lies in the
       resumption of peaceful negotiations to resolve the crisis in the
       Middle East; and


  (4) reiterates Comrade Ronnie Kasrils' view that the Israeli armed forces
       should stop committing atrocities against the unarmed and the
       defenceless people of Palestine.
[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the announcement by SAA to retrench more than 2
       000 employees before the end of the year;


  (2) asks whether the Government, as a major stakeholder of the airline,
       is going to allow job losses in the light of the already high level
       of unemployment in the country;


  (3) urges the Government to consider a special measure to save jobs at
       SAA, bearing in mind the effects of the terror attacks on 11
       September 2001 in the US and the fact that the airline has to be
       saved from financial ruin; and


  (4) believes that SAA has to clarify its position as it creates
       uncertainty with workers.

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sittin day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with concern that the Standard Bank of South Africa Ltd has
           acquired a derelict building called the Empire Cinema on the
           beachfront in Muizenberg;


       (b)  that the Standard Bank has made no effort to maintain or
           demolish this building even though it is a danger to neighbours
           and passersby;


       (c)  that the Bank denies any obligation or legal duty to attend to
           these matters even though the condition of this building
           constitutes a breach of section 29(f) of the National Building
           Regulations of 1977 as well as the consolidated by-laws of the
           City of Cape Town; and


       (d)  that the dilapidated and highly dangerous state of the property
           is causing a measurable decline in the value of surrounding
           properties and is a major factor inhibiting the campaign for the
           renaissance of Muizenberg; and


  (2) urges the DA-controlled City of Cape Town to support the people of
       Muizenberg and institute proceedings against Standard Bank.

Mrs G M BORMAN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  provincial government departments of the Eastern Cape owe
           district municipalities R72 million made up as follows:


           (i)   public works owes more than R47 million for services;


           (ii)  education owes R6 million;


           (iii) health owes R8,5 million;


           (iv)  provincial housing, local government and traditional
                  affairs each owe more than R1 million; and


           (v)   several other departments owe R500 000; and


       (b)  district municipalities did not receive any of the equitable
           share from the national division of revenue; and


  (2) calls on the provincial and national departments of finance to set an
       example to the people of South Africa by paying what they owe to
       local government.

[Applause.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with deep concern the high incidence of rape and other forms of
       woman and child abuse, as well as the accompanying post-traumatic,
       physical and psychological damage; and


  (2) believes that concrete measures are urgently needed, which should
       include -


       (a)  urgently speeding up education programmes for justice
           administrators and SAPS officers, with the primary aim of
           sensitising judges and officers to the alarming increase in the
           incidence of violence against women and children;


       (b)  ensuring that police investigations are carried out in a proper
           manner to ensure the conviction and incarceration of
           perpetrators of violent crimes against women and children;


       (c)  ensuring that sentences are commensurate with the severity of
           the crimes committed so as to serve as an effective deterrent to
           the would-be criminal;


       (d)  ensuring that there are a sufficient number of trained
           sensitised female officers to debrief victims of violent crime
           and that a humanitarian ...

[Time expired.]

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay that the DA in Cape Town has made a mockery of
       public participation by holding so-called public workshops in the
       areas of the subcouncils to which relevant stakeholders were not
       invited and which were minimally advertised, resulting in minimal
       attendance by the public;


  (2) believes that this cynical pretence at compliance with the Local
       Government: Municipal Systems Act - which states that integrated
       development planning must be based on community participation - is
       further proof of the DA's shallow self-interest and opportunism; and


  (3) condemns the DA for its abuse of power and its lack of commitment to
       the needs and aspirations of the poor, the majority of the citizens
       of Cape Town.

[Applause.]
Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  since 1994 unemployment has risen to 25%;


       (b)  in the past decade one million jobs in the formal sector have
           been lost, and so has one in 10 jobs since 1997;


       (c)  economic growth has averaged under 2%;


       (d)  investment fell to below 15% of GDP, the worst since 1993; and


       (e)  R54 billion has left the country in foreign direct investment;
           and


  (2) urges President Mbeki to come down from the clouds so that he can see
       his Government's devastating effect on the poor people of South
       Africa.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, before we come to the
orders of the day, I wish to make a ruling on a point of order which was
raised a week ago.

During the debate on the IPU Declaration on 18 October, the hon Dr Jordan
raised a point of order asking whether it was acceptable for the hon Mr Van
der Merwe, in his speech, to deliberately misconstrue the words of the hon
Mr Mokaba, who had spoken earlier.

I have considered the point of order and, consistent with previous rulings
on this matter, I wish to rule as follows: The Chair cannot be expected to
judge on the accuracy of a member's remarks in a debate. If a member wants
to take issue with what is said in a debate, that member should seek an
opportunity in the debate to present a different version. The member could
either do that in person or request a colleague to present a corrective.

That is my ruling on the matter.

   SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) IN ORDER TO CONDUCT SECOND READING DEBATE ON
                       MEDICAL SCHEMES AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I hereby move the
draft resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That Rule 253(1) be suspended for the purposes of conducting the Second
  Reading debate on the Medical Schemes Amendment Bill [B 80 - 2001]
  (National Assembly - sec 75).

Agreed to.
                    AFRICA INSTITUTE OF SOUTH AFRICA BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Minister, I am sorry that they blocked your
way - there was a road block!

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, this
Bill, the Africa Institute of South Africa Bill, is the culmination of the
transformation process of the Africa Institute of South Africa, Aisa, as we
now call it, that started with the 1997 review of science and engineering
institutions by the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology.

The institute has been in existence for many years and I am happy that it
has done a lot of work on the continent. If one wants any information,
literally on any aspects of the African continent, one would find it at
this institute.

We know that the previous regime used Aisa extensively as a source of
information on African countries, and for conveying their carefully crafted
view on development on the continent. It became a formidable depository of
information on Africa, but because of the political climate of the time, it
did not have the degree of interaction with scholars and others in the rest
of Africa and the world that was to be expected of a research institution
of its kind.

With the advent of democracy in 1994, South Africa's relationship with the
rest of Africa changed completely. With it came the need to rethink the
role that Aisa should play. Also, the development paradigm of the African
Renaissance and the challenge of a credible base of knowledge on
development challenges on the continent called for a review of the research
content in this area.

By 1997 it was clear that fundamental reform of the institute was
necessary. The review panel that was then appointed came up with a number
of options. After considering these options, this Bill was drafted. Amongst
others, the review panel said that Aisa needed a double turn-around which
is, firstly, a change in perspective that would help it to see Africa no
longer through foreign eyes, but from within and, secondly, a change in its
governance structure that will bring it under the umbrella of a larger body
sharing that vision, thereby continuing its access to assured resources,
but without reproducing its historic insularity and combining its
traditional autonomy with a newly defined accountability.

The Bill now seeks to convert Aisa from a section 21 company to a statutory
body that does research and will function under an Act of Parliament that
is similar to those governing other science councils. By bringing Aisa into
the family of science and technology institutions regulated by institution-
specific Acts, the necessary interaction and multidisciplinary approaches
will be promoted by this Bill.

By administering Aisa through a specific Act, we will, in collaboration
with the council of Aisa, be in a stronger position to guide and evaluate
the activities of the institute. Furthermore, by bringing Aisa into the
system of science and technology institutions, funded by way of a science
Vote, the allocation of funds according to national research priorities
using, amongst others, a process of competitive bidding, will be promoted.

Members may be aware of of the financial reporting system that was
instituted for science councils. This includes procedures for determining
key performance indicators for these institutions and then reporting
against them. This will be a most suitable vehicle for ensuring that Aisa,
along with other institutions, performs according to expectations and
justifies entrusting the responsibilities in this Bill to it.

The Africa Institute's functions include the collecting, processing and
interpreting of information on Africa, especially on South African affairs.
It should do this by means of analysing, researching and then disseminating
information, findings and analyses through suitable media. It is required
to carry out this dissemination process through periodicals and other
publications, seminars, workshops, conferences and commentary through the
mass media.

As a principally state-supported and nationally based organisation for the
study of African affairs, the institute has a public education role to
inform South African society at large, including politicians, professionals
and laymen, about trends and events in Africa. The council of Aisa is at
present composed of six representatives elected by members of the institute
through representatives from the South African universities and one
representative appointed by my department.

With Government taking responsibility for appointing the chairperson and
the majority of members of the council of Aisa, we will be in a better
position to ensure the appointment of a competent council to promote the
activities of Aisa against the background of South Africa's interaction
with the rest of the continent. The importance of this work is already
evident in the current participation of Aisa's work related to the new
Africa Institute and the stature it is gaining in research circles of the
continent.

Now that we are achieving these objectives, Aisa is required by this Bill
to investigate matters of public interest and on the strength of its
findings act in an opinion-forming and advisory manner. It should publish
scientific reports and other publications. It is placed under an obligation
to promote outstanding achievements in the different fields of African
cultural life and to grant recognition for excellence. Aisa is already
involved in encouraging more extensive coverage of Africa in social science
education and it will continue to promote and generate interest in social
science education.

Globally, there are numerous institutions, networks and groups that study
Africa. Aisa will have the responsibility of establishing reciprocal
arrangements with organisations that have similar objectives to its own
locally and abroad, in order to promote the exchange of information and
ideas. The major portion of its income will be derived from a parliamentary
grant. This is to be supplemented by self-generated funds from commissioned
contract, research and other consultancy services, as well as membership
fees, donations from the corporate sector and income from the sale of
publications.

I would definitely encourage members to interact with the portfolio
committee and with the institution very closely. Aisa has grown in stature
and established itself as an internationally recognised research and
information centre. In focusing on the continent, I would also like to
reiterate what President Mbeki said when he addressed us at the South
Africa-Algeria binational commission. He said that we as the government and
parliamentary structures should study French so that we could interact with
all parts of the continent, not only Anglophone Africa. [Applause.]

Dr M W SEROTE: Chairperson, firstly, I would like to thank the members of
the portfolio committee from all parties. Our deliberations on the three
Bills indicated very clearly that we are living in a time in which we
should address issues of democracy and inclusivity as we address the issue
of transformation in our country.

The debates also indicated a maturity among us where we consistently sought
the best solutions to whatever problems were confronting us. I would also
like to thank the members for the fact that although we were faced by three
Bills, almost one after the other, members attended the portfolio committee
meetings consistently and participated with eagerness and vigour. I would
like to thank them and also thank mme mmaNjobe, for being a good Whip in
our committee. [Applause.]

When we approached this debate, I was asked to look at the three Bills at
the same time ie the Africa Institute of South Africa Bill, the Academy of
Science of South Africa Bill and the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal''
Act Repeal Bill, and give our impression on all of these at the same time.
The key thing about the three Bills is that the department is consistently
contributing towards the transformation of our society, in relation to
nation-building, redressing the past, and in terms of trying to address
issues of what we call the grassroots in our country and their
participation. Each of the Bills, as one sees them, will be strong in
contributing towards democracy and in terms of when people are selected to
sit in execution of competence of those structures. One needs from them
commitment, conviction and we paid a lot of attention to questions of
accountability, both in terms of finances and social and political input in
our country.

In my view, the Africa Institute, as the hon Minister has said, will also
contribute very significantly to South Africans developing a continental
patriotism, reversing perceptions on the continent about us and our
perceptions about the continent, which were negative. It is appropriate
that this Bill is passed at this point when our country is beginning to
discuss the issues of the African Union and the New Africa Initiative.

It is also appropriate that this Bill is being passed now, because, as we
remember, our President mentioned that this is the African century. There
is no other better time for us to have an instrument of research and
professionalism, which, in my view, will assist us to engage both the
conventional and organic intellectuals of Africa.

In terms of the Academy of Science of South Africa Bill, we were faced by
an issue which I thought may have indicated a problem emanating from the
past. I am glad to say that I felt that the committee was very mature in
the manner in which it approached it. Therefore, I feel that this also
contributes to a process which has been unfolding since 1994 - the process
of creating public awareness of science and technology in our country. It
is also going to create a dialogue among professionals who, for a very long
time, had no dialogue among them. That is very important.

I do not see the repealing of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal''
Act in a negative light, but as a means of contributing to what has always
concerned us right from the beginning since 1994 - the question of
understanding that South Africa is a multilingual society. But, the whole
lexicographical approach to language, in my view, is also an indication
that we are very concerned about not only building multilingualism. As we
contribute towards multilingualism, we will be contributing very
significantly to understanding the diverseness of our culture and
multicultural approach in our country. We will also be equipping our people
to have a very broad-based approach toward the solution of problems because
they will be approaching it from a multilingual as well as a multicultural
position. I think that this is how we should look at the issues which are
before us.

One could not fail to recall, as we are deliberating about all of these
institutions that we are putting in place, that in the past seven years, we
have put in place many structures with the intention and objective of
creating them as pillars of democracy in our society. But, I think that we
have arrived at a point where we should pose certain questions about all of
these structures that we are putting in place. Are these structures
functioning? Are they achieving the objectives that they were set in place
for? Do we feel that the people who are working in all of these structures
have conviction and are committed to what I would call the national
priorities which our Government has set in place, and with the
understanding that the structures which we are continually putting in place
are actual pillars for the achievement of nation-building, nonracialism,
nonsexism and democracy?

I raise this question in this manner because I also want to recommend that
the question of the oversight role of Parliament, in my view, is long
overdue. It is a matter that we should have already been experts at
implementing. And, for as long as we continue to debate this issue and not
resolve the manner of engaging oversight, we will never know whether the
money that we are spending, in terms of the structures that we are putting
in place, is really being utilised constructively.

I also think that we should find a manner of working out between the
portfolio committee, the department and the Ministry, something that we can
do to know how to put methods in place for ensuring that a consciousness
develops among all of the people who are involved in these structures - a
consciousness which says, ``we are expected to deliver''. My suggestion is
that a dialogue must first begin among us, the three blocks which are
responsible for this area of work, where we can sit and begin to look at
all the structures, in science, arts and language. If one looks at those,
there are hundreds and hundreds of people who are doing one thing or the
other to facilitate transformation, to entrench democracy and to ensure a
process of inclusivity. [Time expired.]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Chairperson, the Bill provides for the establishment,
objectives and functions of a juristic person known as the Africa Institute
of South Africa. The institute's main functions are to collect, through its
library and monitoring service, process, interpret, by means of research,
and disseminate information, findings and analyses on African and
especially Southern African affairs through periodicals, seminars,
workshops, conferences and commentary to the mass media.

The ultimate objective of the Africa Institute, namely to contribute to the
peaceful development and prosperity of the continent of Africa, is a very
noble objective, which the DA believes falls within the broader framework
of the vision of the African Renaissance. Key words in the preamble such as
``understand'', ``establish'', ``maintain'', ``participate'', ``support'',
``contribute'', ``development'' and ``revival'' emphasise the focused
approach to deal with the challenges and the opportunities the institute
envisages to address.

Die skep van vrede, veiligheid en stabiliteit, die belegging in die mense
van Afrika, die ontwikkeling van Afrika se infrastruktuur en die groeiende
belegging in inligtings- en kommunikasietegnologie is konsentrasiepunte wat
deur behoorlike ondersoek, behoorlike beplanning en aksieprogramme van die
instituut en ander instansies kan help om die oneindige potensiaal in
Afrika te ontsluit.

Indien die navorsing wat deur die instituut gedoen is en gedoen gaan word,
streng analities en nie dogmaties gegrond is nie, behoort die instituut die
klimaat te skep om almal te betrek wat 'n positiewe bydrae kan lewer om die
prosesse van omvorming te versnel. Indien navorsing egter daarop gemik gaan
wees om, soos in die verlede, 'n regerende party se beleidsrigtings te
kondoneer, sal doeltreffendheid en geloofwaardigheid ingeboet word ten
koste van objektiewe bevindinge wat die regte reaksie tot gevolg sal hê.

Die instituut behoort 'n eie navorsingsagenda te volg wat ongekontamineerde
belegging in die mense van Afrika tot gevolg sal hê. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The creation of peace, security and stability, the investment in the
people of Africa, the development of Africa's infrastructure and the
growing investment in information and communication technology are focus
points that can, through proper investigation, proper planning and action
programmmes of the institute and other organisations, help to unlock the
infinite potential of Africa.

If the research which has been done and is still to be done by the
institute is strictly analitical and not dogmatic, the institute ought to
create the climate to involve everybody that can make a positive
contribution to accelerate the processes of reformation. However, if
research is going to be aimed, as in the past, at condoning a governing
party's policy directions, efficiency and credibility will be sacrificed at
the expense of objective findings that would lead to the correct reaction.

The institute needs to follow its own research agenda that will result in
an uncontaminated investment in the people of South Africa.]

In the programme of action of the Millennium Africa Plan, African leaders
are called upon, amongst other things, to strengthen mechanisms for
prevention of conflict and conflict resolution, to promote and protect
democracy and human rights in their own countries, to revitalise and extend
the provision of education and health services, to institute transparent
legal and regulatory frameworks for financial markets, to promote the
development of agriculture, and to promote investment in infrastructure
construction and sustainable operations.

These changes are enormous, but we in the DP and the DA believe that the
Africa Institute of South Africa can and must play its role in a system
with a realisation of this dream. The DP and the DA support the Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Chairperson, when hon members take a look at the hon
Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology they will see around him
an aura of paternal self-satisfaction. [Laughter.] This comes from the fact
that he is father to so many offspring. Today he produced another two
offspring and for that we need to say congratulations to him. This is a
work of art, indeed, when hon members come to consider it very seriously
and closely. It is a very fine work of art.

We in South Africa really ought to be conscious of the moment in history in
which we are called upon to do what we are doing. Future parliaments and
future members of parliament will not have the opportunity that we have, to
bring into being the instruments that are going to make this country a
great country indeed.

When one considers the history of Africa after each country received its
independence, those countries raced quite rapidly towards an implosion.
South Africa, on the other hand, is moving out. It is moving out with
confidence, with courage, with vision towards a new Africa, towards the New
Africa Initiative that the President of the country has embraced, towards
the African Union. This means, then, that South Africa needs to be
supported by people who are doing the research, who are doing the writing,
who are producing the periodicals, who are producing, constantly, a flow of
information to tell us just what is happening in Africa and to tell the
rest of Africa what is happening here in South Africa.

Let us be constantly conscious of the fact that never in the annals of
history did any country do what we did. We were able to resolve an
intractable problem by sitting around the table. If one sees what is
happening now in Ireland, then one sees that we are beginning to have an
impact, not only on Africa, but even on Europe, which is supposed to have
been the mother of parliament, the inventor of politics as we know them. So
lowly Southern Africa is able to contribute to that.

So the Africa Institute of SA, this offspring by the way, has the very
seductive female name of Aisa. Through Aisa, South Africa can hope to be
able to make a much greater impact and allow the developments that are
taking place here to be recorded, analysed and pronounced upon. This will
also help the country in respect of contract research and consultancy. We
know that South Africans are being called upon by the World Bank, the IMF
and a number of other bodies to do such consultancy work, and the Africa
Institute of SA, no doubt, will fulfil this role admirably.

We also need to be able to develop - as my colleague Dr Serote and the
Minister himself said - continental patriotism. We need to be patriotic
about Africa; we need to be patriotic about South Africa, because too often
we begin to talk down the great achievements of this country and the things
that we have already done. However when someone scientifically evaluates
this and tells us that we are, indeed, doing a great job, then maybe we
will begin to believe ourselves.

The New Africa Initiative and the African Union also require that we play
our significant role in directing these developments so that they can begin
to find an important niche in the whole African discourse. The issue that
is most important for any parliament and a free parliament like this one is
peace and prosperity in our time. All nations, all parliaments all over the
world are continually searching for peace and prosperity. Peace and
prosperity can only come from the basis of the knowledge that we have. The
greater the knowledge, the greater our ability to ensure that there is
peace and also prosperity.

So we are very happy indeed, and on behalf of the IFP we support the Africa
Institute of SA. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mev A VAN WYK: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is altyd 'n plesier om die
welsprekende mnr Cassim op te volg, en dit is altyd interessant om te hoor
hoe die Persiese tradisie van vertelling nog steeds in sy benaderingswyse
leef.

Die liggaam waarmee ons hier te make het, is een van die menigvuldige
prestasies van die SA Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns. Soos met die Raad vir
Geesteswetenskaplike Navorsing, die Nasionale Letterkundemuseum, die
instelling van die desimale stelsel in Suid-Afrika, die Nasionale
Vakterminologiediens, die Stigting Simon van der Stel en die Buro vir
Heraldiek, het hy die inisiatief geneem om die Afrika-Instituut te stig.
Hiervoor, en vir sy onskatbare bydrae tot wetenskap en kultuur oor bykans
'n eeu, is Suid-Afrika aan hom veel verskuldig.

Ongelukkig, terwyl ek daarvan praat, die vroeër uitmuntende Vaktaalburo het
ongelukkig 'n onderdeel geword van die departement, waar hy nou in 'n
burokratiese stagnasie verval het onder 'n heerskappy waar onbekwaamheid
met uitvoerende poste beloon word. Van veeltaligheid kom daar tot dusver
nog 'n kluitjie. Ek hoop nie so iets gaan nou ook met die Afrika-Instituut
gebeur nie. Sy sterkte het juis in sy onafhanklikheid gelê.

Hy was in staat om 'n uitmuntende biblioteek op te bou en hom as 'n
gesagbhebbende bronverwysing te vestig, wat 'n wye nasionale en
internasionale kliëntebasis bedien. Die Afrika-Instituut kon met reg beskou
word as een van dié gesaghebbende liggame op die gebied van eietydse Afrika
politiek en ekonomie. As sodanig geniet hy ook hoë aansien. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs A VAN WYK: Mr Chairman, it is always a pleasure to follow on the
eloquent Mr Cassim, and it is always interesting to observe that the
Persian tradition of story-telling is still alive in his approach.

The body with which we are dealing here is one of the many achievements of
the SA Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns. As was the case with the Human
Sciences Research Council, the National Literature Museum, the introduction
of the decimal system in South Africa, the National Terminology Service,
the Simon van der Stel Foundation and the Bureau of Heraldry, it took the
initiative to establish the Africa Institute. For this, and its invaluable
contribution to science and culture for almost a century, South Africa owes
it a debt of gratitude.

Unfortunately, seeing that I am talking about this, the formerly excellent
Bureau for Technical Terminology has became a subdivision of the
department, where it has now fallen into bureaucratic stagnation under a
rule in which incompetence is rewarded with executive positions. Nothing at
all has come of multilingualism. I hope this is not going to happen with
the Africa Institute as well. Its strength actually lay in its
independence.

It was able to build up an outstanding library and establish itself as an
authoritative source reference, serving a wide national and international
client base. The Africa Institute could justifiably be regarded as one of
the authoritative bodies in the field of current politics and economics in
Africa. As such it also enjoys high regard.]

But hold your hearts. Not only will it no longer be a section 21 company,
there will now be another one of these councils, which is fast becoming a
recipe for the doom of many of our national assets. Just look, for example,
at Unisa at present.

The council will consist of at least 7 members, but not more than 10,
appointed by the Minister - I hope that does not mean departmental cronies
- in the prescribed manner; a representative of the department - as if the
above were not enough; and a maximum of a massive two members co-opted by
the council - we have to guard against too much experience possibly
slipping in - and, just for further insurance, this has to be done in
consultation with the Minister, etc. How much autonomy is there?

Nowhere in section 7 does it say anything about technical expertise apart
from the provision that one member must have experience in financial
matters. We read nothing about anyone having to know anything about
political science, economics, African affairs, foreign diplomacy, legal
matters, African languages or French. What kind of council might this body
end up with?

Nowhere do we read anything about representation on its council of any of
its primary client base, for example Foreign Affairs or the universities.
How about someone from the body representing the heads of universities
staying there? The present council does have three such persons. So far
Aisa - and a charming acronym that is - has enjoyed a far more independent
status than other research bodies. However, if the Minister also appoints
the chairman of the council, as now provided for, one wonders whether a
good balance between discipline related autonomy and accountability can be
struck.

Ondanks hierdie, en ander, bedenkinge steun ons hierdie wetgewing, want dit
is noodsaaklik. Die portefeuljekomitee het daarin geslaag om 'n paar
betekenisvolle wysigings aan te bring, veral die verwydering van die
klousule waardeur die departement gepoog het om die raad as bankier te laat
optree vir werknemers.

Ten slotte moet ek sê daar is in hierdie wetgewing, asook die ander wat ons
vanoggend behandel, 'n merkbare verbetering in die gehalte van die
wetskrywing, en ek wil diegene wat daarvoor verantwoordelik is, bedank. Te
veel van die wette in die verlede, soos byvoorbeeld dié oor nasionale
instellings, is duidelik deur amateurs geskryf. Hopelik kan ons nou uitsien
na meer goeie wetgewing.

Die Nuwe NP en die DA steun graag hierdie wet, en ons wens die nuwe te
stigte liggaam sukses toe. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Despite these and other reservations we support this legislation, because
it is essential. The portfolio committee succeeded in effecting a few
significant amendments, especially the removal of the clause by means of
which the department tried to have the council act as a banker for
employees.

In conclusion I must say that in this legislation, as well as in other
pieces of legislation that we will be dealing with this morning, there is a
remarkable improvement in the quality of the drafting of legislation, and I
want to thank the people responsible for that. In the past too many laws,
for example the one about national institutions, were clearly drafted by
amateurs. Hopefully, we can now look forward to more well-drafted
legislation.

The New NP and the DP take pleasure in supporting this legislation and we
wish the proposed new body every success. [Applause.]]

Nksk N B MBOMBO: Mgcinisihlalo, Mbomvu, tat' uSerote, maqabane neNdlu
ngokubanzi, ndiyanibulisa. [Chairperson, Mbomvu, hon Dr Serote, comrades
and the House at large, I greet you all.]

As the Africa Institute of SA or Aisa, a section 21 company, is tasked,
among other things, with collecting, processing, and interpreting
information on Africa and Southern African affairs, the introduction of
this Bill has put Aisa on a par with other institutions and science
councils, eg the SA Medical Research Council and the Human Sciences
Research Council. The chief executive officer of Aisa will now be in a
position to sit with the president of the aforementioned councils and
deliberate on budgetary issues, and agree on the allocation of such funds
and not be given leftovers, as the situation has been up to now.

This Bill seeks to empower Aisa to meet the expectations of the state and
the diplomatic community. Cognisance should be taken of the fact that Aisa
has now only seven researchers and yet it serves the continent, while the
other institutions in other African countries which are regionally based in
terms of activities have about 30 researcher. Thus the Bill will empower
Aisa with intellectual, monetary, physical and technological resources.

Because of this Bill, Aisa will now be able to receive and make donations,
offer endowments and scholarships, acquire movable and immovable property,
and borrow money - all these are things which are not possible while Aisa
is still a section 21 company. Aisa will now be brought into the family of
science and technology institutions funded by way of the Science Vote,
whereby the allocation of funds will be in accordance with national
priorities.

Aisa must also be seen in a new light. Our country is undergoing massive
transformation. In the apartheid era there was a great determination to
prevent black people from coming into the science field. This field was to
be reserved for whites only. We are now reversing all of that. We are not
only encouraging black people at every turn to become scientists, but we
are also encouraging them to interact with other scientists and to become
involved in the growth and development of science.

South Africa has a very bright future. Year after year, young people are
leaving universities with skills and knowledge to support scientific
research. These scientists will serve as role models for more young people
to become involved in science. The Africa Institute, by conferring honours
on outstanding scientists, will encourage research and publications. Every
professional likes to operate competitively. Similarly, every scientist
likes to be recognised and acknowledged. Aisa will afford scientists such
an opportunity.

Seven years after the first democratic elections, we are a country striving
steadfastly to create a better life for all. With an ever-increasing circle
of scientists, both black and white, South Africa needs Aisa and indeed
Aisa will work to stimulate greater interest in science. We, in the ANC,
are delighted with this development and call on Aisa to give meaning and
expression to the wishes we are expressing in this House. [Applause.]

Miss O N MNDENDE: Chairperson, the UDM supports this Bill because we
believe it is important to have an autonomous institution which is the
repository of knowledge and information on South Africa specifically and
Africa in general. The autonomous nature of the institution guarantees that
it cannot be politically or otherwise manipulated to enhance a sectoral
agenda.

Africa has a wealth of information of archeological, historical,
scientific, social, economic and political interest. Some of these can be
sourced from oral traditions, and therefore need to be researched and
properly recorded for posterity. Scholars of the future will find an
invaluable resource in the institution for research and enrichment of our
academic and cultural traditions.

It is also important to note that much of Africa's history was written from
a very selective and subjective viewpoint, by people who were advancing a
partisan cause of establishing colonial hegemony over the continent. We all
know that African affairs were recorded and understood as primitive and
barbaric. The essential character of this historic record is biased in
favour of the view that suited the colonisers. This institute will provide
great opportunities to revise and rewrite African history in a way that
portrays an objective historical perspective.

At a time when Africa has been given pride of place in our order of
priorities, it is vital that when we conduct our own research about our
continent, we articulate ourselves in the manner that facilitates our
growth, development and wellbeing. The dialogue that will ensue as a result
of the utilisation of the institute will nurture a tradition of scholarship
and brainstorming.
The UDM supports the Bill.

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, God works in a mysterious way His will and
purposes to fulfil, like the melting of swords into ploughshares. The
company, the Africa Institute of South Africa, is one clear example of this
phenomenon. We welcome the rebaptism of the institute and the changed name
``juristic person'' instead of ``company''.

The institute is a remarkable resource collected over the years while the
rest of Africa was still asleep. It is a Pan-African institution, a
valuable national asset which will help restructure and transform Africa.
We welcome this new development and pray that it will rise above petty
party-political exercises and help to serve the whole of Africa, from Cape
to Cairo, and from Malagasy to Morocco, izwe lethu [our land].
[Interjections.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chair, for 40 years Aisa has been a great asset to the
nation in terms of its focus on Africa. With its in-depth analysis and
research it has earned itself a reputation as a most resourceful source of
information.

Aisa's intention to become an independent authoritative centre of
excellence for the production of education in Africa is supported. A nation
that recognises the right of all to education should certainly support an
equipped resource such as Aisa, to contribute to our learning process and
that of our neighbouring countries in Africa. It is also aimed at promoting
awareness, as well as the importance of unity, peace, prosperity and
democracy on the continent - all attributes that are favourable to the
continent and the Republic, which we are working towards.

The body is a great asset, and our support and appreciation is needed for
this institute that serves us greatly by way of research and knowledge of
issues that influence our actions in one way or the other.

The MF supports the Bill.

Mr S L DITHEBE: Chairperson, I think it is proper that we remember what the
President said in 1998. He said: ``I am an African.'' I think those words
that he uttered could not be appropriate enough, especially on this day.
And may I reiterate what the President said: I am an African.

The Bill before us transforms Aisa into a member of the family of science
councils, and like all other science councils, the HSRC the CSIR, the MRC,
etc, it existed during a particular period in the history of apartheid
South Africa. Established in 1960 during the reign of H F Verwoerd and
others, ironically in the year of the banning of the ANC and other
political organisations, it existed as an entity whose main object was, and
I quote:

  The collection, processing, documentation and dissemination of
  information related to or affecting human wellbeing on the continent of
  Africa; the promotion, sponsoring and co-ordination of research and
  publications in respect thereof and all activities related thereto.
Is it not ironic that here we had a body that was committed to research
work in African affairs? Those of us who know the history of this country
very well know that that particular assignment was not fulfilled in order
to know more about the African continent, but to undermine countries in
Southern Africa and indeed the whole of the African continent. It was an
exercise of intelligence gathering, so as to know more about what was
happening there, in order to undermine them, as I said.

There can be no denying the fact that Aisa has had, for many years, non-
Africa-sensitive and non-Africa-literate intelligentsia. But today the call
is being made - the call for the new partnership for Africa's development.
The call undoubtedly says the solution to Africa's problems is possible
because, as they say in Tswana: Motho ke motho ka ba bangwe or Zulu: Umuntu
ngumuntu ngabanye. In English this means: I am because we are and since we
are therefore I am. Fifty-three countries, 700 million people - we are one
people, inhabitants of the cradle of mankind, the continent of Africa. Aisa
must ensure that its research and related work undermines xenophobia and
fosters - as other speakers before me have said - continental patriotism.

I cannot resist the temptation to conclude by saying that in the DA we are
faced with a Janus-like creature - a creature with two faces, because, on
the one hand, one of the components of that so-called alliance in the
person of the hon Opperman supports the Bill and speaks very well of it,
and, on the other hand, one has the hon Van Wyk who speaks in very
disparaging terms about the powers of the Minister to appoint the
chairperson and the powers of the council to co-opt members and so forth.
The flipside of that whole issue which she has not demonstrated today is
the fact that if one leaves a council with the power to appoint a
chairperson, they could well be reduced to a faction or clique that fights
amongst themselves never gets down to the business of what they have been
called to do.

I think the truth must be told today, that when we sat in the portfolio
committee, we looked at all those possibilities and when we inserted that
clause, we did it with that in mind. And I have no doubt that Aisa, apart
from what is contained in the Bill, because it has this history over many
years of research work, will collaborate with institutions of higher
learning, foreign embassies, the Department of Foreign Affairs itself and
the Africa section in particular, and many other institutions. And I have
no doubt that it is geared up more than ever before, and we have seen in
its review process document that it is geared up more than ever before to
ensure that not only does it continue to do research, but that, like other
research councils - the HSRC and so forth - it is able at least to raise
more than 30% of its income through other means, without relying solely on
what Parliament has to offer it.

I think Aisa and the department must be commended on that. I think that
under the able leadership of Dr Serote, we have been able to achieve that
which was expected of us. I also want to say that Aisa must continue to
inform the people of South Africa. And going back to the point that I made
about undermining xenophobia and promoting continental patriotism, we have
to learn, amongst others, about countries such as the Democratic Republic
of Congo. How many of us, for instance, know that the DRC is a vast
territory of 2 345 406 km, and that it shares borders with nine other
countries in East, Central and Southern Africa? [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Mr Chairperson, I
would like to thank the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Arts,
Culture, Science and Technology, the hon Dr Wally Serote, for giving an
overview of the three Bills that are being presented today. What informs
and infuses the three Bills is the transformative spirit in very
responsible terms.

South Africa should be proud and thankful that, after 1994, the democratic
governments that we have had have been very responsible in handling
transformation issues. Therefore, I am rather disappointed with the hon Van
Wyk because she always tends to look at the depressing side of things. I
would really request the hon member to look at the stars and see the
shooting stars. We have such clear skies in Southern Africa which are
always an inspiration. Therefore, one looks at the positive side because we
have the possibility of a rising trajectory rather than a falling one.
[Applause.]

I just want to correct a bit of misinformation on the hon Van Wyk's part.
She has levelled criticism regarding the qualifications of council members.
In all the appointments, we consult the portfolio committee. They are
included in our considerations. We do not just go and do it all on our own.
So, there is no reason why there should not be this consultation about the
appointment of the council members. Clause 5(1) of the Bill specifies
explicitly that council members should be persons who have special
knowledge or experience in African affairs. Therefore, I think that this
correction must be made for all members and for the country.

The other issue that I am pleased about is that all the parties, by and
large, have been very positive about this Bill. There is a very positive
sentiment towards the African continent and to our linkage with the rest of
our sister countries on the continent. This is very positive because,
whether we like it or not, South Africa is the most developed part of the
continent and therefore we need to play a leadership role.

There are donor funds that have come from the EU to other organisations
which are related to the continent, moneys that have not been used because
of lack of capacity. We must work with the ACP and the EU, as South Africa,
to help the continent absorb the funds in order to see to the improvement
of the quality of life and the standard of living, because we have this
capacity. The Africa Institute of South Africa will be a very important
element in this continental approach, particularly when it comes to issues
of sustainable trade and development that take care of the environment.

So, I would like to thank hon members for a very effective contribution and
for helping us, the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology, to
work in a constructive way. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Decision of question postponed.

                   ACADEMY OF SCIENCE OF SOUTH AFRICA BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Mr Chairperson, I am
just reminded by the hon member here that I must make sure that I have the
right speech. [Laughter.] It reminds me of a Minister who used to be in
charge of Bantu Affairs in those days, who went to open a high school only
to find that his private secretary had given him the wrong speech. So, he
came there and made a big speech about a bridge because he was supposed to
be opening a bridge. [Laughter.] That bridge was going to help communities
come together and everyone thought to themselves: We never knew that the
Minister was so philosophical. [Laughter.]

The Academy of Science of South Africa Bill is a very important element in
our transformative scheme. In South Africa different academies and similar
bodies have up to now furthered the interests of different sections of our
scientific community, often very competently. We are now ready to recognise
a single representative body as an academy that can represent the interests
of all sectors of the scientific community, rather than just specific
subgroups.

To date the academy has functioned as an unofficial body. Its history goes
back as far as 1989. During that year the need for the establishment of an
academy that was truly representative of all scientific disciplines was
first highlighted. It needed to provide a home for all branches of science,
including natural science, social science, the humanities, economic
science, engineering, health science and agricultural science. It had to be
inclusive of all cultural communities.

After an extensive development and consultation process, the Academy of
Science of South Africa came into being in 1996, at an inaugural meeting
where its founding members accepted its constitution. Its membership
includes a wide variety of scientists from all scientific disciplines and
communities.

Government has a distinct need for an overarching academy that is the only
officially recognised body representing the full spectrum of South African
scientists. There are occasions when inputs from scientists are needed from
a single reputable source. In the process of international co-operation, it
is often appropriate to enter into co-operation agreements with academies
in other countries, for which we need a local academy that has official
status.

Scientists themselves, who have to consider accepting membership, need the
assurance that the body that they are invited to join is indeed a
distinguished body which it will be an honour to be a member of. We expect
Assaf to meet the needs just mentioned and also that Government will
productively utilise Assaf to provide advice on policy and strategy.

This Bill therefore establishes the Academy of Science of South Africa, or
Assaf, which will seek to mobilise the whole science and technology
community. Its objectives will be to promote common ground in scientific
thinking across all scientific fields and in addition to promote optimum
development of the intellectual capacity of all people in the country. It
further provides effective advice and facilitates appropriate action in
relation to the collective needs, opportunities and challenges of all South
Africans in the field of science and technology.

The objectives of Assaf are designed to ensure that individuals who have
made significant contributions to science act in concert across all
disciplines in providing direction to the scientific community. They must
facilitate appropriate action in relation to the collective needs, threats,
opportunities and challenges of all South Africans.

The Bill provides for the establishment of Assaf as an autonomous body
corporate with perpetual succession and legal personality. The expectation
is that it will articulate scientific viewpoints, information and thinking
within the scientific community. We anticipate that it will become a
valuable source of advice on matters of government, science and technology
policy.

It is regarded as appropriate that Assaf be established under its own
dedicated legislation. This will provide full clarity regarding its
functions and provide the basis for openness and transparency as regards
its activities. Assaf will thereby become known to the public at large.

Large parts of the legislation are based on the content of the constitution
according to which Assaf is already operating. To emphasise its status as
the only officially recognised academy, this Bill therefore proposes the
repeal of the Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns Act. As a body
corporate with perpetual succession and legal personality sanctioned by the
Act, Assaf will enjoy international acceptance and credibility, as its
reputation is thus recognised and its constitution or objectives cannot be
changed at will.

Assaf differs from existing bodies such as the Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir
Wetenskap en Kuns and the Engineering Academy of South Africa in that it
serves all language and cultural groups in all disciplines of science. A
slight correction is that the academy has opened its doors to the
Engineering Academy. So it is quite representative of all scientists across
the country. Nevertheless, we want to bring an acceptable single body to
represent all sciences and these two bodies can become affiliated to Assaf,
and of course, continue to contribute in a very constructive way to the
generation of new knowledge and the leadership of this country.

Prof I J MOHAMED: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, on behalf of the
ANC I welcome the opportunity to participate in this debate.

We welcome the establishment of the Academy of Science of South Africa by
an Act of Parliament as the only academy of science to be recognised by
Government. The Act provides for Government to direct the academy to
perform acts on behalf of Government, consistent with its objectives. The
Minister may make regulations in consultation with the academy for its
smooth functioning to achieve its objectives.

Currently there are three academies of science, the Royal Society of South
Africa, the Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns and the Academy
of Science of South Africa. The Royal Society has its origin in the South
African Philosophical Society formed in 1877. In 1908 this society was
granted the Royal Charter and the title Royal Society of South Africa. This
is a rather elitist and exclusive society, with elected fellows and
ordinary members. In early, racist South Africa blacks were, I suppose,
excluded by default.

The Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns was established by an
Act of Parliament in 1942. It is the successor to the Zuid-Afrikaanse
Akademie Voor Taal, Letteren en Kunst established by an Act of Parliament
in 1921. The Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns was intimately
involved with the Afrikaner milieu and was aimed at advancing science, arts
and the Afrikaans language in this setting, hence its membership then was
exclusively white.

In 1997, or thereabouts, the Academy of Science of South Africa was formed
as a nongovernmental organisation. It planned to be fully part of the new
democratic South Africa, to embrace all communities, build science across
all its various sectors, engage in science institutions, develop expertise
and build across boundaries to create innovative ideas and products, so
that industries may compete in the global market.

The Academy of Science of South Africa, established by this Bill, will have
as it first council the council of this NGO and its initial membership will
be that of the NGO. The NGO will be subsumed in the new Academy of Science
established by Parliament. It will pursue the objects and functions briefly
outlined above and popularise science and mathematics so that we can assume
our rightful place in the world community and bring the poor and
marginalised into the mainstream of society.

Thandi Modise reminded us very forcefully a few days ago that the struggle
we have been engaged in for decades must continue. Two of her phrases
constantly echo in my mind. She said: ``I was confronted by young white
soldiers and one groped in my groin, presumably looking for weapons''. On
another occasion, while she was giving birth, a young white soldier called
his mates and said: ``Kom kyk, die swart vrou kalf.'' [``Come and take a
look, the black woman is calving.'']

These barbarities did not just occur in particular strata of our racist
past. I want to recall briefly two or three things out of so many that
happened to me at university. I completed an honours degree in mathematics
at the University of the Witwatersrand in 1954. A dinner function was
arranged at the university for the graduates, but the professor of
mathematics and head of the department, for whom I had such high regard,
explained to me that the function was only open to white students.

I went to study for a Ph.D at London University in 1957 and then lectured
at the University of Wales and the University of London. I was invited by a
new professor and head of the department of mathematics of the University
of the Witwatersrand to join his department. When I assumed my post at Wits
in 1961, a cabinet minister made some threatening remarks in Parliament. I
will not repeat them.

I joined the SA Mathematical Society, but was told by a member that I was
admitted to the society because a very prominent professor and member of
our department threatened to resign and leave the country if I was not
admitted. I went to express my appreciation for his support. In the course
of the discussion I remarked: ``Are these people so blind that they cannot
see the struggle going on in the country and that we are going to have a
black government?'' To my surprise he banged on his desk and shouted,
``Never, never, never''. This was unbelievable to me.

In 1962 I submitted a mathematical paper to be presented at the annual
conference of the SA Mathematical Society. The president of SAMS came all
the way from Pretoria to Wits and asked me not to turn up at the conference
as the society may break up because of the participation of a black person.
I went and presented my paper. I was well received, but at the end of my
presentation, I was spirited away by a CSIR official under the pretext of
showing me some of the facilities of the CSIR. In that time the rest of the
conference went off to have a meal in a whites-only restaurant in Pretoria.
I have no doubt that some of these things are still happening in a more
subtle manner to black students at ground level and so we must, as Thandi
has said, pursue our struggle.
Some years later Wits university conferred a doctorate on me and SAMS, as
part of its millennium celebrations, is awarding me a gold medal for my
contributions to mathematics. I nevertheless have to make these remarks.
[Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Chairperson, the Academy of Science Bill is an uncontroversial
Bill and the DA will support it. The Bill seeks to establish a single
autonomous scientific state-recognised academy of science in South Africa.
It is important to have an advisory body for Government on scientific
matters. It can be argued, however, that some of these functions may be
replicated in bodies, such as the National Advisory Council on Innovation
and the National Science and Technology Forum. It is important that clarity
of its role be obtained from the Minister.

The Bill also provides an invaluable foundation for promoting the
intellectual capital of this country. For far too long our country has
failed to effectively utilise the huge pool of academic excellence and, in
particular, has unsuccessfully addressed national priorities such as
poverty and HIV Aids. The DA has much faith that the academy will achieve
these goals. However, there are a few areas of concern that need to be
addressed. Stakeholders may comment on the previous version of this Bill
during the latter part of 1999. According to some, they heard or received
nothing further from the department and assumed that the process had died a
dignified death.

It was, therefore, very surprising to see a redraft of the Bill before this
House a few weeks ago, which seemed to have gone a long way to address the
concerns raised by stakeholders but hurried through the parliamentary
process without further consultation. In the words of one of the
stakeholders: ``At this late stage in the process, any meaningful
consultative comment, comment would not be possible.'' It is a pity that
this Government, which prides itself on its participative approach, so
often shoots itself in the foot in this way during the last minutes.

Another worrying aspect of this Bill is the ability of any statutory body
established by legislation to effectively bypass Treasury regulations.
Government departments and some directories are accountable to the public
through parliamentary oversight. The establishment of the Academy of
Science opens up a possible avenue for abuse and the excessive use of
taxpayers' money. It would be necessary for the House to be able to receive
assurances from the hon the Minister that this would not happen in this
regard with the Academy of Science. It would also seem that it is not
intended at this stage to provide a grant to the academy for the science
Vote, but rather that the academy may receive project funds for specific
tasks. Perhaps the Minister could comment on this interpretation.

There is a clause in this Bill which only allows South Africans to be
members of the council of the academy, whereas permanent residents are
allowed to be members of the council of the Africa Institute, covered in
another Bill on today's Order Paper. It is preposterous to think that such
nationalistic tendencies and laager mentalities still exist in South
Africa. How can we even contemplate that if we had an Einstein living in
South Africa as a permanent resident he would not be allowed to serve on
the council of the academy, but could serve on a council for the African
Institute. This also runs counter to much of the spirit of the Bill which
would allow the academy largely to run its own affairs.

Another clause in the Bill, which was removed on the insistence of the DA,
made provision for the academy to lend money to employees or to provide
collateral security, including guarantees. The question that needs to be
asked is: Was the hon Minister attempting to establish a scientific think-
tank or a banking institution?

Ideally, academic councils should consist of members who act from an
objective scientific viewpoint and are independent of the state or
government. They should consist of people who are nationally and
internationally recognised for their scientific achievements and give of
their time on a voluntary basis. One role of an academy is to act as a
valuable, expert and independent sounding board for the state or government
on scientific matters.

The DA is of the view that the Academy of Science of South Africa meets
these board objectives, but cautions that independence from state
involvement should be maintained at all times. We will be supporting this
Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Chairperson, the IFP will be supporting the Bill. And, in
saying that, I think it is important to let the House know that this Bill
was not hurried through the portfolio committee. Had the portfolio
committee felt that the Bill needed to be held for another two weeks or
until the following year, it would have done so. So the impression that is
created that it was it was hurried through and that serious consideration
had not been given to all of the implications of the Bill is not true.

The question of whether the Bill should provide for someone who is not
South African to serve on the council is really a side issue because the
council is an administrative body. It does not really preclude anyone from
joining the work of the academy as a whole.

It is significant that, for the first time, we have a body in South Africa
that is representative of all the scientific institutions in the country.
In addition, if it is possible, on an annual basis, awards could be created
so that those who are the very best scientists in the natural sciences,
social sciences, the humanities, economics, engineering, health and
agriculture could be recognised. It will then provide the impetus for young
and outstanding academics to reach for the stars as the hon Minister
challenged a little while earlier.

In the United Kingdom the British are rightly very proud of the Royal
Society because of the sterling work that that society has undertaken
independently in that country. We hope and pray that the South African
version of the Royal Society in the new body that we are creating will also
be able to rise to the challenge and be able to help South African science
to grow in the way we expect it to.

It is indeed well worth noting that Africa's time has come, that this is
the beginning of the African century, that we will need to promote common
ground amongst all the top scientists of our country, so that, inspired by
this commonality, they could actually help each other to become a great
deal more productive and help this country achieve the success that it
does.

We are quite happy about the fact that while the National Advisory Council
on Innovation - or Naci - is the lead body in the country that is charged
with innovation, we do not see that this body could also be innovative in
respect of sciences, because when we talk of sciences, we are talking about
innovation, and there is no doubt about it.

We also would like to encourage the new body to promote the optimum
development of the intellectual capacity of South Africans. If we are going
to search for a better life for all, how better than through bringing the
top scientists of our country together, whether they are in the natural
sciences or in agriculture, to work and strive together in order to help
put South Africa at the very forefront of science and technology.

We are, indeed, very proud that the body has come into existence. We would
like to watch its progress and trust that it would fulfil the objectives
that have been set out for it.

Mrs A VAN WYK: Chairperson, allow me to congratulate, in his absence, Dr
Adi Paterson on his secondment from the CSIR to the Department of Arts,
Culture, Science and Technology, and the hon the Minister on the fine catch
he has made. It is to be hoped that in the year that the department will
have the abilities of Dr Paterson at its disposal, it will effect some
sound improvements in the governance of, at least, this part of the
portfolio.

The new council of the Academy of Science of South Africa has, as a
criterion for election as a member, the following: ``significant
achievement in the pursuit, advancement or application of science'', and
from the ranks in the academy, the council will be elected by its peers. I
think that that is excellent. It seems odd, though, that any kind of
scoundrel - provided he meets this criterion - could theoretically become a
member of the academy. Thankfully, clause 7 protects the council from
having to elect such persons to run the body. I wonder who the Government
thinks might be excluded from the academy should the same requirements of
uprightness apply to ordinary members?

The potential for interference from Government in the composition of the
council is very sensibly kept to a relative minimum, with the direct
appointment of only one member of the National Advisory Council on
Innovation. Congratulations to the hon the Minister. Oh, would he but
follow this approach in the composition of the other councils under his
supervision!

A council stuffed full of incompetents and yes-persons compromises the
institution it is meant to govern, and provides an excuse for Government to
interfere in the operational terrain of bodies that properly belong in the
hands of professionals. One only has to look at the unfortunate dealings of
this department with the museums and, should I say, daft appointments of
some dubiously qualified persons to head some of these organisations.

Die SA Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns het in die vroeë negentigerjare, saam
met die uitstekende Royal Society of South Africa, die leiding geneem om
die Akademie vir Wetenskap van Suid-Afrika te stig. Sy Engelse akroniem is
Assaf. Ná 10 jaar van harde werk kan ons vandag almal wat betrokke was by
die totstandkoming van hierdie liggaam en vandag se wetgewing hartlik
gelukwens en voorspoed toewens vir die groot taak wat nou voorlê. 'n Mens
sou kon wens dat internasionaal-gerekende deskundiges van buite ook op die
raad moes dien, want dit sou status verleen aan die raad.

Hiérdie departement het hom ongelukkig onderskei deur sy onvermoë om die
bates van die land almal na waarde te skat. Die wetsontwerp herroep die Wet
op die SA Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns van 1959, en bepaal
oorgangsmaatreëls vir voortspruitende sake. Die akademie is, ondanks talle
versoeke, nie geken in die besluit van die Regering, in die finale stuk
wetgewing, om summier die statutêre bestaan van die akademie te beëindig,
of om, terugwerkend nogal, die klein, maar noodsaaklike, jaarlikse subsidie
van R128 000 terug te trek nie. Miskien het Prof Mohamed se ervarings,
waarvan hy ons vertel het, iets met hierdie besluite te make.

Dit moet egter benadruk word dat die akademie dit herhaaldelik beklemtoon
het, en so ook die Royal Society of South Africa, dat hulle nie die
aanvaarding van die wetsontwerp en die totstandkoming van die te stigte
liggaam, waaraan hulle so 'n gróót aandeel het, enigsins wil benadeel nie.
Ek wil ook graag hulde bring aan die akademie vir die voortreflike werk wat
dit sedert 1906 vir Suid-Afrika op soveel terreine verrig. Ek is oortuig
daarvan dat dit tot die akademie se voordeel is om los te wees van die
huidige regime, en dat dit nou éérs sal presteer. Ek dra my goeie wense en
gelukwensinge oor aan Assaf.

Die Nuwe NP en die DA steun met graagte hierdie wetsontwerp. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[During the early 1990s the SA Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns, together
with the excellent Royal Society of South Africa, took the initiative in
establishing the Academy of Science of South Africa. The English acronym is
Assaf. After 10 years of hard work we can today sincerely congratulate
everyone who was involved in the establishment of this body and the
legislation tabled before us today, and wish them everything of the best
for the great task that lies ahead. One might almost wish that
internationally renowned experts from outside could also serve on this
council, because that would give status to the council.

This department has unfortunately distinguished itself by its inability to
estimate the true value of all the assets of the country. This Bill repeals
the Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns Act of 1959, and
determines transitional measures for consequential matters. Notwithstanding
many requests, the academy was not consulted in the decision of the
Government, in the final piece of legislation, to summarily bring the
statutory existence of the academy to an end, or to withdraw - and
retrospectively at that - the small but essential annual subsidy of R128
000. Perhaps the experiences of Prof Mohamed, of which he told us, had
something to do with these decisions.

However, it must be emphasised that the academy stressed repeatedly, as did
the Royal Society of South Africa, that they did not in any way want to
prejudice the passing of this Bill and the establishment of this body in
which they have such a great stake.

I would also like to honour the academy for the exceptional work it has
done for South Africa in so many spheres since 1906. I am convinced that it
is to the advantage of the academy to be free of the current regime, and
that it will now truly begin to perform. I express my good wishes and
congratulations to Assaf.

The New NP and the DA are pleased to support this Bill.]

Miss O N MNDENDE: Chairperson, members of Parliament, the formation of the
Academy of Science of South Africa as a body that is representative of all
scientific disciplines and serves all language and cultural groups, will
clearly serve the needs of all South Africans.

It is clear now that the definition and application of ``science'' will not
be confined to one particular scientific discipline, as it used to be. The
Bill will provide a broader scope for other sciences, such as the social
sciences, humanities and natural sciences in which to operate, so as to
afford them equal recognition and respect.

The repeal of the Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns Act of
1959 will also broaden the scope of active participation of all members of
South African society across cultural and linguistic backgrounds. It will
be important that consensus be reached first on a common definition of
``science'', as it is still defined from one specific approach based on
some specific cultures which excludes other cultures.

It is evident from the content of the Bill that science will not only be
confined into a laboratory as humanities will also form part of the broad
definition of science. Since the Academy of Science of South Africa Bill
will establish national and international links with similar organisations,
it will also encourage all South Africans to exchange ideas and participate
on a multicultural approach to science internationally, which will
accommodate everybody in the global village. The UDM supports the Bill.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, hon Minister, the MF welcomes an academy that
will serve as a representative to all scientific disciplines.

This centralisation will allow for direction and the ability to keep a
close eye on all faculties of science within our ambit. The body is
instituted not only for national advancement, but also to enhance
international relations with faculties of its nature globally. The fact
that its services will be rendered to all language and cultural groups in
all disciplines of science is a wonderful thing, and this will certainly
assist in a better interpretation of science in its various faculties.

It is noted that Assaf members will be employed based on their ability to
perform and the highest level of scientific thinking and knowledge. This
certainly ensures that the institute will be competent in terms of content.
The MF supports the Academy of Science of South Africa Bill.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, the hon member Mr
Cassim has already corrected some of the wrong perceptions given by the DA
in this House with regard to this legislation.

However, it is clear that the components of the DA in this Parliament will
never recognise the importance of empowering Ministers to carry out
transformation. For Mrs Van Wyk to speak of interference by the Minister in
implementing legislation, is actually not only missing the point, but also
misleading the House and the public.

After listening to the hon member Prof Mohamed relating instances of
nonrecognition and discrimination of black scientists by white scientists,
I am sure that the House will agree with me that it is imperative that a
democratic Government such as ours makes a decisive intervention.

The Academy of Science of South Africa Bill seeks to put an end to the
gross waste of scientific intellectual capacity in this country, as
happened under the system of apartheid. No wonder then that just two years
after the democratic elections of 1994, progressive scientists came
together to form the Academy of Science of South Africa, or Assaf for
short. In its five years of existence, Assaf has been trying to find a
place in the South African science system. This Bill seeks to empower Assaf
to do just that, and to transform the science system in this country so
that all South Africans, regardless of colour or belief, can participate.

The objectives of the academy, as stated in clause 3 of the Bill, give me
confidence that transformation of the science system of this country is
about to begin. Emphasis is placed on promotion of common ground in
scientific thinking. The academy must address issues of public concern. The
scope of its operation will be broadened across all disciplines - natural,
human, social and economic sciences. The academy must link these to
technology and engineering, Therefore, the challenge to the scientific
community in this country is to discard the apartheid image, to be
inclusive, to be transparent and to make a visible contribution that will
impact positively on the lives of all our people.

The academy will encourage and promote innovative and independent thinking.
Innovation must be guided by national needs and must address, among other
things, issues of poverty and disease. South Africa needs to develop
technology that will enhance productivity and the safety of food supplies.
Health research should aim at combating infectious diseases.

Water studies and research should improve both the quantity and the quality
of water. Information technology can be used to improve education, health,
agricultural work, police work, including the combating of crime, social
work and so on. Only on Wednesday this week, during question time,
President Thabo Mbeki gave an example of how a video camera is used in a
rural area to transmit pictures of a patient's heartbeat, blood pressure,
etc, to a central hospital for diagnosis and treatment, enabling timeous
intervention by a doctor to prescribe treatment, thus saving the patient's
life.

The Academy of Science will stimulate and involve science councils, such as
the CSIR, the Medical Research Council, the Council for Geoscience, Mintek
and others in providing the necessary technology. Many rural schools do not
have science laboratories, but still, however, teach science subjects.
Information technology can thus be used to transmit laboratory work at the
CSIR in a class in Pretoria to a rural school.

The legislation seeks to promote development of the intellectual capacity
of all the people. No longer shall it be the case that only certain racial
groups have the monopoly on scientific knowledge in our country. The Bill
will address the collective needs of the people, identify and utilise
opportunities, and respond to threats and challenges. It will be the
vehicle to link with other scientific communities and bodies within South
Africa, in the SADC region,in Africa and the rest of the world.
The legislation will empower the academy to play a significant role and to
contribute positively to the African Renaissance in developing co-operative
Pan-African programmes and examining scientific issues of common concern. A
glance at the analysis of the current membership of Assaf shows the usual
pattern, resulting from decades of racial and gender discrimination in this
country. Out of a membership of 201, 168 are male and only 33 female, 148
are white and 53 are black. There are more blacks in the humanities and
life sciences; there are very few in economic, technological, physical and
mathematical sciences. There are no blacks, for instance, in the earth
sciences. During the committee's visit to the CSIR in Pretoria last month,
the delegation was informed that black scientists are still scarce.
Therefore correcting this situation is one of the challenges facing the
South African scientific community.

Clause 19 of this Bill is important in that it provides for transitional
arrangements for the previous council, now dissolved by this Bill, to form
a section 21 company in terms of the Companies Act, Act 61 of 1973. In my
opinion the conditions under which this transition should take place are
reasonable and fair. For example, the council retains all its assets free
of any charges such as tax duties, fees and so on. Employees retain their
rights and jobs under the new company. In the same way, no changes are
envisaged either in the composition of the current Aisa council or its
membership. However, during deliberations of this Bill the DP and the New
NP were against the inclusion of this clause, which would have meant
continuing the old council, undoubtedly an apartheid creation.

The ANC supports transformation for a better life for our society.
Therefore, we support this Bill and we urge everyone to do the same.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Mr Chairperson, I
would like to thank all the parties for a very informed and constructive
debate on this Bill. Its time has come just as the continent's time has
come.

I went with Prof Gevers to Trieste in Italy, where we presented the South
African academy to all the academies of Africa and, of course, other
countries. Our formulation of the statute was highly praised because we
emphasised independence and the role of giving sound advice to Government.
Of course, it is acceptable for us to pay for projects that we commission
with the academy.

We could not continue to fund the Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns, because
it was an aberration. Normally academies are not funded by governments, so
we could not make this exception in the case of the Akademie vir Wetenskap
and Kuns. People must just accept that. We are part of the world now. We
must employ and adhere to normal practice. There was enough correspondence
between the akademie and my department to have settled all the issues. I am
really surprised that this issue is surfacing again.

A new member is only accepted if four existing members propose him or her.
It is very unlikely that scoundrels will slip through this type of net. The
Minister has the power to prescribe, by legislation, a code of conduct for
members. This allows the Minister to exclude scoundrels and prohibit any
undesirable activities. This is going to be a highly respected body. We
cannot trivialise it by saying these honourable scientific people will
stoop so low as to include undesirable elements. So, I can reassure the
House about this issue.

Also, with regard to the issue of duplication, there will be no duplication
because the academy's role is very clear and very distinct from that of the
other statutory bodies such as the National Advisory Council on Innovation,
the National Science and Technology Forum or any other statutory body that
we have created. It is very clear.

I would like to congratulate Dr Adi Paterson, a senior person in Dacst - Dr
Paterson has been a vice president of the CSIR. He still remains in the
CSIR, but has been seconded to us to add value to our work. I would also
like to congratulate Prof Sibisi, the Deputy Vice-Chancellor for research
at UCT, on having been confirmed by Cabinet as the new president of the
CSIR.

We are moving forward steadily, creating absolute participation by all
groupings and creating a new environment for our young people in the
country. This will also include the thinking on the biotechnology strategy
that Cabinet has adopted, which seeks to create a new industry in this
country, as well as huge research and employment opportunities for our
young people. I thank members very much for supporting this Bill. It is
very constructive. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Decision of question postponed.

           ``WOORDEBOEK VAN DIE AFRIKAANSE TAAL'' ACT REPEAL BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, it is an honour to be afforded the
opportunity to address the House on this Bill. The Bill provides for the
repeal of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Act of 1973, and for
matters connected therewith. The following Acts are hereby repealed:
``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Act, Act 50 of 1973, ``Woordeboek
van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Amendment Act, Act 9 of 1986 and ``Woordeboek van
die Afrikaanse Taal'' Amendment Act, Act 22 of 1991.

I am really pleading with hon members to see this in a constructive light.
I have had discussions with the Bureau of the ``Woordeboek van die
Afrikaanse Taal'', and they are in full agreement with what we are doing,
because this is actually creating more space for them to play a very
constructive role in the development of languages in this country.

The repeal of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Act is indicative
of a fundamental change in the lexicographical landscape of our country. In
the process of developing our indigenous languages, lexicography is
arguably one of the main building blocks. However, it is imperative that
all the indigenous languages share equally in the financial resources
available for these building blocks. The inequality in funding in the past
for dictionary or lexicographic units, owing to the previous policy of
bilingualism, is now, I am happy to say, a thing of the past. This Bill
therefore in many respects, represents a watershed in the management of
language matters in this country as we take an important step towards
fulfilling the lexicographic needs of a multilingual South Africa. The
lexicography units that have been established for all our languages will
each conserve, research and document the language concerned by compiling a
monolingual defining dictionary and such other dictionaries as may be
required to satisfy the target users of that language.

I would like to point out that this Bill was preceded by a long and
inclusive process of consultation with all stakeholders over a period of
five years. The process dealt with a wide variety of relevant issues such
as the role of lexicography units in the context of the language policy and
plan for South Africa, legislative implications, establishing norms for the
recognition of existing units such as the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse
Taal'' and for new units for the other indigenous languages and also
personnel matters.

The process was managed by the Pan-South African Language Board as part of
its mandate in collaboration with the Department of Arts, Culture, Science
and Technology. I wish to take this opportunity to convey my gratitude to
the board for the excellent work it has done in this regard. The board of
control of the Bureau of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'',
established in terms of section 4 of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse
Taal'' Act of 1973, is hereby dissolved in accordance with the transitional
provisions set out in the Bill.

The section 21 company established by the Pan-South African Language Board,
in accordance with section 8(8)(c) of the Pan-South African Language Board
Act, Act 59 of 1995, will be successor, in law, of the Bureau of the
``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal''. All assets, rights and obligations
of the Bureau of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaans Taal'' will, upon
abolishment, devolve upon the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal''
section 21 company without formal transfer, and without payment of any
fees, duties, taxes or other charges.

All employees of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' statutory body
will be employees of the Bureau of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse
Taal'' section 21 company upon abolishment. It is important to note that
all the rights and obligations between the Bureau of the ``Woordeboek van
die Afrikaanse Taal'' and each of its employees at the time of abolishment
will remain in force, as provided for in section 197 of the Labour
Relations Act of 1995. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!

The MINISTER: Chairperson, this will remain in force as if there were
rights and obligations between the Woordeboek van die Afrikaans Taal
company and each employee.

I would like to assure hon members that the conversion of the ``Woordeboek
van die Afrikaanse Taal'' statutory body to the ``Woordeboek van die
Afrikaanse Taal'' section 21 company does not interrupt the continuity of
service of any employee. The conditions of service of each employee
continue as if the section 21 company was in fact still the Woordeboek van
die Afrikaanse Taal, except that it is now changed in law.

As successor to the Bureau of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'',
the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' section 21 company will be bound
by any and all collective agreements, as defined in section 213 of the
Labour Relations Act of 1995.

Agreements concluded with the trade union, staff association or any body
that represents the interests of employees, will remain in force in respect
of the Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal section 21 company, irrespective
of whether or not the trade union, staff association or any body that
represents the interests of employees has been registered, or has applied
for registration in terms of the provisions of the Labour Relations Act.
Also, the dismissal of any employee of the Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse
Taal section 21 company will be subject to the provisions of Chapter 8 and
Schedule 8 of the Labour Relations Act. I would like to emphasise that all
activities of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' will continue in
the new lexicography dispensation that we are entering now.

I am positive that the important developmental work of compiling the
``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' to serve the Afrikaans language and
all its users, will carry on at the same high level of professionalism and
dedication that characterised its activities in the past.

Me N M TSHEOLE: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil eers om verskoning vra omdat ek
vandag gaan probeer om Afrikaans te praat. [Applous.] Alhoewel my taal nie
vlot is nie, het ek besluit om te doen wat my voorvaders en my ouers my
geleer het, naamlik om ander mense se taal te eer. Ongelukkig is dit
hierdie eerbetoning wat die apartheidsregering laat dink het dat ons tale
nie belangrik is nie.

Hierdie wetsontwerp is weer eens 'n positiewe stap op die transformasiepad.
Met die herroeping van die Wet op die ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse
Taal'' verwelkom ons Afrikaans in die familie van al die tale van ons land,
sodat dit nie meer gesien word as dié taal wat sy eie wette het nie. Die
boodskap aan al die Afrikaanssprekendes is dat hulle taal nie vreemd is in
Suid-Afrika nie. Dit is een van ons tale. Ek doen 'n beroep op al die
Afrikaanssprekendes dat hulle hierdie positiewe uitkoms met albei hande
aangryp. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Vandag word die ideaal van ons Grondwet verder bewerkstellig. Ek is baie
opgewonde. Ek is ook dankbaar dat die sprekers van ander amptelike tale van
ons land tot dusver nie die Regering na die Konstitusionele Hof geneem het
nie. Daardie angs is vandag iets van die verlede. Ek weet dat as dit wat in
hierdie land gebeur het aan Afrikaans gedoen sou word, naamlik om ander
tale meer geld te gee vir hul woordeboeke, die Afrikaanssprekendes hierdie
Regering na die Konstitusionele Hof sou geneem het.

Ek is ook bly dat ek die Afrikaans wat ek geleer het nog kan onthou. Dit is
nie maklik nie. Dit maak seer. Dit bring al die herinneringe van die
verlede terug, van die dae toe ek deur my onderwysers gedwing is om
Afrikaans te praat om pynpille te kry as ek siek was. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N M TSHEOLE: Mr Chairman, at the outset I want to apologise because I
am going to try to speak Afrikaans today. [Applause.] Although I do not
speak the language fluently, I decided to do what my ancestors and my
parents taught me, and that is to show respect for other people's language.
Unfortunately, it was this showing of respect which caused the apartheid
government to think that our languages were not important.

This Bill is once again a positive step on the road to transformation. With
the repeal of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Act, we welcome
Afrikaans into the family of all the languages of our country, so that it
will no longer be regarded as the language which has its own legislation.
The message to all Afrikaans-speaking people is that their language is not
foreign to South Africa. It is one of our languages. I appeal to all
Afrikaans-speaking people to seize this positive outcome with both hands.
[Interjections.]

Another step in the realisation of our Constitution is being taken today. I
am very excited. I am also grateful that up to now so far those people who
speak the other official languages of our country have not taken the
Government to the Constitutional Court. That fear is something of the past
today. I know that if what has happened in this country were to be done to
Afrikaans, namely to give other languages more money for their
dictionaries, the Afrikaans-speaking people would have taken this
Government to the Constitutional Court.

I am also glad that I can still remember the Afrikaans I learnt. It is not
easy. It hurts. It brings back all the memories of the past, memories of
the days when I was forced by my teachers to speak Afrikaans in order to
get painkillers when I was ill.]

The history of our country has shown that no language should be imposed on
people. Although the apartheid regime succeeded in developing Afrikaans as
a language to where it is now, a lot of damage was done to the image of the
language itself and, unfortunately, to the speakers of this language as
well. It is unfortunate that the FF members are not here, because they
always claim to represent the speakers of Afrikaans. Today this Government
claims that that responsibility is ours. We represent all the languages,
including Afrikaans. [Applause.]

This Government is left with the arduous task of redressing the damage that
was done by the previous government, of changing the image of Afrikaans
speakers and that of Afrikaans as a language. Therefore it is important to
note that success in this regard does not only depend on what the
Government does, but also on what the speakers of this language themselves
do. This partnership is very important. If the Afrikaans speakers were
going to continue to complain, they would be endangering the future of this
language. It is up to them.

Allow me to refer briefly to the developments that preceded this Bill.
Consultation, as the Minister indicated, took place. We visited the bureau
in Stellenbosch, and discussed the Bill with them. Since the PanSALB Act
was also amended, we could have incorporated the repeal at the time when we
were amending the PanSALB Act. However, we felt that we were going to give
this special attention, because we respect Afrikaans and were aware of the
consequences and the image that has been created. There are quite a number
of things that one would not like to refer to that are happening in our
country, because of the damage that has been done to this language of our
country.

Afrikaans is not spoken anywhere else in the world. Although Flemish and
Dutch could have relations with Afrikaans, Afrikaans belongs to this
country. So I would like, as the theme of this debate, to say the following
in Setswana.

Bana ba motho ba kgaogana tlhogwana ya tsie. [People share from the little
resources they have at their disposal.]

We are not expecting to hear people complaining and saying that there is
little money being given to the Afrikaans unit. We are going to share, as
long as we agree that all the speakers of the languages in South Africa
belong to one family.

Ke bana ba motho, ... [They belong to the same parent ... ]

... and they are going to share whatever resources we have. [Applause.]

Mnr S E OPPERMAN: Mnr die Voorsitter, die wetsontwerp wat die herroeping
van die Wet op die Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal tot gevolg het, is
daarop gemik om die WAT in 'n posisie te plaas om, net soos ander
leksikografiese eenhede, 'n artikel 21-maatskappy te word. Hierdie
verwikkeling val binne die breë raamwerk vir die ontwikkeling van
leksikografie en terminologie van ons amptelike tale. Verskeie nasionale
taaleenhede word reeds by tersiêre inrigtings regdeur ons land gehuisves,
byvoorbeeld isiXhosa by Fort Hare, isiZulu by die Universiteit van
Zululand, Sepedi by die Universiteit van die Noorde, Afrikaans by die
Universiteit van Stellenbosch en Engels by Rhodes Universiteit.

Die verantwoordelikheid wat die Grondwet plaas op die staat om praktiese en
positiewe maatreëls te tref vir die verhoging van die status en die
bevordering van die gebruik van inheemse tale, kry ook beslag in die
vestiging van hierdie eenhede wat onteenseglik sal bydra tot die
bevordering van veeltaligheid.

Die tema van ons portefeuljekomitee vir hierdie jaar is ``transformasie vir
rekonsiliasie'', en ek dink dit is kragtig gedemonstreer deur die spreker
wat my vooraf gegaan het, die agb Tsheole. Ek wil aan Dr Serote sê dat dit
'n jammerte sal wees as dit net die tema vir die jaar bly, en nie by elkeen
van ons 'n leefwyse word nie, maar dán sal die konsep van rekonsiliasie die
dinamiese dryfkrag in ons harte moet word.

Rekonsiliasie sê ons neem aan boord, ons haak by mekaar in, ons verwerp nie
mekaar nie, al verskil ons van mening, en ons verander vyandskap in
vriendskap. Dit beteken dat ons die klimaat sal skep om mense wat voorheen,
na ons mening, ons groot skade berokken het, geleenthede sal bied om te
help om die skade te herstel. Dit moet ook beteken dat ons, in die konteks
van veeltaligheid, oneindige geduld en empatie moet hê met enige lid wat 'n
woord, 'n naam, 'n uitdrukking of 'n sin probeer uitspreek in 'n taal wat
nie sy eie is nie. Rekonsiliasie beteken ons sal nie hoonlag as iemand
Qwaqwa probeer sê nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN, Mr Chairman, the Bill, whose objective is the repeal the
``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Act, aims to place the WAT in a
position to become, like other lexicographical units, a section 21 company.
This development falls within the broad framework for the development of
the lexicography and terminology of our official languages. Various
national language units are already housed at tertiary institutions
throughout our country, for example Xhosa at Fort Hare, Zulu at the
University of Zululand, Pedi at the University of the North, Afrikaans at
the University of Stellenbosch and English at Rhodes University.

The responsibility placed on the state by the Constitution to institute
practical and positive measures for the improvement of the status and the
promotion of the use of indigenous languages, is also given expression in
the establishment of these units, which will make an undeniable
contribution to the promotion of multilingualism.

The theme of our portfolio committee for this year is ``transformation for
reconciliation'', and I think this was powerfully demonstrated by the
speaker who preceded me, the hon Tsheole. I want to say to Dr Serote that
it would be a pity if this only remained the theme for the year, and did
not become a way of life for each one of us, but in that case the concept
of reconciliation will have to become a dynamic driving force in our
hearts.

Reconciliation says we take on board, we link our arms, we do not reject
one another even if we have differences of opinion, and we change enmity
into friendship. This means that we will be creating the climate in which
we give opportunities to people who, in our opinion, have harmed us
tremendously in the past to repair the damage. This must also mean that we,
in the context of multilingualism, must have endless patience and empathy
with any member who tries to utter a word, a name, an expression or speak a
sentence in a language which is not his or her own. Reconciliation means we
will not laugh derisively when someone tries to say Qwaqwa.]

There will be no derisive laughter because of the wrong pronunciation of
words.

Versoening beteken dat ons nie afwysend teenoor toegewyde terminoloë sal
staan nie. Versoening sal ook beteken dat ons erkenning sal gee vir die
positiewe bydrae wat die WAT lewer ten opsigte van die uitbreiding van alle
leksikografiese eenhede. Veeltaligheid behoort by te dra tot die
bevordering van doeltreffende kommunikasie. Dit sal ingeligte en
deelnemende besluitneming bevorder.

Opvoeding en onderwys sal meer toeganklik en gelykwaardig word en daar sal
begrip en aanvaarding wees vir ander tale en kulture, wat weer sal bydra
tot die positiewe verandering van gesindhede. Die herroeping van die Wet op
die Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal is na my mening 'n deel van die
legkaart van transformasie vir versoening wat in plek geplaas word. Die DP
en die DA steun hierdie wetgewing. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Reconciliation means that we will not act in a dismissive manner towards
terminologists. Reconciliation will also mean that we give recognition to
the positive contribution that the WAT is making towards the expansion of
all lexicographic units. Multilingualism should contribute to the promotion
of effective communication. It will promote informed and participatory
decision-making.

Education and training will become more accessible and equal and there will
be understanding for and acceptance of other languages and cultures, which
will in turn contribute to the positive changing of attitudes. Repealing
the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Act is, in my view, a part of
the jigsaw puzzle of transformation for reconciliation that is being put in
place. The DP and the DA support this legislation. [Applause.]]

Mnr J J DOWRY: Voorsitter, tydens die tweede lesing van die
Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Pan-Suid-Afrikaanse Taalraad op Dinsdag 23
Februarie 1999, is onder andere die volgende gesê, toe 'n agb lid soos volg
na die WAT verwys het:


  When one visits this project at the University of Stellenbosch, one
  recognises that it is one of the premier institutions of its kind on the
  whole African continent. It is very, very important for us to preserve
  and encourage the Woordeboek project and allow it to grow, because it has
  certain expertise that is of use to all other dictionary units in this
  country.

Daar is ook 'n beroep gedoen op diegene wat betrokke is by die WAT -


  ... (to) share the expertise that they have with the rest of South
  Africa.

In die tussentyd het daar 'n nasionale leksikografie-eenheid vir elk van
die amptelike tale in Suid-Afrika onder beheer van Pansat tot stand gekom.
Hierdie eenhede sal almal as artikel 21-maatskappye sonder winsoogmerk
bestuur word. Die personeel van die Buro van die WAT het 'n baie belangrike
rol in dié proses gespeel, onder andere by die opleiding van personeel wat
diens kan doen in hierdie eenhede, maar ook by die strategiese beplanning
van hierdie nasionale leksikografie-eenhede. Aangesien hierdie nasionale
leksikografie-eenhede deur 'n proses van koöperatiewe leksikografie tot
stand gebring is, is daar 'n gees van samewerking gegenereer wat nie net in
belang van hierdie eenhede is nie, maar in belang van die ontwikkeling en
standardisering van al die amptelike tale van Suid-Afrika.

Die betrokkenes in die totstandkoming van die nasionale leksikografie-
eenhede het geleer om mekaar en mekaar se tale te waardeer. Hulle
gesamentlike taak is nou die optekening, bewerking en beskikbaarstelling
van die taalskat van die amptelike tale van Suid-Afrika aan die gebruiker
van hierdie tale. Met die herroeping van die Wet op die Woordeboek van die
Afrikaanse Taal, 1973, soos gewysig, bereik die proses van woordeboekmaak
in Suid-Afrika 'n baie mooi hoogtepunt. Voortaan kan die amptelike tale van
Suid-Afrika saam woordeboeke ontwikkel in belang van al die tale en al hul
gebruikers, aangesien nie net eentalige woordeboeke saamgestel sal word
nie, maar ook meertalige woordeboeke, wat ook 'n daadwerklike bydrae kan
lewer tot die noodsaaklike bevordering van veeltaligheid in Suid-Afrika.

Die Afrikaanse taal kan nooit uitgebou en gehandhaaf word in eksklusiwiteit
nie, maar alleen as die taal ook in diens staan van ander volke en tale,
want so kan Afrikaans 'n brugbouer wees tussen verskillende taal- en
kultuurgroepe. Daarom moet ons geesdriftige taalbouers soos Dr Dirk van
Schalkwyk, hoof van die WAT, wat ook op die gallery sit, bedank vir sy
algehele toewyding om brûe te bou tussen verskillende taalgroepe. Hy het
reeds Xhosa-, Zulu- en Peditaalgroepe met metodiek en die vestiging van
direksies gehelp.

Verder in Afrika het Angola, Tanzanië, Namibië, Zambië en Gaboen baat
gevind by dié buro se werksaamhede. Ook lande soos Noorweë en Duitsland het
geholpe geraak met die kundigheid wat dié buro op Stellenbosch bied.

Dit is dus dié Parlement se verantwoordelikheid om toe te sien dat Pansat
in 'n posisie gestel word om dié nasionale leksikografie-eenhede
doeltreffend te subsidieer. Dié eenhede het reeds in 'n samewerkingsmodel
ontwikkel, omdat die besef reeds baie duidelik posgevat het dat as 'n mens
iemand se taal respekteer, jy hom of haar ook respekteer. In die gees van
die versoeningsrol wat taal vertolk en in die gees van die welwillendheid
wat dr Dirk van Schalkwyk en sy medewerkers by WAT weerspieël het, behoort
al die taalgemeenskappe van Suid-Afrika te sê: ``Viva die WAT, lank lewe
die WAT in diens van Afrikaans en al die ander inheemse tale.''

Die NNP en die DA ondersteun dié wetsontwerp. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Chairperson, during the Second Reading of the Pan South
African Language Board Amendment Bill on Tuesday, 23 February 1999, the
following was said, interalia, when an hon member referred to the WAT as
follows:


  When one visits this project at the University of Stellenbosch, one
  recognises that it is one of the premier institutions of its kind on the
  whole African continent. It is very, very important for us to preserve
  and encourage the Woordeboek project and allow it to grow, because it has
  certain expertise that is of use to all other dictionary units in this
  country.

An appeal was also made to those involved with the WAT -


  ... (to) share the expertise that they have with the rest of South
  Africa.

In the meantime a national lexicography unit for each of the official
languages in South Africa has come into existence under the control of
PanSALB. These units will be managed as section 21 companies not for gain.
The staff of the Bureau of the WAT played a very important role in this
process, amongst others in the training of staff who can serve in these
units, but also in the strategic planning of these national lexicography
units. Due to the fact that these national lexicography units came into
being through a process of co-operative lexicography, a spirit of co-
operation was generated which is not only in the interests of these units,
but also in the interests of the development and standardisation of all the
official languages of South Africa.

Those involved in the establishment of the national lexicography units
learned to appreciate one another and one another's languages. Their joint
task is now the recording, processing and provision of the vocabulary of
the official languages of South Africa to the users of those languages.
With the repeal of the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Act, 1973, as
amended, the process of dictionary production in South Africa reaches a
very fine culmination. In future the official languages of South Africa can
develop dictionaries together in the interests of all the languages and all
their users, because not only monolingual dictionaries will be compiled but
also multilingual dictionaries, which will also make a decisive
contribution to the essential promotion of multilingualism in South Africa.

The Afrikaans language can never be expanded and maintained in exclusivity,
but only if the language is also at the service of other peoples and
languages, because in this way Afrikaans can be a bridge-builder between
different linguistic and cultural groups. For this reason we should thank
enthusiastic language builders like Dr Dirk van Schalkwyk, head of WAT, who
is also in the gallery, for his general commitment to building bridges
between different linguistic groups. He has already helped Xhosa, Zulu and
Pedi linguistic groups with methodology and the establishment of management
boards. Further afield in Africa Angola, Tanzania, Namibia, Zambia and
Gabon have benefited from this bureau's activities. Countries like Norway
and Germany have also been helped through the expertise offered by this
bureau in Stellenbosch.

It is therefore this Parliament's responsibility to see to it that PanSALB
is placed in a position effectively to subsidise these national
lexicography units. These units have already developed into a co-operative
model, because the realisation has already very clearly taken hold that if
one respects a person's language, one also respects that person. In the
spirit of the reconciliatory role played by language and in the spirit of
the goodwill which Dr Dirk van Schalkwyk and his colleagues at WAT have
reflected, all the linguistic communities of South Africa should say:
``Viva WAT, long live WAT in the service of Afrikaans and all the other
indigenous languages.''

The NNP and the DA support this Bill. [Applause.]]

Nkszn O N MNDENDE: Sekela sihlalo namalungu ePalamente akhoyo apha,
ukurhoxiswa kwalo mthetho oyi`` die Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' ka-
1973, mthetho lowo ubunika ubungangamsha kwilwimi olunye phakathi kwelwimi
ezininzi phofu apha esizweni, linyathelo elibaluleke kakhulu ingakumbi
kwezolwimi ezaye zijongelwe phantsi nezathi azaxabiseka konke konke
kuburhulumente bangaphambili. IUDM, nekholelwa kulingwano kwilwimi zonke
iwamkela ngezandla ezishushu lo mthetho wokuba kwenziwe ingqokelela
yezichazi magama zazo zonke iilwimi zabantu bomzantsi Afrika.

Le ngcamango yalo mthetho siwushukuxayo namhlanje, isisikhokelo esisingele
ekubeni kuhlonipheke wonke ummi womzantsi Afrika, ingakumbi ngokwenkcubeko
yabo bebecinizelekile ngaphambili. Kaloku iilwimi zabantu abantsundu
bekusithiwa ziilwimi zabantu abangaxabisekanga. Bekusithi naloo nkwalambisa
yayisithi ibekho ezikolweni, ibe ibhalwe yaqulunkqwa ngabantu abangabaziyo
ubunzulu nobuncwane bolwimi olo. Loo nto ke, ibisenza ukuba zijongelwe
phantsi kuba kwakusithiwa ziilwimi zamaqaba ngokwemeko yasemlungwini ke
phofu. Loo nto ibisenziwa kukuba urhulumente wangaphambili ebejongele
phantsi iilwimi zabantu abaNtsundu ephuhlisa kuphela ezabelungu. Loo nto
yenza ukuba nabantwana bethu namhlanje bacinge ukuba iilwimi ezibhadlileyo
neziphucukileyo zezo ingezizo ezo zabo, kwaye bekholelwa kananjalo ukuba
aziyikubasa ndawo kuba kusithiwa zisemva, azikwazi kusa ndawo mntu kwaye
azikwazi kudala misebenzi.

Phofu ke bethu, nakwiidyunivesithi, iilwimi zesintu bezifundiswa
ngesingesi, nto leyo ibidala impixwano kwabo bantwana bazincace ebeleni
iilwimi zabo. Olu xanduva lokuba kubekho izichazi magama zelwimi zonke
ngokulinganayo nezizakuthi zibephantsi kwebhodi yeelwimi zomzantsi Afrika
uPansalb, iyakuthi ibonise ukuba ngenene nenyani alukho ulwimi olungaphezu
kolunye kubantu abaluthethayo. Loo nto ke iyakwenza nolutsha oluzinkokheli
zangomso luzingce ngengcambu zalo. Akwaba lebhodi yelwimi zomzantsi Afrika
iPansalb, iyakuthi ikhwentshele umsila ikhawulezise kungade kutshone ilanga
sijonge enkalweni ukuze sizokwazi ukuthetha ngolwazi nobugcisa bemveli,
sifundise ngamasiko nangezithethe zakwantu kananjalo sizokwazi ukuthetha
ngebuyambo lokwenene okanye iAfrican Renaissance yoqobo.

IUDM iyawusekela lo mthetho. (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Miss O N MNDENDE: Chairperson and members present here, the repeal of the
``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal'' Act of 1973, which gave preference
to one language out of many in the country, is a very important step with
regard to the previously marginalised languages. The UDM believes in
language equity and therefore welcomes this Bill, which encourages the
development of a dictionary of all the languages of the people of South
Africa.

The Bill we are discussing today will restore dignity to all the citizens
of South Africa, particularly those who were culturally oppressed before.
Indeed, African languages were undermined. Even the little that was
available was written and published by people who lacked in-depth knowledge
of the language. This happened because, in the eyes of the white people,
they were the languages of the uneducated. Thus, our children regard
foreign languages as more important. They also believe that these languages
cannot empower them because they are not developed and cannot benefit them
in the labour market.

At universities, African languages were taught through the medium of
English, which created confusion amongst the indigenous speakers of the
languages. The development of dictionaries for all languages under the
auspices of PanSALB will show that all languages are important. That will
encourage the youth, who are the future leaders, to be proud of their
roots. We hope that PanSALB will fast-track this process so that we can
impart more knowledge about our traditions and values. It is only then that
we can start talking about the real African Renaissance.

The UDM supports the Bill.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, we have undertaken in our Constitution to
preserve the many languages of our nation. Afrikaans is one of them. Though
not the sweetest of languages, it is the tongue of many of our citizens.

The repeal of this Bill is supported in the light of this and the
acceptance of a diverse society that survives within the realm of diversity
and unites in this very same diversity. The Bill seeks to dissolve the
bureau that previously oversaw the ``Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal''
and replace it with a body established under the Pan South African Language
Board Act. If this is advantageous, it is supported.

May the preservation of our languages and the ways of doing so, be upheld
by all sides. I earlier mentioned that we should survive as one nation. Our
diversity, be it Afrikaans, English, isiXhosa or any other language,
deserves the same respect. These languages represent us.

The MF supports the Bill.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Voorsitter, dié wetsontwerp gee beslag aan die belangrike
beginsels van die gelykberegtiging van tale. Afrikaans sal nou, soos ander
tale, bedien word deur die leksikografiese eenhede as 'n artikel-21
maatskappy van Pansat.

Die AEB ondersteun dié wetsontwerp. Ons vra nie spesiale behandeling van
Afrikaans nie. Ons vra nie dat Afrikaans as bedreigde spesie geklassifiseer
en uitgesonder moet word nie. Ons vra dat daadwerklik beslag gegee word aan
die beginsel van gelykberegtiging van tale. Veral in die wêreld van
globalisering en kommersialisering is dit die algemene neiging om na die
een gemeenskaplike taal, Engels, toe oor te skakel. Is dit dan nodig dat
alle tale bemagtig moet word? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, this Bill gives expression to the important
principles of the equal treatment of languages. Afrikaans will now, as in
the case of other languages, be served by the lexicography units as a
section 21 company of PanSALB.

The AEB supports this Bill. We are not asking for special treatment for
Afrikaans. We are not asking for Afrikaans to be classified and singled out
as an endangered species. We are asking that actual expression be given to
the principle of the equal treatment of languages. Especially in the world
of globalisation and commercialisation, there is a general tendency to
switch to the one common language, English. Is it then necessary that all
languages should be empowered?]

When Afrikaners advocate for Afrikaans, it does not mean that they deem it
more important than other languages. Everyone has to advocate for his own
case. We do not want to be the patrons of others peoples' belongings. That
is their own right.

Ons ondersteun die wetsontwerp. Ek wil bysê, 'n taal kan nie onderdruk nie,
mense kan onderdruk. Kom ons gee volle uiting aan die gelykberegtiging van
alle tale in Suid-Afrika. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We support the Bill. I want to add that a language cannot oppress, people
can oppress. Let us fully endorse the equal treatment of all languages in
South Africa.]

I conclude by saying that my three sons are coming down to Cape Town
tomorrow and I am seriously looking for tickets for the rugby match, if
anybody could help. [Laughter.]
Nkskz C I GCINA: Sihlalo namalungu ahloniphekileyo, lo Mthetho oYilwayo
uqhubela phambili inkqubo yenguqu. Ngo-1999, umthetho we-9 ka 1995 webhunga
leelwimi zoMzantsi Afrika waguqulwa ngelilungiselela ukuseka amaziko
eelwimi zonke ezisemthethweni.

Mandulo iilwimi zemveli zazithatyathwa njengezingabalulekanga, kanti kulo
Rhulumente wethu siseke ibhodi yeelwimi efana yodwa, nevumela ukuba ishumi
elinanye leelwimi zoMzantsi Afrika zibe ntanganye ngokubaluleka. Oku
kwenzelwa ukuba kuqhutyelwe phambili zibekwe kumgangatho ofanayo
nolinganayo ezi lwimi ebe zilityelwe mandulo.

Siyathemba ukuba oku kuvuselela, kwaye kukhuthaza abemi boMzantsi Afrika
ukuba baqondane ngcono. Kwakhona, bakwazi ukuqhagamshelana ngcono ngeelwimi
ezingezizo ezokuzalwa. Kananjalo, oku kulungiselela ukuziqhubela phambili
iilwimi ezi, ze kukhuthazeke nokufunda. Kumaxa angaphambili, iilwimi ebe
zisetyenziselwa ukufunda zivale amathuba okuba nakho ukukuqhubela phambili
ukufunda. Ngokwenjenjalo, zavala amathuba okuba nakho ukukwazi ukuzenzela
izinto ngeendlela ngendlela.

Ulwimi aluyo nto nje, koko luyinkcubeko yoluntu. Kananjalo lukwa yindlela
yokuphila kwabantu. Le nguqu kulo mthetho ayizange ikwazi ukujongana nemiba
yokutshitshisa lo mthetho. Ulungiso lwenzelwe ukuba umthetho uwathabathele
ingqalelo nawo amaziko akhoyo ezichazi-magama, ukuze akwazi ukuba
ukusebenza ngokweCandelo 21 loMthetho weeNkampani wango-1973.

Lo mthetho utshitshiswayo ubeka ulwimi lwesiBhulu kwinqanaba eliphezulu.
Ngaxeshanye, siphethe umba wolingano ngokuphathelele ekuphuhliseni zonke
iilwimi zethu zesizwe. Ezinye iilwimi zethu zemveli bezisoloko zingasiwanga
so. Ngoko ke aziphuhliswanga, azikwazi ukusetyenziswa kwezinye izifundo
ezifana nenzululwazi, ezobalo, nezopolitiko. Kodwa kukho ukuzingca
nochulumancho kum ukwazi ukuba loo maxesha abekwe kwelokulibala ngoku,
ngakumbi ngokutshitshiswa kwalo mthetho.

Ngoku uRhulumente wethu wesizwe ubonile ukuba ezi lwimi zilishumi elinanye
mayibe zizo ezikhoyo apha. Siyambonga ke uRhulumente wesizwe okhokelwa yi-
ANC ngokuthi asazi nathi bantu abalwimi zazingazelwe nto, nathi asibeke
phambili namhlanje. Sithi kuMongameli, uZizi, uDlamini omhle makakhule
angakhokhobi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mrs C I GCINA: Chairperson and hon members, this Bill advances the process
of change. In 1999 the Pan South African Language Board Act was amended in
preparation for the establishment of centres for all official languages.

In the olden days, indigenous languages were considered to be unimportant,
but in this Government of ours we have established a special board that
makes eleven languages of South Africa equally important. This is to
facilitate progress in placing the previously disadvantaged languages at
the same and equal level.

We hope that this inspires and encourages the citizens of South Africa to
have better insight, besides, so that they can communicate better in
languages which are not their mother tongue. In addition, this is aimed at
facilitating the advancement of these languages so that learning is
encouraged. In previous times, languages which were used as the medium of
instruction inhibited opportunities to advance learning. In doing so, they
prevented people from being able to do things on their own in various ways.

A language is not just something, but it is a culture of a community.
Again, it is also a way of life of people. The amending to this Act could
not stand up to the issues of repealing this Act. Amending the Act is aimed
at enabling the Act also to take into consideration the existing dictionary
centres so that they are able to function in terms of section 21 of the
Companies Act of 1973.

This Act, which is being repealed, affords Afrikaans a higher status. At
the same time, we are engaged in bringing about equality with regard to
developing all the languages of our nation. Some of our indigenous
languages were never given any respect. They are therefore not developed,
they cannot be used in some subjects like science, mathematics and
politics. However, with regard to other aspects I am filled with pride and
excitement to note that, in view of this Act, those times have now came to
an end.

Our national Government has now deemed it fit to make these 11 languages
official. We praise the ANC-led Government for recognising us, as well,
whose languages were considered to be nothing, and for placing us in the
forefront today. We are saying to the President, to Zizi, he must grow, but
not to the extent of not being able to make us benefit from his deeds.
[Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLGY: Chairperson, I feel
very proud to be a member of this illustrious Parliament. When I travel
around foreign countries, people are amazed that we have 11 official
languages. The issue of language is one of the most emotive and disruptive
issues. It has led to genocide and suppression of minority rights, and
created absolute chaos. But this Parliament, as well as the Government and
people of this country, are handling these issues in such an expert and
intelligent way that we do get accolades from many countries. [Applause.]

The handling of these three Bills has been an absolute manifestation of
this spirit of building and working together. I thank the portfolio
committee and Dr Serote, the hon Tsheole and other members of the
committee, for creating this thematic concept of transformation for
reconciliation.

This portfolio committee has contributed a lot to South Africa under the
leadership of Dr Serote. They created the Year of Science and Technology in
1998, promoted the issue of symbols as a form of reconciliation and nation
building, and they have been closely involved with huge issues in culture
which lay the foundation for a united nation and a reconciled people.

We are a multicultural country and we need this reconciliation thrust
through transformation. It gives a sense of certainty and security to any
group in the country to know that any transformation that takes place in
our country is for the good and benefit of all South Africans.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                    AFRICA INSTITUTE OF SOUTH AFRICA BILL

                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)

Question agreed to.

Bill read a second time.

                   ACADEMY OF SCIENCE OF SOUTH AFRICA BILL

                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)

Question agreed to.
Bill read a second time.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I am aware that
today you have the cricket final and tomorrow, the rugby final. Please do
not shout yourselves hoarse, so that you are able to come and continue your
work next week!

The House adjourned at 11:27.
                                 __________

               ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPFORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Assent by the President of the Republic in respect of the
         following Bills:


           Counterfeit Goods Amendment Bill [B 27 - 2001] - Act No 25 of
           2001 (assented to and signed by President on 24 October 2001);
           and


           Trade Practices Amendment Bill [B 34 - 2001] - Act No 26 of 2001
           (assented to and signed by President on 24 October 2001).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Communications for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Universal Service Agency and the Universal Service Fund for 1999-
         2000 [RP 137-2001].


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Provincial and Local Government for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         Disaster Relief Fund for 2000-2001 [RP 133-2001].


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         National Supplies Procurement Fund for 2000-2001 [RP 144-2001].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Minerals and Energy for information:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         National Electricity Regulator Fund for 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-
         2000 [RP 152-2001].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education:


         (a)     Report of the Certification Council for Technikon
              Education for the period 1 April 2001 to 31 August 2001 [RP
              175-2001].


         (b)     Government Notice Number 415 published in the Government
              Gazette No 22281 dated 18 May 2001, National Policy regarding
              Further Education and Training Programme: Approval of
              adjustments to the Economic Higher and Standard Grade Core
              Syllabi for Grade 12, made in terms of the National Education
              Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (c)     Government Notice Number 416 published in the Government
              Gazette No 22281 dated 18 May 2001, Approval of an amendment
              to the aggregate for Senior Certificate candidates offering
              technical college instructional offerings as part of their
              programmes, made in terms of the National Education Policy
              Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


         (d)     Government Notice Number 417 published in the Government
              Gazette No 22281 dated 18 May 2001, National Policy regarding
              Further Education and Training Programme: Approval of the
              drafting and the documentation of National Education Policy
              regarding the Gauteng Youth College Programme, made in terms
              of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of
              1996).


         (e)     Government Notice No 472 published in the Government
              Gazette No 22334 dated 29 May 2001, Call for nomination to
              fill a vacancy in the South African Qualifications Authority
              caused by the resignation of the member representing the Adult
              Basic Education and Training Sector, made in terms of section
              4(3)(l) of the South African Qualifications Authority Act,
              1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).


         (f)     Government Notice No 485 published in the Government
              Gazette No 22345 dated 1 June 2001, Call for nomination to
              fill a vacancy in the South African Qualifications Authority
              caused by the resignation of the member from the National
              Organisations Representing Colleges other than teachers and
              technical colleges, made in terms of section 4(3)(l) of the
              South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of
              1995).


         (g)     Government Notice No 541 published in the Government
              Gazette No 22374 dated 13 June 2001, Appointment of a
              replacement to serve as a member of the South African
              Qualifications Authority, made in terms of section 4(4) of the
              South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of
              1995).


         (h)     Government Notice No 650 published in the Government
              Gazette No 22471 dated 12 July 2001, A focused study of the
              development of the National Qualifications Framework with the
              aim of streamlining its implementation, made in terms of the
              South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of
              1995).


         (i)     Government Notice No 703 published in the Government
              Gazette No 22524 dated 27 July 2001, National Policy regarding
              Special Needs Education: Approval of Education White Paper 6,
              Special Needs Education: Building an inclusive education and
              training system, made in terms of section 3(4)(l) and (o) of
              National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications:


         Report and Financial Statements of Telkom Limited for 2000-2001.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (a)    Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho on Extradition,
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho on Mutual Legal
         Assistance in Criminal Matters, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.


     (c)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Treaties.


     (d)    Statute of the Hague Conference on Private International Law,
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (e)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Statute of the Hague Conference on
         Private International Law.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on the General and
     Further Education and Training Quality Assurance Bill [B 57B - 2001]
     (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), dated 23 October 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Education, having considered the
         subject of the General and Further Education and Training Quality
         Assurance Bill [B 57B - 2001] (National Council of Provinces - sec
         76), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Medical Schemes
     Amendment Bill [B 80 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 26
     October 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the subject
         of the Medical Schemes Amendment Bill [B 80 - 2001] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 80A - 2001].

