---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 June 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2001-06-05
---

TUESDAY, 5 JUNE 2001
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  South Africa and the rest of the world are today celebrating
           World Environment Day;


       (b)  this day was established by the United Nations in 1972 to remind
           people across the globe about the importance of conserving the
           environment; and


       (c)  every year a theme is identified to focus world attention on the
           environment and that the themes serve as a reminder that the
           earth is our common heritage and is indivisible;


  (2) commends the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and
       provincial environmental departments for their launch of a wide range
       of sustainable environmental initiatives aimed at giving effect to
       environmental rights expressed in the Constitution;


  (3) calls on all organs of state to give full effect to our citizens'
       environmental rights by adherence to the principle contained in
       Chapter 1 of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998;


  (4) commits itself to uphold all principles of the International
       Convention for the Protection of the Environment to which South
       Africa is a signatory; and


  (5) commits itself to promoting a culture of cleanliness, minimising
       pollution and waste, encouraging a holistic and integrated approach
       to development, encouraging the involvement of all sectors of
       society, and promoting and enhancing the quality of our environment
       for the wellbeing of all our citizens.

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek by die volgende
sitting van die Raad sal voorstel:


  Dat die Raad kennis neem dat die Demokratiese Alliansie -


  (1) sy diepe teleurstelling en skok uitspreek oor die voortslepende en
       voortdurende plaasmoorde;


  (2) die President van Suid-Afrika versoek om in te gryp en hierdie wraak
       en kriminele optrede van 'n klein groepie kriminele stop te sit,
       voordat die reg in eie hande geneem word;
  (3) sy simpatie en medelye uitspreek teenoor die gesinne, die personeel
       en naasbestaandes van die afgestorwenes; en


  (4) sy dank uitspreek vir die bystand van werknemers, bure en die
       polisie, waar hulle wel bystand verleen het en met sukses kon optree.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the Council I shall move:


  That the Council notes that the Democratic Alliance -


  (1) expresses its profound disappointment and shock about the ongoing and
       continued farm murders;


  (2) requests the President of South Africa to intervene and put a stop to
       these revengeful and criminal actions by a small group of criminals,
       before people take the law into their own hands;


  (3) expresses its sympathy and condolences to the families, the staff and
       the relatives of the deceased; and


  (4) expresses its gratitude for the assistance of employees, neighbours
       and the police, in cases where they were able to assist and take
       successful action.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with regret the alarming report that a certain teacher in
       Gauteng has been suspended because of the sexual abuse of a
       schoolchild;


  (2) further notes that girls are raped, sexually abused and sexually
       harassed at their schools by their teachers;


  (3) calls on the Government to comply with its constitutional and
       international obligations to protect women and girls from sexual
       violence and further to promote an environment conducive to obtaining
       a good education; and


  (4) therefore calls on the national Department of Education to develop a
       national plan of action to address the problem of school-based sexual
       violence.

                       RATIFICATION OF KYOTO PROTOCOL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T B TAABE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) on the occasion of World Environment Day, notes with concern -


       (a)  President Bush's stated intention not to ratify the Kyoto
           Protocol;


       (b)  that this will set back efforts to halt the global threat of
           climate change; and


       (c)  that the political fallout which resulted from this across the
           world indicates that other countries view this environmental
           threat in a very serious light;


  (2) calls on South Africa, as host of the World Summit on Sustainable
       Development next year, to occupy a leadership position within the G-
       77 to make sure that progress is made internationally in averting
       this very real threat to developing countries;


  (3) calls for South Africa to ratify the Kyoto Protocol;


  (4) does everything in its power to ensure that the Kyoto Protocol is
       entered into force by the World Summit on Sustainable Development
       next year in Johannesburg;


  (5) calls on South Africa to find ways of developing its renewable energy
       sector, so that we can bring down our own greenhouse gas emissions
       while providing affordable access to all South Africans; and


  (6) acknowledges that promoting energy efficiency throughout the country
       will also help in this regard, while contributing significant savings
       to the country's gross national product.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                     RELEASE OF LATEST CRIME STATISTICS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the moratorium on the release of crime statistics has at long
           last been lifted;


       (b)  according to the new statistics certain serious violent crimes
           such as robbery with aggravating circumstances and other
           robberies have again increased; and


       (c)  although certain crimes have stabilised, all crime levels are
           still unacceptably high;


  (2) further notes that crime remains one of the greatest obstacles to
       business and one of the most worrying aspects of life in South Africa
       for the South African public in general;


  (3) also notes that the latest crime statistics confirm that the
       prevention and combating of crime in South Africa still does not
       receive a high enough priority by the Government; and


  (4) urges the President and the Government to treat the safety and the
       security of all our people as a much higher priority, as this remains
       the Government's most fundamental duty towards its citizens and all
       the people within our borders.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion? [Interjections.] There is an objection. The motion
will therefore become notice of a motion.

       NAMIBIAN GOVERNMENT'S RELATIONSHIP WITH THE NAMIBIAN NEWSPAPER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the Namibian government has, on the grounds of
       ``unwarranted criticism of government policies'', withdrawn all
       routine advertising of government notices from the largest
       independent newspaper in Namibia, the  Namibian, and issued a
       presidential order to the Namibian government departments not to
       purchase the newspaper, which is the most important financial paper
       in Namibia; and


  (2) notes with concern the growing intolerance in Namibia, which now
       includes the free press.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr M V MOOSA: Yes, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! In the light
of the objection, this motion will also not be proceeded with. The motion
without notice will now become a notice of motion.

               TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF IDENTIFICATION OF AIDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Me E C GOUWS: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem van die feit dat -


       (a)  die Amerikaanse Centres for Disease Control and Prevention op 5
           Junie 1981 - presies 20 jaar gelede - 'n nuwe siekte
           ge√Ødentifiseer het; en


       (b)  die siekte 'n jaar later, 1982, omskryf is as die verworwe
           immuniteitsgebreksindroom, nl vigs; en


  (2) van mening is dat veilige gedrag 'n leefwyse behoort te word, veral
       in ons land waar MIV/Vigs heelbo op die agenda behoort te wees.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Ms E C GOUWS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the fact that -


       (a)  on 5 June 1981 - exactly 20 years ago - the American Centres for
           Disease Control and Prevention identified a new disease; and


       (b)  a year later, in 1982, the disease was defined as acquired
           immune deficiency syndrome, ie Aids; and


  (2) is of the view that safe behaviour should become a lifestyle,
       particularly in our country where HIV/Aids should be at the top of
       the agenda.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                  LETTER FROM SUNDAY TIMES JOURNALIST TO DA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B THOMPSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with grave concern the DP or DA's inability to perform as an
       opposition party in the province of KwaZulu-Natal;


  (2) notes a letter from Sam Sole, senior editor of the Sunday Times, to
       Roger Burrows, DA MPL, KwaZulu-Natal Legislature, informing him of a
       story about MEC S'bu Ndebele and taxi violence and how to ask
       questions related to the matter;


  (3) notes further that the letter has exposed and proved the ANC's
       suspicion that certain sections of the media were colluding with the
       DA;


  (4) expresses its disappointment over this unprofessional behaviour by
       journalists who are in cahoots with the DA, running a campaign of
       destruction against the ANC Government and black leadership in
       general; and


  (5) condemns the incident and resolves to lodge a formal complaint with
       the press ombudsman.

[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members
are becoming disorderly. Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] In the light of the objection the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become notice of a
motion.

                           DEATH OF NKOSI JOHNSON

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that Nkosi Johnson, who was an HIV/Aids activist, died last
       Friday;
  (2) further notes that Nkosi had touched the hearts of and inspired
       millions of people;


  (3) acknowledges that Nkosi challenged the Government's Aids policies and
       united millions of South Africans in the fight against HIV/Aids;


  (4) calls on the Government to develop a proper cohesive and valid policy
       on HIV/Aids;


  (5) exhorts the health authorities and other stakeholders to strengthen
       the health education campaign in order to save lives; and


  (6) conveys its condolences to the family of Nkosi Johnson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: I object to the motion, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! In the light
of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without
notice will now become notice of a motion.

                   PROTECTED AREAS AND TRANSNATIONAL PARKS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, I would like to move a motion on South Africa's
progress on the implementation of the Convention on Biodiversity. I move
without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) on the occasion of World Environment Day, recognises the enormous
       progress South Africa has made in protecting its natural heritage, as
       is evidenced by -


       (a)  the expansion of its national parks by 227 307 hectares since
           1994;


       (b)  Minister Moosa's stated intention to increase protected areas to
           8% of South Africa's land;


       (c)  the role which transfrontier national parks are playing in
           bringing the countries of the region together by means of our
           shared natural heritage;


       (d)  the development of the new Gaza-Kruger-Gonarezhou transfrontier
           park, which is welcomed by the Council and is to be the largest
           animal kingdom and queendom in the world; and


       (e)  the agreement which will be signed later this year between South
           Africa and Namibia to combine the Richtersveld and Ais-Ais
           national parks;


  (2) is thankful that God's will is being done here on earth as we try to
       restore God's earth, that human beings have damaged through neglect,
       greed and selfishness; and


  (3) commends the efforts of the Government, which is recognising the
       importance of our environment.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Although it
sounded more like a statement, it is nevertheless a motion. Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, may I suggest an amendment to the last
paragraph? I move as an amendment:


  That, in paragraph (3), after ``Government'' to insert ``and the private
  sector''.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! An amendment
has been proposed. Does the hon member agree with the amendment?

Rev M CHABAKU: I irrevocably concur, Chairperson. [Laughter.]

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely:

  That the Council -


  (1) on the occasion of World Environment Day, recognises the enormous
       progress South Africa has made in protecting its natural heritage, as
       is evidenced by -


       (a)  the expansion of its national parks by 227 307 hectares since
           1994;


       (b)  Minister Moosa's stated intention to increase protected areas to
           8% of South Africa's land;


       (c)  the role which transfrontier national parks are playing in
           bringing the countries of the region together by means of our
           shared natural heritage;


       (d)  the development of the new Gaza-Kruger-Gonarezhou trans-frontier
           park, which is welcomed by the Council and is to be the largest
           animal kingdom and queendom in the world; and


       (e)  the agreement which will be signed later this year between South
           Africa and Namibia to combine the Richtersveld and Ais-Ais
           national parks;


  (2) is thankful that God's will is being done here on earth as we try to
       restore God's earth, that human beings have damaged through neglect,
       greed and selfishness; and


  (3) commends the efforts of the Government and the private sector, which
       are recognising the importance of our environment.

                      ESTABLISHMENT OF JOINT COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the Council, subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly,
  establishes a joint committee in terms of Joint Rule 111 to consider the
  Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2001.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 5 - Provincial and Local Government:

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): I would like to take
this opportunity to welcome the hon the Minister and the Deputy Minister. I
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Deputy
Minister on her appointment. This is her first appearance in this House. I
would also like to take this opportunity to welcome special delegates,
including the hon MECs from the nine provinces. We appreciate your
presence, and we shall now call upon the hon the Minister to address the
House.

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, MECs who are
here, the hon the Deputy Minister for Provincial and Local Government, and
hon members, our national economy involves relations of dominance and
asymmetric dependence between the centre and the periphery. This
asymmetrical pattern becomes manifest, both between former white areas in
the urban centres and black areas within the same centres, as well as in
the legendary urban-rural dichotomy.

The advent of democracy brought with it the imperative to create
institutions of Government which constitute a catalyst for setting our
country on the path to sustainable development. This would, in turn, set
the stage for us to tackle the paramount challenge of redeeming the promise
of a better life for all our people.

Given the base from which we started, some have said that we have, in a
short time, achieved more than we have a right to expect. Until recently,
this country had 834 municipalities, many of which were nonviable entities,
mired in debt and saddled with staggering problems of inequality. Not only
were the majority condemned to a life of misery and despair, but the
ideologues, who represented the few that were on the fast track to
prosperity, wanted all of us to accept this as a permanent condition of
life.

A decisive break with this so-called ``way of life'' is now in prospect.
The inauguration of the new local government system was a milestone
development that qualitatively separated one era of South African political
life from the next. It opened new horizons to untold numbers across the
country.

By reconfiguring the municipal boundaries, reducing the number and
increasing the size of municipalities, a framework for creating resilient
communities in all parts of the country has been firmly entrenched. We now
have a system of local government which not only represents every South
African equally, but also makes possible the sharing of the resource base
of each city, town and village in an equitable manner between all residents
of that locality.

However, as I said recently, I have been sensitised to the stress that the
recent changes have placed on local institutions and resources.
Consolidating local democracy is, indeed, an immense challenge.

In order to ensure that the newly demarcated municipalities work, it is
critical that the other spheres of government, that is national and
provincial governments, support local government.

The task of supporting local government is one which Government shares with
the SA Local Government Association. Salga faces the challenge of
consolidating its own role as the representative voice of local government.

As hon members know, the comparative advantage of this sphere of elected
representatives is that it is spatially, socially and politically located
in local communities. Salga must use this unique position it occupies to
play a leading role in shaping the governance and developmental discourse.

Within the next two years, the primary objective will be to stabilise the
local government sphere and put core municipal systems in place for local
government. By the year 2010, the core systems should be settled, extended
and fully functional.

Beyond this, the collective responsibility of sustaining our system of
developmental local government will be a continuing priority.

At the moment, local government faces many challenges. As hon members are
well aware, the 1996 census figures put the total population of South
Africa at 40 584 000, of which 54% is urban and 46% is rural. Twenty-one
per cent of urban dwellers require increased access to basic services,
whilst 93,5% of rural dwellers require increased access to some or other
services.

This means that across the nation 45,9% of the population requires some
form of increased access to municipal services. It is estimated that demand
for services will increase by a total of 1 454 000 households by the year
2007.

It is clear, therefore, that in order to meet both the existing need for
services and the increased need for a growing number of households, a
supreme effort will be required from a wide range of stakeholders. In
recognition of this, over the next financial year, R2,2 billion has been
allocated by Government for the extension of basic municipal infrastructure
to poor households. Also, I am currently in discussion with my colleague
the Minister for Public Enterprises, Mr Jeff Radebe, to explore increased
co-operation to ensure the delivery of resources at the local level from
other Government agencies, especially through parastatals.

Both President Mbeki and the Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, told
Parliament earlier this year that conditions of macro stability have been
achieved. This has now put us in a position to explore new dimensions of
taking the battle for sustainable development to greater heights. Central
to this will be municipal innovations directed at building and developing
local economies. A lot of these activities are contingent upon the
harnessing of available resources from all sectors. While a lot of work
will have to be done by municipal councillors themselves, we have been in
discussions with representatives of the private sector, as a result of
which they are assessing their own role in the rolling out of
infrastructure projects, especially in areas which are targeted for
integrated rural development and urban renewal.

In this regard, it will be recalled that Government adopted two programmes
which go by the names of the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
Strategy and the Urban Renewal Strategy. These are pivotal programmes which
present our three spheres of government - national, provincial and local -
with the challenge of working together in ways unprecedented in the history
of this country.
Appropriately, the Department of Provincial and Local Government was
charged with the responsibility of ensuring that work, in the
implementation of these programmes, is underpinned both by horizontal and
vertical integration.

The planning of the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Strategy is at
an advanced stage. Its implementation is on course to begin on 1 July 2002.
At the moment, designated Ministers are visiting rural development nodes to
work with provincial and local government practitioners, as well as with
developmental specialists from the Independent Development Trust, to
prepare for the actual implementation.

Meanwhile, the Department of Provincial and Local Government is in the
process of establishing a special unit whose task it will be to co-ordinate
implementation of both the Rural Development Strategy and the Urban Renewal
Strategy.

The theme of my presentation to the National Assembly centred on the
overarching principle of building good governance for consolidating
democracy, and on realising sustainable development based on the actual
conditions of people and communities.

This is the litmus test by which we should measure the effectiveness of our
institutions of governance. Systems of governance are useful to the extent
that they spawn these outcomes. In the current period, all states and
governments are seeking better ways to achieve these objectives, because
the birth of a global economy positions the state and institutions of
governance at the centre of debates about how to govern in a way that
brings about national development.

Research and development is thus a critical function of any department of
state. The Department of Provincial and Local Government will strengthen
its research and development capability in terms of its mandate, over the
next three years, by doing the following. Firstly, the department will
establish learning networks and partnerships nationally, internationally,
within Government and across all sectors of society so as to map, mobilise
and marshal intellectual resources available to the task at hand.

Secondly, the department will engage the public on questions of governance
in innovative ways, so as to ensure that its work fosters and strengthens
public debate and civic responsibility. Thirdly, the department will
develop regular research studies, pioneering research on various issues of
governance through which it can engage intellectuals on issues of public
policy. Fourthly, it will gather and organise data in viable sets for the
purposes of policy and decision-making.

The establishment of a sphere of local government situated at the interface
between the state and the citizen, and charged with consolidating local
democracy and creating systems in which communities directly influence the
allocation of municipal revenues to local preferences, is a conscious step
towards building a developmental state in South Africa.

What we have in this country for the first time is, in essence, a local
development state with the institutional machinery, powers and functions
tailored to the task of improving and extending service delivery; tailored
to the task of improving the attack on poverty and underdevelopment at the
grass-roots level; and creating conditions for local economic development.

Two questions that have begun to emerge out of this experiment with
developmental local governance are, firstly, whether the distribution of
powers and functions between the three spheres of government is rational,
in the context of an emerging local sphere and the developmental challenges
that the country faces, and, secondly, which powers and functions should be
devolved to the local government sphere.

The governance and administration cluster has, as one of its priorities,
the ongoing review of the powers and functions in Schedules 4 and 5 of the
Constitution. Any work that is undertaken in this area will necessarily
have implications regarding the reorganising of powers and functions for
all spheres, sectors and functions.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government shares the mandate for
strengthening the intergovernmental system with the Presidency and the
National Treasury. Our plan is to release a discussion document on the
intergovernmental division of powers and functions by the end of the 2001-
02 financial year to lay the basis for a policy framework by the end of
2002.

It is clear that there needs to be a framework in terms of which further
devolution is managed coherently, without hindering innovations within
sectors and functions. To this end, one of the priorities for the
department during the next two years is to work with concurrent
departments, the provinces, Salga and the Demarcation Board to develop an
appropriate policy framework for the devolution of powers and functions.

For a while now, this House has been raising the issue of the development
of a national monitoring system that would enable Government and the NCOP
to proactively intervene in matters of local governance.

As hon members are aware, the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill has
put forward a framework of performance management for local government.
This framework is essentially a response to the need for a performance
management system, a need that was expressed by this House. It is a
framework that will ensure that we continuously monitor the performance of
local government in various critical areas of strategic importance while
ensuring that we identify early warning signals to enable us to be
proactive and provide targeted support to needy municipalities.

We are soon going to publish general key performance indicators for local
governments. These are essentially indicators that national Government will
look at in assessing the progress municipalities are making in improving
the quality of life of our people and the contribution that they are making
towards meeting national priorities of Government. This is an important
step that will help bring our vision of developmental local government to
fruition.

Significant progress has also been made with regard to proposals on the
promotion and protection of the constitutional rights of Khoisan
communities in South Africa as highlighted by the President on several
occasions. In addition to the depiction in our coat of arms of the Khoisan
language and culture, a comprehensive policy document has been compiled and
integrated into the draft Green Paper on traditional leadership and
institutions. This will be published and distributed for public comment in
the near future.

After the finalisation of the White Paper on traditional leadership, we
shall embark on the process of introducing permanent legislation which
provides for the role of this institution in our system of government. The
legislation in question is envisaged in section 212 of our country's
Constitution. The new legislation will also make it possible for us to
establish a national independent commission to investigate traditional
leadership disputes and claims.

The integration of traditional leadership cannot be adequately restored
without dealing with those cases of traditional leaders who were allegedly
imposed on people or those who were illegitimately deposed for their
opposition to the old order. Some provinces, under pressure from affected
traditional leaders and royal families, established commissions which have
done some work in this regard. The product of that work will be integrated
into a national process which will be based on a more coherent national
policy position.

The policy document on the Khoisan community mainly focuses on the
following: firstly, the accommodation of Khoisan interests within the soon-
to-be-established Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights
of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities; secondly, the claim by
Khoisan communities to the status of indigenous people, or first-nation
status, in South Africa; thirdly, leadership structures within Khoisan
communities, and their recognition; and, lastly, the establishment of a
national representative body for Khoisan communities.

These matters were part of the agenda of a meeting I held yesterday with a
delegation from the Organisation of Traditional Leaders of South Africa. I
will also have discussions soon with some premiers concerning these issues
and our respective responsibilities in this regard.

We have also set aside funds to conduct further research on some
outstanding issues related to Khoisan communities. A conference is also
planned for later this year at which other interested parties and
stakeholders will be given an opportunity to contribute to the finalisation
of policy positions on matters effecting our Khoisan communities.

We have also spent considerable time assessing the issue raised by the
people of Orania. The community of Orania took court action to stop the
disestablishment of the existing transitional representative council of
Orania in terms of the demarcation process. The court ruled that the case
be postponed for an indefinite period and that Orania would continued to
exist as an entity.

The continued existence of the Orania TRC is only for purposes of enabling
the community to negotiate with Government on issues which lie at the base
of their court application.

As directed by Cabinet, I brought together a group of people yesterday whom
I have charged with the responsibility of examining the feasibility or
otherwise of reviewing the municipal status of Orania as requested by its
community. I have requested the team to report back to me by not later than
the end of July this year. Their report will put me in a position to
recommend to Cabinet the most appropriate course of action to be taken in
this regard.

I have no doubt in my mind that the department and the Ministry will be
carrying in the next few years a fairly punishing load. I have, however,
the satisfaction of knowing that the burden will be shared amongst
practitioners in all the spheres of Government and the rest of South
African civil society. This has enhanced our hope for and confidence in a
bright future for our country. [Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, is it a service or is it a business? This is one
of the crucial questions confronting local government today.

While service delivery to the poor and the extension of infrastructure are
at the heart of the White Paper reform and express common values which we
all espouse, the mere transformation of the local government systems is no
guarantee that we will achieve this aim.

The previous system was perfectly capable of delivering to the entire
community, but lacked the necessary communal values to do so. Despite the
intent, there is no guarantee that we will be any more successful with the
new system than with the old if we retain the same untenable dichotomy as
that which characterises the present struggle in Government of labour
policy versus macroeconomic policy, thus choosing sides between the
community and the municipality, as if the two need always be in opposing
camps.

At present communities are not receiving the services they require.
Municipal workers are being paid by borrowing from pension and medical
contributions to overcome the gap left by the nonpayment of rates. Instead
of operating as an organic whole, municipal finances are more or less a
case of robbing Peter to pay Paul.

This cannot continue, no matter what system of local government is in
place. Consider that we spent R40 million on management support programmes
in the previous budget year, and now have budgeted an 85% increase to R75
million to bolster the lack of municipal capacity existing at present. Add
to this the fact that, despite transitional grants of R100 million for the
present financial year and R250 million for the following two financial
years, this is unlikely to be sufficient to effect the structural
adjustments necessary to facilitate the changeover to the new systems,
including provision for the retrenchment of staff, writing off bad debts
and the fact that approximately R14 billion is owed to municipalities by
defaulting ratepayers. How do we move forward against these odds?

The Minister himself speaks of the daunting challenges for municipal
service delivery in South Africa today. Conservatively, it is estimated
that the total cumulative backlog in municipal infrastructure and services
is approximately to the value of R50 billion. According to the analysis of
the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework prepared for the previous term, if
these backlogs were addressed by public-sector resources only, many
communities would only receive adequate infrastructure 65 years from today.

This figure alone should be enough to persuade communities, labour unions
and committed councillors to welcome the private sector as partners in the
service of the community. Furthermore, we should grasp the challenges of
economic change at local government level through an honest assessment of
the performance capabilities of local government, and in particular the
rural areas.

Actually there is only one answer to the question posed at the beginning.
It is not a case of: Is it a service, or is it a business? If not a
business, it will not be a service, not to employees, nor to ratepayers.
The make-or-break of the present structure of local government lies in
facing harsh realities: Implement indigent policies; make those who can,
pay for services; insist on the political commitment of municipal councils
and employees to provide quality service; and embrace the economic
discipline to provide services at an affordable level, doing so in a way
that is sustainable over the long term, regardless of the short-term cost.

Any other choices will result in short-term political gains which will be
paid, as always, in the long term by the very people our new system is
supposed to prioritise. [Applause.]

Mr M BHABHA: Chair, the position that the DP has taken in this debate is
most unfortunate. It is unfortunate, because if we were to engage in a
meaningful debate, one would expect that a constructive alternative would
be afforded, instead of the endless and mindless whingeing that we have
become so accustomed to. [Interjections.] It is actually becoming
irritating.

I am not at all surprised at the positions that my learned friend has just
taken, because so bereft of ideas is the DP that there is not a single
provision in the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act or in the Local
Government: Municipal Structures Act that it can claim ownership of, not
one. I want to ask Adv Lever to tell me how he would show his grandchildren
that he was part of this process. [Interjections.]

Sometimes I wonder what the concept of bipartisanship and patriotism is. I
was watching former Vice President Al Gore in his concession speech. There
was a time when he said: ``America comes first. Let me sit down.'' This is
one little quality I await. [Interjections.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Why don't you sit down then? [Interjections.]

Mr M BHABHA: Chair, it is one thing having catchy sound bites. If sound
bites were ideas, we would have a symphony of wisdom from the DP, but it is
never forthcoming.
In our haste to take up the challenge of the transformation of local
government, and perhaps even in the anxiety of facing so massive a
challenge, it is so easy to forget the road that we have already traversed.
It is a road that saw us hold yet another local government election, one
that was peaceful and beyond reproach, thereby further reinforcing the
pillars of our democracy. It is in this regard that we must applaud the
thousands of voters that voted, all the volunteers, the IEC and the
returning officers who made us so proud.

At the risk of sounding slightly melodramatic, it is a road that saw this
country embark on a course that is nothing short of miraculous. The process
of demarcating this country was in itself no small task, but to complement
it with an assessment of the capacity of each of the municipalities in such
a short period is nothing short of commendable. I believe that the
Municipal Demarcation Board deserves a medal for having achieved this.

At the time of considering the Bill which facilitated the establishment of
the Municipal Demarcation Board, the opposition parties did not support it,
because they feared the impartiality of the board. I am sure that they will
now agree that the members of the board were not only impartial, but also
performed their task with distinction.

The implementation of the provisions of the Acts that usher in the new
local government regime will require a meaningful and sustained support
system from municipalities throughout the country. Since we are graced here
with a number of MECs, I think it is appropriate that we actually discuss
the role of provincial government vis-√†-vis local government.

Very often the term ``support'' has been conflated with ``interference''.
The Constitution places an obligation on the provincial governments and the
national Government to strengthen and support local government. That
support includes an obligation that becomes particularly relevant at this
juncture when local government is being transformed.

With a new dispensation one can expect a posse of so-called experts to lend
a hand in training. This, of course, comes at a price. None of these so-
called experts have been assessed, nor has the material they deliver been
analysed. I would urge the Minister, and the MECs, to ensure that a list is
compiled so that we can have an accreditation system. We do not want any
Tom, Dick or Harry - sorry, I am being a bit sexist here - coming there,
saying that they are consultants and that they know how to train. We need
an accreditation system and a list from which municipalities must choose.

This, I suggest, must be done urgently, because our constituency work has
exposed a weakness in the training programmes. The support also entails
correcting weaknesses in the financial systems of a municipality. On the
other hand, for the MECs to be able to perform this duty they require the
co-operation of the municipality. I raise this, because it has been our
experience during the section 139 interventions that often municipalities
invoke constitutional autonomy to ward off an action that they perceive as
an interference. I think some of the MECs would agree with us here. I do
hope that Salga will encourage its members to view the relationship with
the other spheres as necessary and essential, and not necessarily as an
invasion. We are at a phase that will require transparency and honesty.

At the best of times the understanding of the division of powers, as
envisaged in section 84 of the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act,
as amended, is complicated. I believe that its reading will be made easier
if the objectives that are sought to be achieved through the creation of
district councils are revisited. It was always envisaged that a district
council would perform functions at a macro level, while category B
municipalities would perform the same function at a different level,
perhaps a micro level.

A power can thus indeed be disaggregated. It is not a case of a category of
municipality performing a power to the exclusion of all the others. The
functions that fall within the purview of other Ministries have been placed
at district level, pending forthcoming policies from these Ministries.

The uncertainty, particularly at a time when administrations are being
restructured, can be a source of anxiety, but we have only one opportunity.
I believe that we should rather take our time, and get it right the first
time, although I think these Ministries need to be nudged a little.
At the time of deliberations on the Local Government: Municipal Systems
Bill, the committee, being mindful of the lack of an early warning system
in the monitoring of municipalities, introduced mechanisms for MECs to
detect problems in time. I would urge MECs to use these mechanisms to
monitor the progress of respective municipalities.

Furthermore, the National Council of Provinces also has a facility
available in the Act to keep itself apprised of the financial conduct of
municipalities. To do justice to this highly technical task, can I use my
friendship with the Chairperson to persuade the powers that be to, perhaps,
look at the restructuring unit within the NCOP to be able to decipher the
key performance indicators that the Minister has spoken about. It is a
highly technical task, but I think the NCOP can play a very meaningful role
in detecting and planning an early warning system.

The Integrated Rural Development Strategy and the Urban Renewal Strategy
create an exciting opportunity for the NCOP. It can monitor the progress of
the various Ministries that are participating in the identified nodes, all
13 of them. I believe this House can, in a very imaginative way, assist in
monitoring the implementation of these strategies. Again, I will rely on my
friendship with the Chairperson to look into that.

This brings me to ward committees. The rationale behind this creation was
simple, yet profound. It is an effort to allow all communities, be they
business, religious or sporting communities, to buy into the democratic
process.

The election of a candidate does not necessarily bring with it enthusiastic
support for the democratic process from the entire community, particularly
from those with whom the ward councillor does not have resonance. The ward
committee, in effect, is an attempt to cure a defect in the democratic
system itself. It also creates a sense of belonging and bonds a common
identity. I would ask the MECs to really ensure that municipalities have
the capability of capacitating these ward committees.

Let me finally thank my committee because it has been hard-working. I want
to thank the department and Mrs M Titus, who is sitting there. Sorry for
troubling her so much, but it is our job, she knows how it is. I also like
to thank my counterpart, Yunus Carrim. He is not here, but he has been very
helpful.
I want to welcome the Deputy Minister to the Ministry and to the NCOP. I
just want to tell the Deputy Minister that this House is a very cultured,
sovereign House. It gives sanity to Parliament. Parliament consists of two
Houses, and we would rather not talk about the other House, but this one is
sane. [Laughter.]

I see some of my friends from the press and members of the general public
sitting up there. I just want to make one request: that when we assess the
failures and successes of councillors in municipalities, I think they must
be measured against the magnitude of the task before them. We must not
assess them in a vacuum, because they have a huge task. Their performance
must be assessed in that context. [Applause.]

Mr D E AFRICA (North West): Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister,
MECs, hon members, firstly, I would like to congratulate and welcome the
new Deputy Minister in the constituency of local government, and hope that
we will have added benefits with her presence in our midst. I further wish
to congratulate the Minister on the task he has performed in guiding the
process of putting in place the new system of local government.
The new challenge, however, is to create sustainable capacity within the
new municipalities to ensure that the new system meets the challenges our
localities face. The new system of local government has the potential to
take us in new directions in the field of urban governance and also holds
tremendous capacity and potential for cities, towns, villages and the
future development process that we envisage.

The vision for local government in our province is the consolidation of an
inclusive local government system that is capable of exercising its
democratic authority, performing its functions and exercising its powers
efficiently and effectively, committed to and capable of working with civil
society in an accountable way to reduce poverty, redress inequality, foster
security, and fulfil social, economic, cultural, civic and political
rights.

The financial situation in most municipalities is not a pleasant one.
Municipalities are faced with greater challenges. For instance, the area of
operation of some municipalities has increased as a result of the
demarcation process. There is a low tax base for most municipalities, and
low levels of payment for services - of course, not as a result of
unwillingness to pay, but as a result of inability to do so.

Most operational budgets of municipalities are not cash funded. The salary
bill of some municipalities has increased due to the amalgamation process.
Some municipalities are unable to tap into the dormant revenue base they
have, and, of course, also have difficulties in recovering outstanding
money owed to them by local debtors, including provincial and national
government departments.

In our province, and as part of our endeavour to meet and help local
government meet the challenges facing municipalities, the North West
provincial government has established a local government development fund
to the value of R10 million, which we believe is inadequate, but a good
step in the right direction to ensure that we fulfil our obligation
effectively in helping municipalities and strengthening their capabilities
to carry out their mandate.

During the past two months, the provincial government has received requests
from municipalities for urgent financial assistance to the tune of about
R55 million. Requests ranged from the construction of minimum office
accommodation to the repayment of loans and a host of other challenges that
municipalities are facing. It is our humble request to the Ministry,
department and Minister to assist provincial governments in their efforts
to ensure that the new system of local government is strengthened.

The issue around the management and administration of cross-boundary
municipalities needs some attention as well in order to ensure that we
remove uncertainties, and clarify the roles and responsibilities of the
affected areas.

There is a need to develop a comprehensive, legally binding agreement for
all the affected areas. Formalised agreements and memorandums of
understanding must be entered into. The joint administration of the cross-
boundary municipalities should be seen not only as a responsibility of the
MECs for local government, but also in a broader context to ensure that
there is no disruption of services, whether those services are from other
departments at a provincial level or from other areas as well, so that the
municipalities in the cross-boundary areas are not adversely affected.

A number of things will need to be done to ensure that local government
becomes the real nucleus in the development of our localities. Not only do
we have poor people in many cities and towns, we actually have poor cities
with poor people - a situation that could lead to a number of problems at
local level.

Therefore, I think the following issues need serious attention: the legacy
of arrears inherited by the new system and its impact on the efficiency of
this system; the creation of the long-term fund to build capacity; and the
consolidation of the new system. Whilst we appreciate the initiative by the
department to set up a transition fund, we believe that a long-term fund to
help build the capacity of the new system of local government is the best
way to go.

We need to have a dedicated focus to help local government, at least over
the next 10 years. We therefore propose the establishment of a dedicated
national fund which will be focused on assisting local government, because
it is our responsibility to ensure that the primary sphere has the
necessary capacity to carry out the responsibilities enshrined in the
Constitution.
The role of the new system is wide and varied, ranging from issues of the
environment to mobilising local civic actors to deal with our urban and
rural challenges. Therefore, in such a context it is only logical that the
municipality must have the necessary capacity. As the provincial government
we will do our best to ensure that this happens, and we will also request
that the national Government support these efforts.

The issue of the ward committees in critically promoting local
participation and building a new appreciation of local government within
our community still needs serious attention. Various organised interests
will meet at ward committee level. If there is no understanding of the role
of these ward committees, serious delays in the implementation of projects
and service delivery may result. Indications are that questions are
beginning to arise about the ward committees.

Various local authorities have their own approaches throughout the country.
Some of the questions are: Are these committees political committees? If
so, what is it that they are going to do? Are they advisory committees? Are
they development committees? Or are they a combination of all three? Is
there a national framework that defines exactly what the role of the ward
committees will be, so that we do not allow each municipality to develop a
mechanism that would be inappropriate to carry out a national
responsibility of restructuring and developing our local communities? We
need to clarify these issues and develop a collective approach, as
provincial government, local government and national Government.

Regarding traditional leaders, we believe that there is sufficient scope to
address the issue of traditional leadership without necessarily changing
the Constitution, and we fully support the initiative taken by the Minister
to find appropriate accommodation in the new system. South Africa cannot
afford a dual system of governance at local level. Participation and the
issue of the functions and powers of traditional leaders in the new system
is a matter for all South Africans. Therefore the broad consultation
initiated by the department and the Minister in particular has our full
support. We believe that the institution is about communities.

We have demonstrated a desire to see development in their local areas, but
they have also proved their commitment to the new system by voting in the
December 2000 election. There is therefore no doubt that they have a role
and say in how the institution of traditional leadership can enhance the
capacity of our people to participate together at local level.

We are also happy to learn that the remuneration of councillors will now
come from the national fiscus. We want to congratulate the department on
its initiatives and express the view that this will go a long way towards
giving added momentum to the process at local level.

The role of local government in the economy cannot be over-emphasised.
There is a very clear relationship between governance and the economy and,
therefore, a strengthening of local government to play this role is
essential. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Cllr H JENKINS (Salga): Chairperson, hon Minister for Provincial and Local
Government and Deputy Minister, hon members of the NCOP, MECs present, and
special delegates, on behalf of Salga, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Deputy Minister on her new position.

The SA Local Government Association, Salga, as members know, is a statutory
body broadly mandated to represent and resource local government at
national, regional and international level. This mandate stems from the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, the Organised Local
Government Act, the White Paper on Local Government and the Salga
constitution.

We like to view ourselves as a link between our individual municipalities
and their employees, as well as between our individual municipalities and
national Government. We provide a platform for uniformity and a collective
approach where possible.

Specifics in terms of our mandate are the development of capacity in local
government, especially with regard to councillors; acting as a resource for
local government, for example in legislative and other relevant updates;
acting as an employer organisation for local government, including the
local government bargaining unit; representing local government in all
policy, legislative, consultative and executive processes affecting local
government, such as we are doing today; and representing local government
internationally with a bias towards gleaning as much as possible from cases
of best practice.

Over the past few years Salga has made a mark on the landscape of local
government in South Africa. Like all committed and progressive
organisations, however, we would love to have made an even greater impact,
but that is on our agenda as we proceed decisively forward. Some of the
highlights of our existence over the few years are the following.

On labour relations, besides generally building capacity within the
employer sector, we provided ongoing advice and support on labour relations
matters, made inputs on the development of labour relations policies; and
we have started a process of bringing about greater uniformity in the
conditions of service, employee benefits, the mobility of employees,
appropriate remuneration frameworks, performance management systems,
alternative service delivery, rationalisation of pension and medical aid
schemes, change management and organisational transformation, and the
transfer of staff from provincial to local governments.

With regard to the municipal elections of 2000, we ran a council training
programme. On voter education, we mobilised town clerks and chief executive
officers to serve as municipal electoral officers; provided, through our
member councils, infrastructure for running the elections; and availed the
necessary personnel to help conduct the electoral process.

In policy, our main point of intervention was on electricity restructuring,
and local governments' finances and legislation. On capacity-building and
training, we have run a core councillor training programme and an executive
leadership programme.

In intergovernmental relations, we participated, through the NCOP, in
processes involving a number of Bills relevant to our work. Worth
mentioning are the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Bill, the Fire
Brigade Services Amendment Bill, the Division of Revenue Bill, the Local
Government: Municipal Electoral Bill, the Cross-Boundary Municipalities
Bill and the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill.

The date 5 December 2000 will go down in the annals of South African
history as the day when local government made a decisive break with the
past, joining provincial and national Government in giving the applicable
majority party the responsibility of delivering basic services and running
a developmental type of local government. From that date it is not an ill-
defined council, but the relevant governing party which is held
accountable.

Developmental local government focuses on the role that municipalities will
have to play as agents of delivery of basic services and the promotion of
public participation and accountability. The system calls on local
government to take the lead in the fight against poverty, to ensure a
sustainable livelihood for all and to promote social and economic
development.

In his address at the opening of Parliament this year, reiterated in his
address at the Salga conference in April, President Mbeki emphasised the
importance of the local sphere of government in giving our people a better
life. Local government, it has been said, is the sphere of government
closest to the people. It is felt on a daily basis, and in terms as
practical as the availability or nonavailability of such basic necessities
as water and electricity. For that reason, its success or failure is also
regarded as a success or failure of the other two spheres of government.

Given this mammoth task, the question is: What role can organised local
government play in ensuring that municipalities fulfil the mandate flowing
from the resultant challenges? At its national conference this year, Salga
reflected on the strategic role that organised local government can play.

Based on that, a strategy informed by the following critical factors was
adopted: inadequate capacity for the implementation and management of new
systems and functions of local government; the need for councillors to
demonstrate leadership in municipal planning and decision-making; the
financial viability of some of the municipalities, including newly
demarcated ones; large disparities in resources and capacities between
municipalities, translating into varied requests for support from Salga;
the threat posed to the sustainability of municipalities by infrastructural
backlog, whose genesis lies in the apartheid system; major interventions
required for rural development and urban renewal; the challenge of
providing free basic services; and the entrenchment of public participation
and accountability.

Our plans for the next financial year are strongly influenced by the above,
and are founded on our understanding of our mandate, referred to earlier.
Key to our programme are the following strategic objectives: increasing
effectiveness and efficiency to enhance the level of quality of service to
our members; ensuring the sustainability of organised local government by
enhancing its financial, administrative and political position; fostering
the policies, strategies, operational integration and cohesion of national
and provincial components; supporting and facilitating capacity-building
within municipalities; entrenching and expanding the role of organised
local government in human resource management and development within the
local government sphere; positioning organised local government at the
centre of its knowledge and information management; positioning organised
local government as the hub of co-ordination and interface with
municipalities; supporting and facilitating social and economic
development; proactively representing local government through effective
intergovernmental relations, advocacy and policy implementation; and
supporting and consolidating the transformation of local government through
the development of policies and best practices.

This programme, informed as it is by the challenges of integrating
previously separate and disparate municipalities, will necessarily be
costly in human resource and systems development terms. It calls for high-
level programmes and design and management skills. It demands project
management skills of a high order. It requires solid communication
strategies and the consequent communication management skills. It needs
organisational design experts to advise our constituent municipalities.
Seasoned, trained practitioners will be necessary to educate councillors
about the intricacies of the system and how to harness these for
development.

Through this programme, Salga will, while modernising its own systems and
procedures, concomitantly transfer such experience and knowledge to its
constituency, enhancing the delivery mandate of local government in the
process. Our municipalities are faced with challenges of integrated
development, integrated budgets, information technology, and common and
electronic-based billing systems produced at levels below the current
average of R30,00 per bill. They have to roll out infrastructure for the
extension of free basic amounts of water and electricity to previously
excluded communities.

They have to establish ward committees and evolve legally obligatory,
ongoing consultative and communication mechanisms with their communities.
They also have to establish their own portfolio committees. More
importantly, though, they have to capacitate these committees accordingly,
if the committees are to fulfil their intended role.

They have to create and implement credit control systems, which will
improve service payment levels, so that there are adequate resources for
infrastructural maintenance and further development. They have to foster
economic development, job creation and poverty alleviation.

All these challenges will need a certain amount of common leadership and
points of advice and guidance. Technical expertise will be required.
Experts outside of Salga and municipalities will have to be engaged.
Workshops, seminars and conferences will have to be held ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr B J TOLO (Mpumalanga): Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister,
maybe I should, at this stage, also congratulate the Deputy Minister on her
appointment. We are looking forward to working with her in the department.

MECs present here and members of this honourable House, it is our greatest
pleasure to be part of the Department of Provincial and Local Government
budget review process in the NCOP this afternoon. This is so because it
happens at a challenging and interesting time in the history of local
government in this, our country. The December 5 elections are now behind
us, and we are now faced with the task of establishing these new
municipalities which are to be different in many respects from the ones we
had hitherto.

The main brief of the municipalities we had before the December elections
was just that of service delivery. Over and above service delivery, our
present municipalities have assumed a new mantle, that of being
developmental in their nature. This is a tall order for our municipalities,
especially those in the rural areas.
For our rural municipalities to live up to their constitutional mandate,
our task as provinces, as well as that of the national Government, through
the Department of Provincial and Local Government, should go beyond
ordinary support and monitoring, under otherwise normal circumstances. If
we do not do that, our rural municipalities will never be able to achieve
sustainable development, with the aim of eliminating poverty, thus creating
a better life for the people they serve.

As the province of Mpumalanga, we can report here that we are committed to
working hand in glove with the national Government to make these
municipalities work, so that they are able to better the lives of the
people they serve.

We want to address ourselves to some specific challenges that we face as
the Mpumalanga provincial government in relation to municipalities. These
are challenges that we need to tackle immediately, if transformation and
service delivery are to be meaningful in our province and, indeed, in the
whole country.

I now come to the establishment of municipalities. In most of the areas
that fell under bantustans there were no municipalities before the advent
of democracy in our country in 1994. The local government functions were
performed by the bantustan departments of public works, in some, and by the
Department of Home Affairs in others. This resulted in the lack of basic
municipal infrastructure such as offices and basic machinery for street
maintenance. This therefore means that it will be impossible for such
councils to grade or even maintain a street that leads to a school or a
clinic.

In other instances, in areas in our province such as Kanyamazane and
Kabokweni in Mpumalanga, people who are mobile park their cars some 100
metres away from their homes due to inaccessibility of the streets. We are
saying this because we want the approach to funding to discriminate in
favour of such municipalities. We want to hasten to say that this situation
is a legacy of apartheid because services in those areas were of an
inferior standard, and we are faced with the task of correcting the
situation.

Another problem related to the above is the question of cross-border
municipalities. This honourable House will be aware of the fact that, as
Mpumalanga, we have categories A, B and C cross-boundary municipalities
with both the Northern Province and Gauteng. The agreement between us and
the respective provinces is that there is joint political responsibility
and administration. On the surface, joint administration seems to be easy,
but its practical implementation is a different ball game altogether.

Our understanding is that there is cross-boundary activity with regard to
municipal functions alone. Other government services are undertaken by the
respective provinces. A cross-boundary category B municipality, in our
view, must be seen to be a functional unit. Even the people in that
municipality must see themselves as one. But because they are getting
services like health and others from different provinces, there are bound
to be differences because policies in the different provinces may not
necessarily coincide. For instance, I am also responsible for traffic and
traffic control in the province. If one has this kind of situation it may
lead to a point where one might have cars in a cross-boundary municipality
registered in two provinces. In our situation we have to register them in
both Gauteng and Mpumalanga. We think that it is an anomaly.

Another anomaly happened early this year when the provincial local
government associations were formed. They were asking: ``Where should we
affiliate? Should we affiliate in the Northern Province, Mpumalanga or
both?'' These are some of the practical problems that this question of
cross-boundary municipalities has. These are teething problems and we hope
that they will be sorted out as time goes on.

The existence of a consolidated municipal infrastructure programme goes a
long way in addressing infrastructure backlogs in our province and we have
no doubt that the same applies to other provinces as well. It also goes a
long way in addressing the problem of joblessness as many people, through
this programme, are able to put food on the table for their children. We
are advocating a substantial increase in funding for this programme if we
are to, once and for all, get rid of the bucket system that is still
prevalent in towns like Amersfoort, Amsterdam and many other towns in our
province.

We also want to remind this House that there is not a single white person
using the bucket system in Mpumalanga and I am sure that this applies also
in other provinces. It is a legacy of apartheid.

The Government's policy of free basic services is a good one which, as
Mpumalanga, we have unreservedly embraced. It is clear, even to the
doubting Thomases, that this Government is a caring one. But unfortunately,
for some people, especially in rural areas, whom this policy is meant to
help, the policy will remain a mirage for quite some time. This is so
because many of these people do not have access to a basic supply of water,
for instance. If they do not have the basic supply it is therefore
impossible for us to give them the basic free water. It means therefore
that we must, as we are doing, first roll out these services to the people
before we can realise this very important policy.

As Mpumalanga, we are fortunate that traditional leaders in municipalities
like Marble Hall, Groblersdal and Luthuli, and district councils like
Sekhukhune and Eastvaal have decided and are participating in the
proceedings of their respective municipalities in accordance with the Local
Government: Municipal Structures Act. We want to publicly thank these
traditional leaders for having decided to put the interests of their
communities before their own selfish interests. We thank them for having
realised that there is no way in which they can enhance the development of
their subjects by staying away from those councils.

We have no doubt in our minds that, through our continued engagement with
those who have not yet participated, they will in due course do so.

The only small problem with regard to traditional leaders is the fact that
the law allows us to pay them only out-of-pocket expenses, which, we think,
does not cover sitting allowances. We argue that the law should be changed
so that they get sitting allowances like councillors who come from category
B municipalities into the district municipalities.

Regarding the question of powers and functions, as a province, we have gone
a long way in trying to allocate these powers and functions to different
municipalities. We need also to be aware that this process can only be
completed after two years. On this note, we want to thank the Municipal
Demarcation Board, which has always been on our side when dealing with
matters, especially its chairperson Dr Sutcliffe.
The Mpumalanga provincial government, through the department of local
government, traffic control and traffic safety, is committed to ensuring
that we have strong municipalities capable of fulfilling their functions
and managing their own affairs. But we must also indicate that sometimes,
due to financial constraints, we do not live up to these expectations. Our
departmental budget, this financial year, was cut so that as a whole
government we should be in a position to address the problems that were
faced by the social services departments, which were underbudgeted from
1994.

We are all aware that the national norm is that these departments should
get 85% of the entire provincial cake. In our province, up to now, they
have been given 72%.

We want to thank fraternal countries and organisations, like the European
Union, the Norwegian government and the German Technical Corporation, for
making funds available for us to be able to train councillors and
officials. We can only say that the world wants to see our democracy
succeeding so that, as a nation, we can take our rightful place among the
community of nations as a truly liberated country.
The depth of democracy in any country is measured by the extent to which
local government is developed. In any country, if a despot comes into
power, the first casualty is local government. Let us jealously guard our
democracy by building strong municipalities. [Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I rise in support of Budget Vote No 5. Let me
follow in the footsteps of my colleagues and congratulate the hon the
Deputy Minister on her appointment. I would like to tell her that we
welcome her to the world of local government.

The mission of the Northern Cape department of housing and local government
is to promote, facilitate and monitor effective and efficient local
governance through the achievement of a number of strategic goals.

These strategic goals include continuous service delivery improvements, the
transformation of local government through participatory democracy, the
delivery of municipal services and infrastructure to the disadvantaged
communities and the transformation of our local communities through
integrated planning and development.

To fulfil the above mission and strategic goals, the provincial department
has rationalised its programme structure and restructured its budget to
improve service delivery of the following services and functions: firstly,
strengthening and assisting in transforming the institutions of local
government and ensuring capacity, viability, transparency and good
governance practice; secondly, ensuring better disaster management
readiness of local government institutions; thirdly, facilitating local
government institutions as they prepare integrated development plans within
the context of a provincial framework; fourthly, implementation and quality
control of infrastructure projects; and lastly, preparing and implementing
provincial Bills and regulations pertaining to the development and
functions of local government institutions.

The transition to the new system of local government in the Northern Cape
and in all other provinces has been a very painful, though necessary,
exercise. It has been painful because the process of transformation on
which we have embarked has no parallel internationally. There is no
corresponding system of local government anywhere in the world from which
we can learn and draw lessons. Yet this is a process which was necessitated
by the extreme inequalities which resulted from our previous system of
local government.

The previous system of local government paid no regard whatsoever to the
people for whom it was intended. Our townships and localities were built
without adequate infrastructure, such as roads. We were not situated in
close proximity to major centres of economic activity and to social
amenities.

Parents had to wake up at three in the morning to go to work, and arrived
home at ten at night. In such a situation there was little room for family
interaction and parental guidance, which resulted in children dropping out
of school or becoming involved in crime. Decisions which affected
communities, such as increases in rates, were taken without consultation
with the affected communities and were forced down their throats.

With the new system of local government, we are trying to eradicate these
inequalities. A defining feature of the new system is the space it offers
ordinary people to become actively involved in governance. It also gives
expression to the notion in the Constitution of developmental local
government. This means that local government is not just an important site
for the delivery of services, but is crucial to the economic and social
development of our people.

Fundamental to fulfilling this developmental role is the requirement of the
new system for all municipalities to adopt integrated development plans.
Essentially, an IDP sets out the vision, needs, priorities, goals and
strategies of municipal councils to develop the municipality during its
term of office, as part of a long-term vision and plan for development.

The Northern Cape department of housing and local government has embarked
on a campaign to encourage communities to have a say in both the content of
the IDP and the process by which it is drafted in the various
municipalities. I am glad to announce that a number of municipalities in
the Northern Cape have already started to initiate local economic
development projects as part of their respective integrated development
plans.

The municipalities of Garies, Douglas, Philipstown, Strydenburg, Kimberley,
Riemvasmaak and Pella have already started developmental projects, such as
the construction of informal stalls and industrial hives for SMMEs; the
recycling of waste products to produce kerbs, gravel and paving; the
plantation of lucerne and olives; and even the establishment of fish farms
and tourism projects.

In addition to this, five municipalities in our province, namely Barkly
West, Concordia, Keimoes, Port Nolloth and Richmond, are in the process of
conducting local economic regeneration studies. From the above, it is clear
that the Northern Cape has moved quite rapidly in implementing the new
system of local government. But because transformation of local government
in the Northern Cape is still in its infancy stage, we will, necessarily,
experience problems in its transition to maturity.

We therefore appreciate the assistance given to us by the Minister for
Provincial and Local Government in providing R8,9 million for the local
government transitional fund of our municipalities to assist them in their
transition periods.

In conclusion, regarding ward committees and public participation, we have
a situation in the Northern Cape in which one will find that each and every
municipality has its own format of how to structure ward committees. I
would like to say to the Minister that I think it is about time for us to
perhaps look at regulations so that we can have some uniformity as to how
these ward committees must be established and how they are going to
function. I think that will assist us a great deal.

With regard to the monitoring role of the NCOP as far as local government
is concerned, I think one can do more work in this regard, because this
institution is the ideal House to deal with these kinds of interventions.
Even if it comes to early warning systems, I think the NCOP can play a
major role.

In conclusion, I want to thank the Minister and his officials for the co-
operation that they have given us. They are always there with us, and we
wish them well. [Applause.]

Mr E T VEZI (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister,
MECs present and colleagues, in examining this budget and its objectives,
one is pleased to note that the rationale behind it is one of strengthening
and improving local and provincial government. This is an admirable
objective, particularly in view of the positive effect that it will have on
strengthening intergovernmental relations.

By streamlining the system of transfer of the fiscal aspects from central
Government to provincial and municipal government, there can only be a
distinct improvement in the equity of the proportion stakeholders will
enjoy. Furthermore, the fewer steps taken in this process, the less the
chances of corruption become. Although there will be an initial necessary
budgetary increase in order to service the key objectives and programmes
being implemented by the department of Provincial and Local Government, we
are already beginning to see dividends from these initiatives, in terms of
the increasing efficiency of local government and the beginning of a
positive surge in employment in the areas involved.

These forward-looking plans are being formulated in a way that takes into
account any log jams that may be encountered along the way. The many prongs
of this initiative can only lead us into a future that becomes ever more
secure and which ensures that all areas develop at an equal rate.

The money spent on this development now will bring dividends of security
and wellbeing to our entire nation. If we work patiently according to the
plans and have faith in the success of this long-term enterprise, we can
only look to a bright future. With those few words, I support the Budget
Vote. [Applause.]

Mr L S GABELA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister,
MECs present and members present, it is with pride that achievements
leading to the 5 December local government elections brought about an end
to the racial divide in terms of boundaries that determined our councils.
Indeed, all formations put before the electorate manifestoes serve as the
summary of respective proposed programmes for the next five years. Without
doubt, our people look forward to the realisation of the said promises.
Commitment and responsibility on the part of the elected representatives
must be realised through work done that meaningfully impacts on the lives
of the poor.

In this regard, I would like to quickly comment on concerns surrounding the
role, relationship and powers of traditional leaders which have to do with
local government.

This is an issue that requires to be handled with great sensitivity and
responsibility. In doing so, however, we must not allow those who want to
make a mockery out of nothing to succeed.

The poor still expect much to be done in changing their lives for the
better. These are mainly poor women in rural areas. Even though they may
have a choice of which political formation they vote for, I can tell hon
members that for some, getting access to clean water, electricity and jobs
to get them going matters more than matters related to a political
conscience.

Local government has a duty to positively make an impact on the lives of
the rural poor. All this is more important to them than which political
formation facilitates the realisation of these services. Political
affiliation is less important, as long as there is betterment in their
lives.

At the point where we are anxiously waiting for local government to make an
impact on our programme of speeding up delivery, it is disturbing to learn
that there are people who want to derail the process towards the
realisation of the dreams of our people. It is most embarrassing that there
are people who have been elected for this duty. I here want to condemn
unequivocally councillors who participate in processes that seek to go as
far as setting ultimatums for Government. They have been elected to deliver
on their promises, yet they engage in petty, political, opportunistic
activities. We are not going to accept this.

Laws and regulations governing local governments will have to be put into
effect. There are those of us who believe in the betterment of the lives of
the poor. They will always be there and it may even mean that we must
declare by-elections in some instances. Some of us will be there to contest
the election and serve the people.

In conclusion, let me raise two issues briefly. We would like to know what
is happening, because we are dissatisfied with the delay on issues related
to the legislative framework on municipal finance management processes. I
am aware that a process was started last year. There was some consultation
at provincial level and now nothing is happening.

I also want to raise a point in relation to municipalities that have no
ratepayers. I recognise the point in the presentation by the Minister that
there are programmes under way to address this problem. It is only through
a holistic approach that we will be in a position to address this problem,
because we have municipalities that have no rate base. This is not our
creation, but we have a responsibility to make a point of it that these
municipalities, in the long term, are able to run on their own. [Applause.]

Mnr J HORNE: Voorsitter, agb Minister en ook die nuutaangestelde
adjunkminister, ontvang ons dank. Ons wens u alle sterkte toe op die pad
vorentoe.

Plaaslike regering is en bly die belangrikste vlak van regering. Indien
plaaslike regering doeltreffend funksioneer, lei dit tot die suksesvolle
werking van die provinsiale en nasionale regerings. In di√© opsig het die
Departement van Plaaslike Regering gepoog om die nuutgestigte
munisipaliteite te stabiliseer en die samesmelting glad te laat verloop.

Daar moet egter kennis geneem word dat, alhoewel die samevoeging nou ten
volle afgehandel is, dit 'n lang pad is alvorens munisipaliteite tot hul
reg sal kom sover dit dienslewering betref.

Die samesmeltingsproses, soos voorgehou in wetgewing, word egter gekortwiek
omdat munisipaliteite nie die finansi√´le vermo√´ het om die proses ten volle
in werking te stel nie. Hiermee word bedoel dat die nuwe plaaslike owerhede
meer kantoorruimte nodig het en rekenaars opgegradeer moet word. Dit alles
is kostedoeltreffend. Wat kommerwekkend is, is dat die betalingskultuur n√°
die afgelope verkiesing gekenmerk word deur 'n insinking wat 'n nadelige
uitwerking op die bedryfsbegroting van plaaslike regerings het. Dit is 'n
landswye neiging.

Provinsiale regerings sal nougeset moet let op genoemde feite, anders sal
die verwagtings wat vir die nuwe munisipaliteite gekoester word, nooit
realiseer nie. Ons vertrou die ge√Øntegreerde, volhoubare landelike
ontwikkelingstrategie en die stedelike vernuwingstrategie sal di√© probleme
aanpak.

Dit sal gepas wees as die Minister meer duidelikheid kan verskaf oor die
moontlike verandering van provinsiale grense, aangesien hy in sy verslag
daarvan melding gemaak het met verwysing na munisipaliteite wat oor
provinsiale grense strek. Die vraag ontstaan of slegs sekere dele van
provinsiale grense hersien gaan word, waar en wanneer dit gaan gebeur en of
provinsies wat daardeur geraak word, vroegtydig in kennis gestel sal word.

Wat gratis basiese dienste betref, het plaaslike regerings nie voldoende
geld nie, veral in die landelike gebiede, en kan dit alleen geskied as meer
IOT-geld toegeken word. Hoe groter die toekenning uit die fonds, hoe groter
die bydrae wat gemaak kan word tot die lewering van basiese dienste aan
mense met 'n maandelikse inkomste van minder as R800.

Ons hoop die vrese en kommer van tradisionele leiers sal so spoedig
moontlik besweer word sodat die werksaamhede van plaaslike regerings in
volle gang kan voortgaan.

Ten slotte vertrou ons dat die Minister en sy departement die begroting sal
bedryf en bestuur soos omskryf en ons wens hulle sterkte daarmee toe.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J HORNE: Chairperson, hon Minister as well as the newly appointed
Deputy Minister, receive our thanks. We wish you everything of the best on
the road ahead.

Local government is and remains the most important level of government. If
local government functions effectively, this brings about successful
functioning of the provincial and national governments. In this respect the
Department of Provincial and Local Government endeavoured to stabilise the
newly established municipalities and to facilitate their smooth
amalgamation.

One should take note, however, that although the amalgamation has now been
successfully completed, there is a long way to go before municipalities
will come into their own as far as service delivery is concerned.

The amalgamation process, as proposed in legislation, is hampered, however,
because municipalities do not have the financial capability of putting the
process into operation fully. By this I mean that the new local authorities
require larger office space and that their computers must be upgraded. All
this is cost-effective. What gives cause for concern is that after the
recent election the culture of payment is characterised by a decline, which
has a detrimental effect on the operational budget of local governments.
This is a countrywide trend.

Provincial governments will have to note the aforementioned facts
carefully, or the expectations that exist in respect of the new
municipalities will never be realised. We trust that the Integrated
Sustainable Rural Development Strategy and the Urban Renewal Strategy will
tackle these problems.

It would be appropriate for the Minister to provide greater clarity
concerning the possible changes to the provincial borders, seeing that he
made mention of it in his report, with reference to municipalities that
stretch across provincial borders. The question arises whether only certain
parts of provincial borders are going to be reviewed, where and when this
is going to take place and whether the affected provinces will be notified
in good time.
As regards free basic services, local governments do not have sufficient
money, especially in the rural areas and this can only take place if more
economic development money is allocated. The larger the allocations from
the fund, the larger the contribution that could be made to delivering
basic services to people with a monthly income of less than R800.

We hope that the fears and concern of traditional leaders will be allayed
as speedily as possible so that the activities of local governments can
continue at full tilt.

In conclusion, we trust that the Minister and his department will operate
and manage the budget as defined, and we wish them everything of the best
in their endeavour. [Applause.]]

Mr J MASWANGANYI (Northern Province): Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy
Minister, MECs present, members of the House, let me join my colleagues who
commended the Minister's policy debate and congratulate the hon Botha on
her appointment as Deputy Minister.

Our province is delighted with the prospects that 2001-02 holds for us.
This is so in the light of the enormous challenges and tasks in the current
financial year and beyond. We have made a breakthrough in the finalisation
and establishment of districts and local municipal structures. We have in
the interim also finalised the decentralisation of powers and functions to
municipalities. This we have done to ensure that our people get the
services that they require in as prompt and efficient a manner as possible.

Our allocated budget will therefore be utilised to champion this noble
objective, bearing in mind that we continue to face increasing demands for
the provision of quality and speedy delivery of services against shrinking
budgets.

In the midst of this transitional phase, we continue to face enormous
challenges that have major financial implications, and that I now turn to
address.

We are currently engaged in a process of regional and district boundary
realignment that is aimed at phasing out regional operations in support of
district municipalities. This will also ensure a well co-ordinated
institutional arrangement, at both district and local level, capable of
responding effectively to its mandate.

The need for institutional realignment also implies that we need to
speedily conclude the transfer of 2 866 regional staff members to
municipalities. Our record shows that out of 2 866 staff members we have
already transferred 2 454. We are left with 412 to be transferred before
the end of this financial year.

Most critical is that we still have an obligation to pay the leave
gratuities of about 1 823 staff members. In addition to this are the
outstanding payments for promotion and for the second and third notches.
The estimated total amount for payment is around R43 million. The budget
allocated is utilised to make provision for the establishment and
capacitation process of district and local municipalities. We have already
seconded a number of officials to assist with development and planning at
municipal level. Coupled with this is the challenge of deploying competent
leadership and skilled staff to ensure quality and speedy delivery of
services.

In order for us to accomplish this task, we need to ensure the deployment
of leadership and employment of skilled staff at municipal level. Where our
municipalities lack competent staff and the necessary resources to deliver
services, for example fire-fighting, water and electrical services, we
definitely require a transfer of staff and assets from national and
provincial departments to local and district municipalities. For this to
happen, we also need to develop and to work on an agreed and acceptable
transfer of staff and assets framework.

All these envisaged responsibilities raise serious budgetary obligations
for the provincial government, and the case for additional financial
assistance is a given.

Regarding disaster management, we would like to commend the national
Government's prompt response to the damage caused by the flood disaster
during February and March last year. [Interjections.] We want to inform
this House that there are many reconstruction projects taking place in the
province, including houses being built in rural areas, bridges and other
public infrastructure.

I also want to indicate that our responsibility for disaster management
goes beyond the establishment of disaster management units and a disaster
management centre, to the actual capacitation of municipalities to manage
disaster.

I want to mention the fact that we have highly respected and visionary
traditional leaders in the Northern Province. During the previous financial
year our department met with Contralesa, and came out of that meeting with
a memorandum of agreement on the participation of traditional leaders in
municipalities. Following that meeting our traditional leaders also met
with the President, Thabo Mbeki, on 27 April 2001. He has promised to meet
them again to discuss, amongst other issues, their role in municipal
councils.

On Tuesday last week, during the sitting of the house of traditional
leaders, traditional leaders emerged victoriously with a concrete decision
to confirm their commitment and willingness for continued participation in
municipal councils, compared to the wave of boycotts in other provinces. We
do not have boycotts in our province. This decision was made out of their
own conviction, commitment and love for the development of their own
country, province and localities where they live.

In support of our traditional leaders, and in view of the progress we have
made, our department has already commenced with special programmes for
capacity-building in legislative, financial and information technology
issues. In supporting the capacity-building initiative, we have, for this
financial year, allocated R2 million for the installation of computers in
tribal offices. Tribal offices can now be used as service points so that
our rural masses do not have to travel long distances to offices in towns
where they have to apply for birth certificates, death certificates and
other services. They need only walk short distances and get services at
tribal offices.

However, there is a concern that the Minister would have to address. This
concern is the sitting allowance of traditional leaders compared to the out-
of-pocket allowance. We appeal to the Minister to attend to this concern so
that our traditional leaders can participate effectively in municipalities.
However, we also want to condemn the self-appointed spokespersons of
traditional leaders who want traditional leaders to boycott municipalities.
This we condemn. [Interjections.]

We want to thank the Department of Provincial and Local Government for
allocating the transitional fund to assist with the establishment and
resourcing of municipalities. We also want to appeal to the Minister to
lead the debate with other Ministers that the issue of capacity-building
and support to local government should not only be restricted to DPLG and
the local government departments in provinces. It is an issue for all
national departments and provincial departments.

As the Northern Province we believe that the 2001-02 budget will bring a
qualitative change to the lives of our people, and in particular to those
of the rural masses.

We support the debate of the budget as presented by the Minister.

Mr B M KHOMPELA (Free State): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, I rise on behalf of the Free State legislature and the province
to support the noble idea put forward by the Minister. We are grateful that
we are led by a visionary, otherwise we, as the Free State, would not be
here. He is a visionary as he serves the masses of the people who do not
have food. [Interjections.]

What municipalities in the Free State want to achieve will determine what
services they provide and how those services will be provided. To this
extent all 25 municipalities in the Free State have undertaken a strategic
planning session that underpins the integration of all existing integrated
development plans of the former transitional councils.

The process of fulfilling this has been very comprehensive and very tiring.
We hope this process will commence during July 2001. The Department of
Provincial and Local Government has already issued guidelines to assist
municipalities in this regard. A training programme will be undertaken by
the national and the provincial departmental officials to further ensure
that municipalities have developed goals informed by good strategies in
order to achieve these goals.

Whilst the specific Chapter 6 in the Local Government: Municipal Systems
Act will only commence in July 2002, it is gratifying to note that three
municipalities in the Free State, namely Mangaung local council, Maluti-a-
Phofung local council and the Northern Free State district municipality
will be piloted for the performance management system in the Free State
during 2001-02. [Interjections.] The Department of Provincial and Local
Government will be providing capacity for these municipalities for training
and for finalising the process of the performance management system.

The division of powers and functions between local and district
municipalities in the Free State is on track. We do not have a major
problem, nor a teething problem. It is going very well. We are very careful
to ensure, on a permanent basis, that when those problems arise, we will be
able to give guidance to the powers and functions so that they do not
create problems.

The all-inclusive consultative process undertaken by the Municipal
Demarcation Board has ensured that all role-players and stakeholders are on
board with this process. As soon as the Municipal Demarcation Board has
submitted its recommendation to the provincial MEC responsible for local
government, a proclamation will be issued in this regard. This is expected
to take place by the end of this year.
The division of powers and functions is strongly linked to the capacity of
the municipality to perform specific functions. In our view, municipalities
therefore have to be capacitated to assume these major responsibilities of
powers and functions prescribed by the law.

The Free State wants to draw the attention of the Minister to the fact that
specific attention needs to be given to the district municipality of
Xhariep. At present, the Xhariep district municipality is nowhere. We have
taken a district municipality where there was no life. Xhariep was not
there, because these very same people do not have even an office in which
to operate. It is only dust there, which was not created by the system that
we are trying to put into place. But that dust, poverty and unemployment
were created by the system that today we are busy designing for our people
to be able to get their dignity.

I would like to tell the Minister that it sometimes takes local councillors
in the Xhariep district 15 days after the month end before they receive
allowances, which many other people call for even before the end of the
month.

Key amongst governance issues is the relationship between the municipality,
the residents and the organs of civil society, which we are also taking
care of. Both the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act and the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Act require municipalities to facilitate the
participation of local organisations in the affairs of municipalities.

Municipalities should also establish other mechanisms that will enable
communities to participate in the affairs of their society.

The newly established municipalities should be urged to get connected, so
that, at least, information technology will link people with the outside
world.

They should develop the idea of e-government, which will enable them to get
information around capacity-building and on how other local authorities are
able to run on their own. They must be able to draw something constructive
from that kind of information. Therefore information technology is a key
for other municipalities to be able to emulate that kind of work.

Lastly, the local government transformation programme should evaluate this
project with a view to providing much-needed assistance for municipalities
in the Free State. In the Free State we push for excellence, even against
the odds. [Applause.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, the nature of municipal boundary delineation
focused on the fulfilment of constitutional obligations such as the
provision of essential services in an equitable and sustainable manner.
However, the majority of the communities in the Northern Province have not
yet realised this service. The contacts made with some of the communities
like Lenyenye, Nkowankowa, Makhado, and Dwarsloop reveal that households
receive water supplies on an intermittent basis.

It was alleged that the water supply rates are inconsistent, and are more
reasonable in big towns like Pietersburg than in rural towns like Tzaneen.
Municipalities lag behind with regard to the roles they are supposed to
play in the land reform programme. This could be due to the financial
constraints that most of the municipalities experience.

Our study visits to the provinces, especially in KwaZulu-Natal recently,
discovered that after the successful acquisition of land by the claimants,
the challenge for the provision of the infrastructure arises. Since these
pieces of land eventually form an integral part of the municipal area of
jurisdiction, municipalities should be equally responsible for the
channelling of some of these resources towards infrastructure provision.

I would like to touch on another sensitive issue here, and that is the
politicisation of the delivery process by some of our municipal
councillors. Utterances such as, I quote, `` No services should be brought
to your area because you did not vote for x political party,'' are a
problem. We should bear in mind that while two elephants are engaged in a
heavy fight, it is the grass that suffers.

May I make a brief comment on the issue of traditional institutions? These
institutions have been with the blacks since time immemorial. The majority
of the black population in South Africa are still under the authority of
these institutions. They are part of our black culture.

The colonial government found these institutions, here in Africa, and
traditional leaders were exploited and manipulated in the interests of the
colonial governments. Humiliating titles such as ``headman'', ``subchief''
and ``kaptein'' were coined to serve their interests.

The present Government is, perhaps, their last hope to get their legitimate
status, dignity and integrity restored, particularly given the fact that
the majority of those who govern today originated from these institutions.
One homeland leader once said: ``If Mangope could do it, why can't I do
it?''[Laughter.] This is basically the concern of traditional leaders.
Consider Chief Madlala's case. He managed to bring the bulk water scheme to
more than 15 000 households in Mzube on the south coast of KwaZulu-Natal.
Chief Madlala uttered the following, and I quote him from Business Day of 4
June 2001:


  If elected councillors can be allowed to take total control of it, then
  it is only them who will get recognition. People will ask at the end of
  five years what councillors have done, and they will point out: What
  about amakhosi? Nothing. How would you justify the existence of your
  chieftaincy when you are doing nothing?
I am leaving the Minister with this innocent question. Are there specific
reasons for not recognising traditional institutions as an integral part of
the executive and legislative authority of a municipality? [Applause.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, MECs, special
delegates and colleagues, I had thought that the hon Lever and his ``Dom
Alliance'' would join us in this Budget Vote with their hands, like ours,
facing upwards, without any hidden agenda on how to accelerate the mammoth
task of solidifying the foundation of a democratic order. I, together with
my party, which is the ANC, had hoped that what dominated our debate would
be issues of fundamental political importance guided by a clear
understanding of our commitment to the total transformation of the local
government structures.

Mr Lever must realise that if we acted in this manner, we would be
empowered to remain focused on the immediate challenges that were ushered
in by our hard-fought democracy, and this debate would then be conducted in
an atmosphere of honesty, frankness and openness.

The democratic local government elections on 5 December 2000 unleashed a
barrage of challenges that would have to be overcome so as to allow us to
continue to be active participants in the process of creating strong local
government structures.

I was disappointed by Mr Lever, who is also from my province, because today
he, like his colleagues in the DA, decided again to parade his face, which
is not so beautiful, in front of us, knowing perfectly well that what he
was saying was tantamount to trying to mix water with oil.

For decades the majority was condemned to abject poverty, fear, insecurity
... [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for a
member to refer to another member's looks? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I will look into whether it is
parliamentary or not, Mr Raju.

Mr N M RAJU: I strongly object to that kind of reference.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Continue, Mr Maloyi.

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chairperson, I am standing before you, because I believe
that it is my duty, amongst others, to assist people like Mr Lever and Mr
Raju who are suffering from a serious disease called verbal diarrhoea.

For decades, the majority was condemned to abject poverty, fear and
insecurity, and without any say in determining the future of our
communities. Many of our people in the apartheid era were forcibly
relocated to the far edges of the urban communities and to the remote rural
areas. It is in these areas that poverty affects the people the most. This
is especially true in the rural areas, where the majority of our population
are women, but also in small towns and secondary cities.

We have been given a rare and historic opportunity to transform local
government to meet the challenges of this century. We have embarked on a
policy process that will give effect to a new vision of local government.
Ever since the first local government elections transitional local
government structures, particularly in nonmetropolitan areas, have had to
face not only the challenges of poverty, but also a range of problems
associated with apartheid local government.

They inherited highly unrepresentative and administratively fragmented
structures. This has made restructuring and transformation very difficult.
These difficulties were generated by obstacles such as limited funding and
a vision which was not so clear and was, obviously, pushed by the DA and
its allies.

Resources and capacity were generally not directed to areas of great need,
and there was not always effective local representation. Many councillors
felt disempowered and alienated.

Dikalajane tse di a tla fa gompieno di tla go re bolelela gore di itse
sengwenyana ka puso semorafe, ga di itse sepe. [These crooks come here
today to tell us that they know something about local government, they know
nothing.]

Approximately 80% of municipalities nationally, have completed their
interim IDPs as part of facilitating the post-December local government
elections, amalgamation and restructuring process. Integrated development
planning forms the basis for a range of key national priority programmes
like the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Strategy and the Urban
Renewal Strategy.

Our new local government system is very different from the one we were
subjected to under apartheid, of which the DP was part. Municipalities are
now responsible for providing democratic and accountable government for
local communities.

The White Paper on Local Government and the legislation that has come from
it provide us with the tools to make this new system a reality. The Local
Government: Municipal Structures Act and the Local Government: Municipal
Systems Act give us guidance on how to set up structures and processes to
ensure that public participation occurs at a local level, and that our
officials and councillors, and also traditional leaders, I would add for Mr
Nyakane's benefit, are held accountable for their actions.

This level of local government is one which we cannot afford to abandon.
Hope was a rare commodity during the apartheid period, but under this new
era of democracy, it is no more an illusion. We should never despair,
because one day we will achieve what we want - a better life for all our
people.

Obviously old mistakes are never repeated. Why should we repeat an old
mistake in a new situation? I think that we all agree when I say that the
old, under the NP government, and the new Government, led by President
Thabo Mbeki, are as distinct as water and stone. We have a vision that is
pleasant. It is reflective of our unfortunate past, but is also of great
importance. It illustrates what the future would look like. [Applause.]

Mr G E NKWINTI (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy
Minister, may I join my colleagues before me in welcoming the Deputy
Minister and wishing her good luck.

Colleagues and hon members of the House, I would like to just highlight a
few points in support of the Minister's budget speech, with reference to
experiences in our province.

A major change in mind-set is essential for the three major role-players
which constitute municipalities. They have to work as a team so as to
ensure the development and upliftment of all people in their jurisdictions.
These are communities' elected councillors and municipal officials.

There are related challenges in the following: the creation of a conducive
environment by councillors to effect full community participation in all
service delivery activities; the realisation and acknowledgement by,
especially, councillors that they form part of an institution vested with
political power to effect major changes from the legacy of the past; the
realisation by communities that they shoulder as much responsibility for
the success or failure of their municipality now as their elected
representatives; councillor accountability to the communities; and linking
developmental local government to developmental financial planning and
management.

In pursuit of local government transformation, the department has the
following elements and programmes, amongst others: the division of powers
and functions, integrated development planning and plans, capacity-building
and training, and institutional capacity-building.

With regard to the division of powers and functions, we have worked closely
with the Municipal Demarcation Board and we have held extensive workshops
with municipalities and reached agreement on a framework to determine the
authorisation of powers and functions for local and district
municipalities. The board has made recommendations and we have evaluated
and concurred with all of them.

We have put together a draft authorisation in terms of section¬†18 of the
Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, and we are ready for formal
consultations with Salga in the Eastern Cape, the Municipal Demarcation
Board, and the Minister for Provincial and Local Government.

The department in our province, the Municipal Demarcation Board and the
Department of Provincial and Local Government will have to agree on a
scientific technique to determine capacity in local and district
municipalities. This is important because we are of the view that we need
to develop plans for capacity-building to ensure the ability on the part of
these municipalities to carry out the powers and functions allocated to
them by law.

With regard to integrated development planning, the status quo is that
municipalities have completed their interim IDPs. The aim is to link
development programmes, including establishment plans, to the Budget for
the 2001-02 financial year. With regard to phase 2 of the IDP process, with
the assistance and support of the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, we are taking steps to ready our municipalities for the next
phase of the IDP process, including local economic development.

With regard to capacity-building and training programmes, there is great
unevenness in capacity across our municipalities, with varied needs for
intervention on our part. For example, the municipality that was not
mentioned directly by the hon Mr Bhabha, Mnquma, which is partly under
Butterworth, really requires what we referred to as a very high level of
intervention. We have 10 municipalities that need high-level intervention,
eight municipalities which need medium-level intervention, five
municipalities needing low-level to medium-level intervention and five
municipalities that need low-level intervention. Of course, we have eight
municipalities that, at least in the short term, can do without any
intervention.

There are four district municipalities which need medium-level to high-
level intervention, especially in the following areas: the institutional
framework; strategic leadership; IT and financial management; and the
eradication of backlogs in preparation for the introduction of GAMAP at the
beginning of the 2002-03 municipal financial year.

To assist in strengthening the capacity of the municipalities, we have
reached, as a department, an agreement with Salga, Eastern Cape, because it
has the capacity to train and we the finances to fund such training. This
is one way of assisting Salga, Eastern Cape, on our part. Salga has
submitted a business plan and we are working out financial transfers and
monitoring mechanisms together.

With regard to institution-building, the department is engaging district
municipalities to develop a demand-driven programme, to be implemented
within this current financial year, and the department has made provision
for this in terms of funding.

With regard to traditional leaders' participation, we have, in terms of
legislation, invited the provincial house of traditional leaders to submit
names of traditional leaders to serve on municipal councils, where this is
provided for in law. The house has failed even to acknowledge receipt of
such an invitation. It did, however, discuss it and decided not to do
anything about it. I have now invited heads of all 10 regional authorities
in the province to submit these names, and some have already phoned back to
say that they are busy identifying these.

We are looking forward to these patriots participating in the processes of
improving the quality of life of their subjects, in partnership with the
Government. [Applause.]

Mr P UYS (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,
hon members, I am grateful for the opportunity to address this House this
afternoon. Our congratulations to Deputy Minister Botha on her appointment.
We really look forward to working with her and, of course, the Minister for
Provincial and Local Government.

Ek wil graag kortliks verwys na die omvormingsproses in die Wes-Kaap, en
ook na die visie wat ons het vir plaaslike regering. Dit is om volhoubare
gehaltediens aan die gemeenskap te lewer, en ook om die lewensgehalte van
al die inwoners van hierdie gebied te bevorder. Dit moet natuurlik
plaasvind met die samewerking van en in vennootskap met die provinsie en
nasionale Regering.

Ons omvorming was ook nie maklik nie, en ek dink dit is die eerste proses
in die hele pad van omvorming, en die eerste hekkie waaroor ons gekom het.
Ons is daaroor en dienslewering het vlot verloop, maar ek dink daar l√™ nog
'n lang pad vorentoe. Ons het een metropolitaanse raad, vyf
distriksmunisipaliteite en 24 plaaslike munisipaliteite. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to briefly refer to the transformation process in the Western
Cape, and also to the vision we have for local government. This is to
deliver sustainable quality service to the community, and also to improve
the quality of life of all the inhabitants of this area. This should, of
course, take place with the co-operation of, and in partnership with, the
province and the national Government.

Our transformation has also not been easy, and I think that this is the
first process on the road to transformation, and the first hurdle we have
overcome. We have overcome this and service delivery has gone smoothly, but
I think there is still a long road ahead of us. We have one metropolitan
council, five district municipalities and 24 local municipalities.]

If I can refer to the support that we give to local government, the first
important issue through our provincial notices is notices 12, 16 and 18,
and we tried to write them as comprehensively as possible, to help and
guide municipalities in that regard. We have also established a provincial
advisory forum within the Western Cape, where we get councillors, officials
and organised local government to help us take the process of
transformation forward.

Ons het ook sekere aspekte aan hulle oorgedra en werkswinkels gehou met
betrekking tot ge√Øntegreerde ontwikkelingsbeplanning, en ek dink dit het
baie suksesvol verloop. [We also communicated certain aspects to them and
ran workshops with regard to integrated development planning, and I think
that was very successful.]

We have interim IDPs for all of our municipalities at this moment, and we
are preparing for the full IDP in the next phase of the budget for local
government.
Daar is ook verskeie werkswinkels gehou, en in besonder met betrekking tot
prestasiebestuur en GOP, wat ek wel genoem het. [Various workshops were
also held, and in particular with regard to performance management and IDP,
which I have, in fact, mentioned.]

At this moment, yes, capacity is needed at some of the local authorities,
but we also get the impression that some of the local authorities think one
likes to evolve the capacity of provincial government. But I think we do it
in partnership, and we do it very well.

I want to emphasise some of the challenges that are generic in the Western
Cape insofar as local and provincial governments and, I believe, our
partner, the national Government, are concerned. These include the division
of powers and functions, and the allocation of staff, assets and
liabilities. We are now in a phase where these must be transferred by 1
July this year, and we are very busy at local government preparing all the
schedules for staff, assets and liabilities. I must say that there are
still one or two differences in the interpretation of the split of powers,
duties and functions. One will always get these differences when it comes
to local government, particularly between the B and C municipalities.
However, we try and give strong guidance in that regard. I must say this is
not divided along political lines ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Could you take
your seat, member? What is your problem?

Mr T B TAABE: Mr Chairperson, will the hon member take a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon member,
are you prepared to take a question?

Mr P UYS: Sorry, Chairperson!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Thank you, proceed.

Mr P UYS: It is a big challenge, not only between political parties, or
even within political parties, this split between B and C municipalities
and the functions thereof.

The second point that I want to raise is the financial challenges that we
face, such as getting valuations for all municipalities.

The question that we pose at provincial and national Government is: Do we
follow the provincial ordinance or the proposed national legislation and
move forward with the valuation of property? I think it is very important
and critical that we now get national legislation in place. Hopefully, that
will happen later this year. However, we do not need to kick-start it with
the municipal ordinance and then later on change to national legislation.

Another important issue is uncertainty from the category A municipality,
the metropolitan, and the C municipality concerning what is going to happen
to the REC levies. Will they disappear, will they remain with our category
C municipalities, and will they have financial support in future?
Transformation costs, we must say, will be very high. But, at the same time
we want to express our appreciation for the transformation funding that is
available at this moment in time, both from provincial government and,
specifically, from the national Government.

The split of the powers and functions between the category B and C
municipalities is going to have major implications. We have been asked when
we will move forward with the four big services, namely water, electricity
and health and, in our case, sanitation and fire as well. I believe that we
will have to wait until at least the next financial year to plan this in a
proper way to keep our local authorities financially viable.

Credit control is still a very important issue, but at the same time we
have to take into consideration delivering services to the poor people and
introducing free water - the six kilolitres and the 20kw of electricity in
the Western Cape.

I would like to congratulate our municipalities who really took up this
commitment and implemented what is necessary here. [Interjections.] That is
not true. On the whole staff issue, I must say, we supported local
government in building capacity in that regard to help them draft
advertisements. We did not dictate to them but we supported their contracts
of employment and remuneration package proposals to staff. That has been
submitted to our different local authorities.
But still a very key outstanding issue is the collective agreement on the
placement and appointment criteria for staff. I believe that this is now
part of the national bargaining process in the hands of Salga. We urge
them, in this regard, to really speed up the process.

Ek wil ook kom by die punt van raadslede en die gedrag van raadslede. Dit
is belangrik dat ons die dissipline reg van die begin af sal toepas, en
wanneer daar oortredings is van die gedragskode, ongeag die politieke party
of die raad, sal die provinsie ook die nodige stappe moet doen. Dit is
trouens ook reeds gedoen. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I also want to turn to the point of councillors and their behaviour. It is
important that we apply discipline from the very beginning, and when there
are transgressions of the code of conduct, irrespective of the political
party or the council, the province will also have to take the necessary
steps. In fact, this has already been done.]

On the salaries and allowances of councillors, I want to thank them very
much for the commitment to a process that leads to putting in place an
increase of salaries and allowances.

Ek weet nie of ek kan saamstem nie en ek weet nie of dit korrek is wat my
kollega die agb lid Africa ges√™ het nie, naamlik dat dit die nasionale
Regering is wat dit gaan betaal. Die belangrike punt wat hier na vore kom,
is dat dit 'n aangeleentheid is wat dringend gehanteer moet word. Ons
verloor raadslede wat uitstekende werk regdeur die politieke spektrum heen
kan doen, en ons kan dit nie meer in hierdie stadium bekostig dat dit met
raadslede gebeur nie.

Raadslede doen baie harde werk en in die meeste van die gevalle moet
raadslede ook nog parlementslede se werk doen, want dit is die raadslede
wat die naaste aan die gemeenskap op die grond is, en ons moet ons hoed
afhaal vir die uitstekende werk wat daar gedoen word.

Daar is 'n paar uitstaande stukke wetgewing ten opsigte waarvan ons wil vra
dat daar die nodige spoed aan verleen sal word. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[I do not know whether I can agree, and I do not know whether what my
colleague the hon member Africa said is correct, namely that it is the
national Government that will have to pay. The important point that comes
to the fore is that this is a matter that must be dealt with urgently. We
are losing councillors who can do exceptional work across the entire
political spectrum and, at this stage, we can no longer afford to have this
happen to councillors.

Councillors work very hard and, in most cases, councillors must do the work
of members of Parliament as well, because it is the councillors that are
the closest to the community at grass-roots level, and we must take our hat
off to them for the exceptional work that is being done there.

There are a few outstanding pieces of legislation in respect of which we
would like to ask that they be dealt with with the necessary speed.]

Regarding outstanding legislation, I have mentioned already the property
evaluation legislation. Regarding the Municipal Finance Management Bill, I
think that section 10(g) is outdated at this moment in time, and we cannot
continue for another year or two with that. I also want to refer to the
disaster management legislation.

Ons wil s√™ die Wes-Kaap is reg. [We would like to say that the Western Cape
is ready.]

We are really willing to help our municipalities and communities to improve
the quality of life of everybody.

I want to acknowledge the role of Salga, specifically in Wecloga in the
Western Cape and the IDT. We work closely with them, specifically in nodal
point 13 in the central Karoo on the integrated rural development strategy.
I would also like to thank the Municipal Demarcation Board, IEC, and
specifically the Minister and, from today, the Deputy Minister and the
department. [Applause.]

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, may I just place on record apologies from our
MEC Fowler. He is unfortunately tied up with some other pressing matters in
the province and he asked me to deliver this input on his behalf.

Hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, MECs, special delegates and hon members,
may I also add our voice from Gauteng in congratulating the Deputy Minister
on her appointment and promise that Gauteng will do its best to co-operate
with her and the Minister and work together.

The transformation of local government poses a challenge to municipalities
and the Gauteng province alike. The bigger challenge relates to striking
the balance between managing transition and ensuring that there is
uninterrupted service delivery. In other municipalities, more than 11
entities came together to form a municipality. As such, the challenge is to
integrate all these entities into one functional entity.

The national department has developed a template for monitoring the
establishment process. The province uses the same template to assess
progress by the municipalities in relation to strategic management issues,
financial management, administrative infrastructure and institutional
matters.

The province appointed transformation managers based at the district
municipalities and metropolitan municipalities. The work of the
transformation managers, the TMs, is to guide the transformation process
and report to the department of development planning and local government
on any possible problems encountered by municipalities.

Transformation managers develop establishment plans for the municipalities
and ensure that there is integration of these plans at the district level.
They serve as change agents at municipality level.

After the demarcation process, some of the assets and liabilities of
municipalities had to be divided amongst, and between, municipalities. In
order to deal effectively with the division of assets and liabilities
between relevant municipalities, and after an apparent reluctance by some
of the municipalities to co-operate on these matters, the department
established two committees to guide this process. The above-mentioned
committees consist of an equal number of councillors of the municipality
concerned and technical subcommittees which consist of municipal officials
of the relevant municipalities.

As far as the current state of municipalities is concerned, a situational
analysis of the state of our municipalities has been done. It has been
illuminating to the extent that it has mapped a path for the future. The
following strengths and opportunities for transformation into viable
sustainable municipalities have been identified.

Local municipalities have been through changes before. There is support
from provincial government. There are new governance structures and change
is inevitable. A conducive legislative environment and dedicated funds are
available. There is a national and international climate for public
administration improvement.

However, there are several weaknesses and threats for this period that have
been identified. These are: interim IDPs and planning that are not
sufficiently driven by strategic priorities or sufficiently linked to the
budget; insufficient human resource management strategies, in particular
change management; stakeholder participation that may result in the loss of
experienced personnel; management not being sufficiently results-driven;
inadequate skills; poor standardisation of policies; insufficient customer
focus; threats to financial viability from issues such as ineffective
billing systems; and an inadequate ability to generate revenue and change
in disaster management systems.

A situation analysis has given an in-depth view of the financial health and
trends relating to the financial health of selected municipalities. For
example, these developments have shown trends of selected municipalities
relating to solvency, debt and income. These trends have pointed to the
inadequacy of amalgamation of budgets, the treasury abilities, the
inadequacy of financial systems, the inadequacy of debt collection,
management and revenue generation, and financial controls.

The analysis has revealed weaknesses in the aforementioned issues. This
approach has been repeated for municipal service delivery systems and
capacity, human resources and information technology.

Regarding the Municipal Institutional Support Centre, or MISC, in order to
meet the transformation challenges faced by local government, the province
saw the need for high-level institutional, financial and service delivery
support to municipalities.

The department of development planning and local government is establishing
the MISC as a vehicle to support municipalities. This will involve
investigating and reviewing the current nature and form of municipal
organisational structures and systems, service delivery issues, finances
and other developmental aspects.

To this end, the MISC project completed a status quo analysis report after
working with the MDBs. The report indicates the need for the support centre
to assist in tackling some of the major challenges in this transformation,
namely resistance to change, low staff morale, poor financial management,
incoherent human resource and administration policies, poor service
delivery and so on. The municipal support programmes flow from project
viability.

During past years the municipal support programme focused only on the
financial aspects of the municipality as a tool for rehabilitating those
who had financial problems. The department has now focused the MSP to be
responsive to the transformation challenges of the municipalities. These
include institutional finance service delivery, IDPs and communication
matters.

To maximise the intervention efforts, the department has developed a plan
to interlink the MICs and MSPs with other funding sources, like the
transition fund and the restructuring grant.

With regard to monitoring the establishment of municipalities, all the
municipalities held their first inaugural meetings within the specified
period of 14 days and elected office bearers. Most of the municipalities
developed and adopted single interim delegations and standing orders. All
municipalities have established interim management plans. The transfer of
staff, according to the new demarcation and functions, remains a challenge
owing to the fact that municipalities are still waiting for a national
process on powers and functions to be finalised.

Regarding strategic management issues, most of the municipalities have
almost completed the development of their interim integrated developmental
plans. There is something of a problem in the cross-boundary
municipalities, owing to the incompatibility of plans and legislation used
by affected provinces, for example transport plans, land use, management,
etc. This matter is, however, receiving attention and the problem does not
seem insurmountable.

In terms of financial issues, some of the municipalities, for example
Merafong, would possibly have difficulty in sustaining the payment of
councillors. Most of the municipalities have established interim financial
management control systems, policies, procedures and interim delegations.
By the end of January, all the municipalities had already compiled a
revised 2000-01 budget for council approval. Following the approval of the
interim integrated development plans, most of the municipalities will be
able to start preparing for the new budget of 2001-02.

The department of development planning and local government has development
plans to assist municipalities to utilise their transitional funds and
restructuring grants to finalise their interim integrated development plans
and their medium-term strategic plans. The municipal support programmes and
the municipal institutional support centre will be used to assist
municipalities to draft their 2001-02 budgets; to develop organisational
structures, human resources and administration policies; and to support the
municipal performance management system.

With reference to cross-boundary municipalities, the department of
development planning and local government has initiated three cross-
boundary technical fora with the affected provinces and municipalities.
Emerging from these is the need to finalise a strategy for the management
of CBM matters. The province is busy developing a memorandum of
understanding which will guide management of CBM arrangements.

One of the flagships in local government transformation is the
participatory system. This is about empowering communities to be in the
driving seat of social transformation. The new system of local government
allows communities to be consulted during the drafting of the integrated
development plans, the budget and delivery systems.

No municipality should ever have plans or budgets without input from
communities. This participatory system allows for the establishment of ward
committees as another means of involving citizens in governing themselves.

We are going to provide a free basic amount of water and a free basic
amount of electricity. One big challenge ahead of us is the lack of or
little infrastructure in areas such as informal settlements and rural
areas. The affected municipalities need support to provide infrastructure,
or they will not be able to provide the free water and electricity to many
households. Government has already taken steps by introducing the
consolidated municipal infrastructure programme to assist municipalities in
providing storm-water drainage, bulk and link water supplies, streetlights,
sanitation and other amenities.

Based on the above principles, the situation analysis and the task to be
achieved, three phases for the transformation have been developed. The
first phase is the establishment phase from 5 December 2000 to 30 June
2001, based on the budgets of the disestablished municipalities. The second
phase is the consolidation phase from 30 June 2001 to 30 June 2002, based
on new budgets. The third phase is the stabilisation phase from 30 June
2002, which will vary from municipality to municipality and will be based
on the size and institutional challenges.

In conclusion, the people have spoken through their votes for the
improvement of their living conditions. They voted for men, women and
political parties of their choice and have placed trust in them. To be
agents of change, communities must now invest their collective energies in
making this social transformation a reality. [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, can I join my colleagues by congratulating
the Deputy Minister. Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Interjections.] One must know,
as I speak here, that I speak from the island of the Western Cape, where a
child competes with a parent. [Interjections.] Although local government
transformation is necessary in all our provinces, the need for it is felt
most acutely in the Western Cape. Why? Because, as Mrs Versfeld knows, the
parties responsible for apartheid and all its terrible consequences are
still governing this province. [Interjections.] While other provinces have
made significant progress in improving the quality of life of their people,
here, in the Western Cape, our people in areas such as Khayelitsha and
Manenberg have still not tasted the sweet fruits of freedom and democracy.
[Interjections.]

Instead of improving, our areas are deteriorating. We are still faced with
unemployment, poverty, overcrowding in houses, a lack of basic services
such as adequate sanitation and clean drinking water, farmworkers being
assaulted and working for R40 a week, the exploitation of child labour on
farms, and a host of other problems that were experienced during the dark
years of apartheid.

The rights we fought for have not filtered down to the majority of people
in this province. In fact, the people who sold their souls for the crumbs
from the tables of their apartheid masters, such as Marais and others, are
still the ones who are benefiting in the Western Cape. [Interjections.]
They are the ones who drive in posh cars and live in expensive houses in
formerly white areas, while those who struggled for freedom and democracy
are languishing in conditions of utter squalor in the African and coloured
townships. [Interjections.]

They are the ones who, like parasites, thrive on the fears of the coloured
working class during the elections, yet forget about their conditions of
living when tabling their provincial budgets. [Interjections.] If one gives
Mrs Versfeld a rod she will go to the sea now.

Unlike the Western Cape government, which only cares for the wellbeing of
the rich, the ANC is proud to be seen as the champion of the interests of
the poor. [Interjections.] All our policies and programmes are targeted at
improving the wellbeing of the poor at local government level.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon members,
order! You are drowning out the speaker. We cannot hear what the speaker is
trying to say. Yes, why are you rising, hon member?

Mr T B TAABE: Chairperson, I am rising on a point of order to check with
you if it is parliamentary for the hon member, who cannot think beyond
issues of fishing, to be disturbing the hon member when she is addressing
the House. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP [Mr M L Mushwana]: Thank you. Take your
seat, hon member. That is not a point of order. [Laughter.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, as the ANC we have taken the lead in
providing immediate free basic services, such as water, to the people
living in the areas of Beaufort West and Plettenberg Bay, while
municipalities led by the ``Doomed Alliance'' in areas such as Hermanus
have conspired to auction off RDP houses, because of the nonpayment for
services caused by unemployment.

The Western Cape provincial government does not believe in public
participation. [Interjections.] The contempt with which the ``Dom
Alliance'' regards public participation in the provinces, is starkly
illustrated by the preference for subcouncils instead of ward committees.
[Interjections.]

Ward committees, which are favoured by the ANC, would have encouraged
community participation by drawing in different sectors of a local
community to sit on the ward committee. A particular ward may have a strong
sports sector or informal trading community. These sectors could have been
asked to name persons who would then represent them on the ward committee.
In this way community participation would have been widened. But no, the
``Dom Alliance'' do not want this. They are afraid of democracy because
they know that by increasing public participation in ward committees, they
will be forced to be accountable through these structures. [Interjections.]

They know that without community participation, they can make decisions
without having to account for them, as is the case with their recent
decision to increase rates in the unicity by 7% across the board,
regardless of its implications for the poorer communities in the province.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.]

This also has to do with their decision to replace informal parking
attendants with a few marshals.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon members, I will
allow this member to speak for the next 30 minutes unless you keep quiet.
[Interjections.] Please continue, hon member.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Thank you, Chairperson.

The decision by the unicity to replace informal parking attendants with a
few marshals, regardless of the impact that this will have on the lives of
informal parking attendants and their families, has to be looked at. Does
one take away that piece of bread, does one encourage people to go back to
crime?

The ``Debt Alliance'' will go to extreme lengths to identify loopholes in
the new local government system which they can exploit to perpetuate the
inequalities existing in our province. [Interjections.]

We should close those loopholes. Firstly, one could start by making
regulations governing the composition of ward committees. They control
municipalities to exclude significant sectors from sitting on the ward
committees.

Secondly, we should put a system in place to ensure that district councils
perform the tasks for which they were elected. Many of our people fall
under a district council where there is a big town with all the facilities
and amenities. This town makes most of its money from the people in the
communities around it, yet it does not plough anything back into those
communities. [Interjections.]

In terms of the new local government system, district councils have the
responsibility to ensure an equitable distribution of resources. Given the
uncaring attitude of municipalities controlled by the ``Dom Alliance'', the
danger exists that these district councils will continue to ignore the poor
communities around them. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, please
take your seat. Yes, hon member Raju. Order! Hon members, please stop that
noise.

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary to refer
to somebody else as ``dom''? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, who is
that person? Order! Order!

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, the speaker referred to the party or DA as the
``Dom Alliance''. Is it parliamentary to refer to the alliance as ``dom''?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Hon member, please
take your seat. There is no party called the DA in the House. Hon member,
please continue.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: As the ANC we will ensure that the new system of local
government brings definite benefits to our people. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.]

I want to conclude by saying that ... [Interjections.]
I never knew that Mr Raju's other surname was ``dom''. Thank you for
informing me. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Mrs Versfeld
and Ms Ntwanambi. I would not like to order you out of the Chamber.

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, let me take
this opportunity to thank all those who participated in this debate.

Many of the participants in the debate made proposals for consideration by
the Department and Ministry. I want to assure them that we have taken those
proposals to heart and they will be given due consideration.

Some speakers called for a national framework regarding the issue of ward
councils. May I again take the opportunity to remind especially my
colleagues the hon MECs that all provinces were provided with a draft
document in this regard. We are keenly awaiting their comments so that at
the next Minmec meeting we may table a refined draft for adoption.
The hon Mr Nyakane posed a question and, before posing the question, he
assured us that he was asking an innocent question. The innocent question
was, I quote: ``Are there specific reasons for not recognising traditional
leaders?''

Frankly this is an innocence I would not be party in extolling: the
innocence of a lawmaker who does not know that the Constitution he adopted
recognises traditional leaders. [Laughter.]

I note with satisfaction the remarks made by MEC Nkwinti who informed this
House about a growing number of traditional leaders in the Eastern Cape who
are ready to join elected councillors and become partners in the service of
our people. I think this growing number of traditional leaders is not
confined to the Eastern Cape alone; we see it in other provinces too. It is
a heartening development about which we as South Africans must be proud.

The hon Mr Bhabha opened his input by expressing disappointment. He is
disappointed in Mr Lever's failure to meet his expectation of what he calls
a ``viable alternative''. What surprises me about Mr Bhabha is that he had
such an expectation in the first instance. [Laughter.]
To my knowledge the DP is not a new party. Under its various names it is
not known for putting forward viable alternatives for anything.

Mr Lever told us that the previous system, that is before the
transformation of local governments, was capable of delivering to all
communities. I informed the House about sections of South African
communities, 93,5% of whom are in need of access to one basic service or
another. Certainly these are communities that do not exist in his
conscience.

All communities were catered for by the old dispensation. He decries
problems created by what he calls ``defaulting ratepayers''. We are just as
worried as he is about this problem, but certainly he cannot be forgiven
for the exposition of the position which is bereft of causal analysis.

He goes on to say that, and I quote,``transformation of local government on
its own will not solve the problem.'' It is not clear who it is that he is
responding to in this regard. Perhaps what he is expressing is an
overbearing fear on his part for change. He is trying very hard to convince
himself that change has not happened. I want to tell him that change has
happened and he had better come to terms with it. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Thank you, hon
members, that concludes the discussion. We take the opportunity to thank
the hon the Minister for engaging this House in this lively debate.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 17:10.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             FRIDAY, 1 JUNE 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

The Chairperson:

1.    The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
     Select Committee on Powers and Privileges of Parliament, viz:


     Ackermann, C; Bhabha, M; Bhengu, M J; Dlulane, B N; Durr, K D S; Lever,
     L G; Lucas, G A; Makoela, M I; Moosa, M V; Mushwana, M L; Ntlabati, S
     N; Nyakane, R M; Pandor, G N M; Surty, M E; Tlhagale, J O.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Vote 8 - Correctional Services for 1999-2000 including a
         Performance Audit for Training [RP 117-2000].


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services for information.


     (2)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Vote 7 - Constitutional Development (now Provincial and Local
         Government) for 1999-2000 [RP 116-2000].


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government for information.

                             MONDAY, 4 JUNE 2001

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 4 -
     Agriculture for 1999-2000 [RP 113 - 2000].

                            TUESDAY, 5 JUNE 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 5 June 2001 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


        Eskom Conversion Bill [B 16B - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
         Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.
2.    The Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled and are now referred to the relevant
     committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic Affairs:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 13 - Foreign Affairs for 1999-2000 [RP 122-2000].


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 6 - Communications for 1999-2000 [RP 115-2000].


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 8 - Correctional Services for 1999-2000 including a Performance
         Audit for Training [RP 117-2000].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 7 - Constitutional Development (now Provincial and Local
         Government) for 1999-2000 [RP 116-2000].


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs:


         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         No 4 - Agriculture for 1999-2000 [RP 113-2000].

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote No 23
     - Minerals and Energy for 1999-2000 [RP 132-2000].


