---
title: 'National Assembly - 03 April 2001'
layout: debate
year: 2001
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2001/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2001-04-03
---

TUESDAY, 3 APRIL 2001
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy caused by the resignation of Mr M
Mpehle had been filled, in accordance with item 6(3) of Schedule 6 to the
Constitution, 1996, by the nomination of Dr E A Schoeman, with effect from
1 April 2001.

                                    OATH

Dr E A Schoeman, accompanied by Mr F Bhengu and Mrs M A A Njobe, made and
subscribed the oath and took his seat.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy caused by the resignation of Mrs B M
Nzimande had been filled, in accordance with item 6(3) of Schedule 6 to the
Constitution, 1996, by the nomination of Dr O Baloyi, with effect from 1
April 2001.

                                    OATH

Dr O Baloyi, accompanied by Mrs L R Mbuyazi and Mr A M Mpontshane, made and
subscribed the oath and took his seat.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs Z A KOTA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the South African Police Service recovered the body of
       Tshepo Matloga in the Northern Province;


  (2) appreciates the hard work and commitment of our policemen and women
       in recovering the body of Tshepo;


  (3) calls upon all the arms of the criminal justice system to co-operate
       to ensure that those responsible for this barbaric crime are brought
       to book; and


  (4) expresses the hope that the courts will give an appropriate
       punishment to those responsible and that this will serve as a lesson
       that our country and society will not tolerate such barbaric actions.

[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move:


  That the House -


  (1) takes note of Dr Dlamini-Zuma's defence of Fidel Castro's
       undemocratic system of government;


  (2) expresses its shock at the suggestion made by Dr Dlamini-Zuma that
       the right to vote is justifiably limited in Cuba, and that this is
       approved by her;


  (3) further notes that five Ministers accompanied President Mbeki to
       Cuba, spending valuable time and money on socialising at the expense
       of the taxpayer instead of tackling the endemic corruption,
       lawlessness, Aids and unemployment in our country; and


  (4) requests President Mbeki to give more attention to the country in
       which he was elected and a little less to the insoluble problems of
       the rest of the world.

[Applause.]
Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the State Theatre was established in the 1960s as the Performing
           Arts Council of Transvaal and changed to the State Theatre in
           October 1997; and


       (b)  the State Theatre was closed on 31 July 2000 because of a severe
           liquidity crisis brought about by huge losses incurred through
           irresponsible investments;


  (2) is gratified that the State Theatre will once again open its doors
       tomorrow with a gala performance;


  (3) takes the opportunity of expressing its felicitations and good wishes
       to Dr Ben Ngubane, the hon Minister, and to Mr John Kani, the
       artistic director; and


  (4) expresses the hope that the State Theatre will give an impetus to the
       performing arts covering the broadest segment of our South African
       population.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent gloating by DA leader, Tony Leon, about how proud
       the DA is, after its first 100 days in power, that Cape Town is the
       best run city;


  (2) agrees that this view is shared only by the rich and privileged;


  (3) further agrees that the experience of the poor, after 100 days, is -


       (a)  cutting of water and electricity in Macassar, Tafelsig and
           elsewhere;


       (b)  a lack of commitment to fight crime;
       (c)  sexist remarks about women;


       (d)  a racist approach to sport in the city; and


       (e)  leaving 10 000 workers unemployed; and


  (4) calls on the DA to build peace, safety and prosperity for all people
       and not to perpetuate the privileges of the few.

[Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses concern over the theft in February of a laptop computer in
       the Western Cape Legislature;


  (2) notes that -


       (a)  a letter written on the stolen computer has suddenly surfaced in
           the media, giving impetus to the perception of a politically
           motivated theft;


       (b)  the said letter was written in August 2000 with no political
           relevance to the current political situation; and


       (c)  thereafter 23% of the voters nationally endorsed the DA in the
           local government elections; and


  (3) further notes that as the official opposition, the DA is now more
       determined to pursue and expose the corruption, mismanagement,
       maladministration and lack of delivery of the ANC Government and not
       to be distracted by malicious political opportunism.

[Applause.]

Prof L M MBADI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the recent incident in which Mr Theunis Bester of Bellville was
       murdered;


  (2) expresses its concern at the escalating incidence of murders of the
       elderly, since the murder of Mr Bester is the third murder in the
       Cape Metro since Friday; and


  (3) calls on the Minister of Safety and Security as well as the Minister
       of Social Development to immediately address this shocking situation
       with a co-ordinated strategy to protect the elderly, who are an
       especially vulnerable group.

Mr L J MODISENYANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the recent newspaper reports exposing the DP's hidden agenda
           with the formation of the so-called Democratic Alliance;


       (b)  that the DP's Ryan Coetzee has both denied and admitted to
           having advised the hon Tony Leon on how to ``get rid of Mr
           Marthinus van Schalkwyk''; and


       (c)  that Ryan Coetzee advised the hon Leon to ensure that he
           ``outshines'' Van Schalkwyk in public to ensure that the latter
           fades and disappears;


  (2) calls on Coetzee to decide whether he admits or denies the reports;
       and


  (3) also calls on the hon Tony Leon to admit that the formation of this
       unholy alliance is unworkable because it is built on opportunism,
       distrust and lies.

[Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates and commends nurses, military personnel and volunteers
       who have worked selflessly in the areas of KwaZulu-Natal which have
       been worst affected by cholera;


  (2) recognises the outstanding work done by the SA Christian aid
       organisation Dorcas, which has been operating in the very remote
       rural areas since October 2000 and has pumped approximately half a
       million litres of ``safe'' water each month from rivers and dams into
       water tanks at villages and distributed approximately 20 tons of
       nutritional food each month to cholera patients as they are
       discharged from hospital;


  (3) notes that Dorcas is the only NGO working in the area and that it has
       been diligent and faithful in spite of the fact that its work is
       largely unnoticed and unrecognised as these neglected rural areas
       have not attracted media coverage;


  (4) acknowledges that another cholera death, and over 500 more cholera
       cases, have been reported;


  (5) further acknowledges that although the figures reported by the
       department on cholera deaths have been commendably low, the fact is
       that many more deaths are not recorded, as people die in villages
       without hospitals confirming the cholera and these deaths are not
       included ...

The SPEAKER: order! Hon member, your time has expired. Your motion will be
published in full.

Ms C DUDLEY: I was interrupted as well. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the world's best-loved choral work, Handel's Messiah, has been
           translated into the 11 official languages of our country; and


       (b)  The South African Messiah, as this has since come to be called,
           will be performed annually from this year in an effort to spread
           a message of peace and goodwill;


  (2) appreciates and congratulates Michael Masote, one of the worthy sons
       of this country, for having taken the trouble to mount the mammoth
       task and at the same time to showcase local talent and give South
       Africans a chance to celebrate their languages and cultural heritage;
       and


  (3) calls on other artists to do likewise in matters that have cultural
       value for the nation.

[Applause.]

Mr J H NASH: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the DA has continually criticised the ANC Government for so-
           called centralism; and


       (b)  the DA has, in classical super-centralist style, decided to
           abolish community-based housing allocation committees in favour
           of a centralised committee;


  (2) agrees that -


       (a)  the DA wants to manipulate the distribution of houses through
           fascist means that will force people to vote for them if they
           want houses; and


       (b)  this militates against people-driven development; and
  (3) calls on the DA to respect the democratic nature of the allocation
       committees and to stop its negative vote-catching campaign.

The centralist! [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Cape Town unicity under the very capable mayor, Peter
       Marais, has celebrated its first 100 days in office, and
       congratulates the DA-controlled unicity which -


       (a)  has R20 million allocated by the provincial government to train
           and equip a municipal police service for all the people of Cape
           Town;


       (b)  is ready to deliver 6 kl of free water to every household from 1
           May - well ahead of many other ANC councils;


       (c)  is rolling out the provision of free antiretroviral drugs, HIV
           testing and counselling to all local clinics and hospitals; and


       (d)  has upgraded its IT systems for better management and control of
           city finances for all the people of Cape Town; and


  (2) further notes that these major achievements could be  accomplished
       despite an ANC legacy of maladministration and nondelivery in the
       city of Cape Town and other councils currently under their control.

[Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -
  (1) is appalled at media reports that innocent matriculants from
       Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal, the Northern Province and Swaziland have
       fallen prey to a scam by a bogus university operating in Johannesburg
       as Cida City Campus, which claims to be an affiliate of Maharishi
       University of Management from the United States;


  (2) is dismayed to learn that the same campus is subjecting its students
       to a cult religion based on the teachings of a spiritual goddess; and


  (3) calls on the Ministry of Education to take steps to close  this bogus
       campus and ensure future denial of its registration on application,
       as it has no intention of academic teaching at all, but to exploit
       and extract money from innocent students and extend a mysterious
       religious teaching without students' choice.

[Applause.]

Ms N M TSHEOLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with appreciation that the North Sea Jazz Festival was held in
           Cape Town from 29 to 31 March 2001; and


       (b)  the positive impact that an event of this nature has  on the
           development of music in our country as well as the promotion of
           public interest in local music;


  (2) believes that this event affirms the contribution by Africa to
       restore cultural heritage in the world at large and thus restores
       pride and dignity to the peoples of Africa; and


  (3) applauds the Ministry of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology for
       having played a significant role in making this occasion possible.

[Applause.]

Mrs M OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates Peter Marais who was officially inaugurated as Cape
       Town's mayor at the city's Artscape Theatre on Monday;


  (2) believes that Mr Marais will be successful in his post and will
       deliver on the DA's promises of putting all the people first;


  (3) notes that corporate sponsors covered the bulk of the inauguration
       costs and that the ratepayer's money was invested back into the
       community by covering the costs of the local entertainment;


  (4) further notes that the inaugural ceremony of the ANC Ekurhuleni
       Executive Mayor cost a shocking R400 000 and even the small
       Rustenburg municipality had an extravagant bill of R100 000;


  (5) believes that this once again proves that the top structure of the
       ANC is only concerned with a better life for an elite few; and


  (6) supports Peter Marais for putting all the people first and for
       focusing on service delivery to the community.

[Applause.]

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Mr Luki Nkonka)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and sadness the untimely death of the Deputy
       Director-General of the Free State Education Department, Mr Luki
       Nkonka, in a road accident on the N1 near Winburg;


  (2) expresses its heartfelt condolences to his family, friends and
       colleagues; and


  (3) joins his family in mourning the death of this beloved patriot.

Agreed to.

          ANSWERING OF QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY BY DEPUTY PRESIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I move the draft resolution printed on the
Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, as
follows:


  That, notwithstanding the provisions contained in the interim questions
  procedure, the Deputy President will answer questions for oral reply in
  the National Assembly on Wednesday, 4 April 2001, in spite of answering
  questions in the National Council of Provinces in the same week.

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 17 - Social Development:

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker ... [Applause.] Thank
you. Madam Speaker, this is the first Vote that we are carrying out under
the banner of the Department of Social Development. As such, this Vote is
aimed at ensuring social development. Our main business is no longer the
issuing of hand-outs but, most importantly, the empowerment of communities
and individuals to be self-reliant.

Hon members, MECs for social development, representatives of civil society
and the older people in the public gallery who have made a special effort
to be here today, during the past year there have been many programme
changes and events that were undertaken by my Ministry and department.
These include extended visits to the provinces and a second consultative
workshop with our stakeholders and partners, And I received a report on the
abuse and ill-treatment of older people in our country. All these events
have reinforced my conviction that, despite the entrenched problem that we
face in our diversity, what unites us is our commitment to building a
caring society and a better South Africa.

The President, in his state of the nation address in February this year,
underlined the fact that our country is a land of hope because of all the
people who make contributions, however small, to advance our country away
from its painful past. I would like to single out the contributions made by
the following outstanding civic-minded citizens who lead by example: Mrs
Zodwa Mqadi and her team in AGAPE - a home for children in KwaZulu-Natal;
Mrs Thuli Tsela at the Mayosi home-based care project; Mrs Mlambo from St
Clement's home-based care project in Clermont, Durban; Mrs Nyembezi of
Zibambeleni Clermont Women's Society; Mrs Joyce Mali - uMaNgconde; and last
but not least, Mrs Adelaide Tambo. [Applause.]

It is their energy, dedication and commitment, together with that of many
people, that ensures that we are where we are and that there is hope amidst
despair, fragmentation and alienation. We express our gratitude and pledge
our support to them and their organisations. May they, together with many
others, continue to be our reliable partners in caring for the vulnerable
members of our society.

Anga uThixo anisikelele, anigcine, anikhusele nihlale nilithemba labantwana
bakowethu, nibe lingomso nezinyanya zabantwana bakuthi. Nangamso ma-Afrika.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] [May God bless them, keep them and protect them, so that
they can remain a sign of hope for our children, and be their future and
their ancestors. To them I say: Thank you, Africans. [Applause.]

During my provincial visits, I witnessed at first-hand the substantial
social and economic contributions made particularly by elderly people to
the wellbeing of children and families with social pensions as their only
resource. Sadly, the report on the abuse of older people substantiates the
brutality and the brutal reality that, despite these contributions in the
context of higher unemployment and widespread poverty, older people are
frequently subjected to physical and mental abuse.

In response to the report, Government is working on an implementation plan
to ensure that older people receive sensitive and integrated services from
the Departments of Social Services, Housing, Safety and Security, Justice,
Health and Home Affairs. We are also committed to ensuring that our social
partners - business, labour, faith-based organisations, the voluntary
welfare sector and civil society organisations in general - share with us
the responsibility of ensuring that older people are acknowledged,
supported and protected. The fathers and mothers of our nation must not be
forgotten people.

In his address at the opening of Parliament, the President outlined
Government's programme of action for the year 2001. I will use this Vote
speech to report on the steady transformation that we are implementing and
elaborate on the role that the Department of Social Development will play
in Government's programme of action for the year 2001. In addition, all the
programmes of the Department of Social Development are developed and
implemented together with other Government departments in the social,
justice and governance sectors. I will speak to the priorities of these
sectors.

Before I begin, it would be remiss of me not to acknowledge the support and
co-operation that I have received from the MECs for social development and
the premiers in the provinces. May I also acknowledge with deep
appreciation the support that I have received from the portfolio committee
in the National Assembly and the select committee - the National Council of
Provinces. May we continue to work together for the betterment of our
people. Together with our social partners, members have sustained our
offensive against poverty and underdevelopment.

Let me first highlight some of our achievements of the past year in this
regard. Social security, which is well-targeted to the poor and is
redistributive, is Government's primary investment in poverty alleviation.
The number of beneficiaries has increased to 3,5 million as of 31 March
2001 - an increase of approximately 17% from the previous financial year.
Child support grants are now being paid out to about one million children
every month. This is up from 60 000 a year ago, thanks to the assistance
that we have received from civil society, especially faith-based
organisations and churches in the rural areas of South Africa. The
Government recognises that the current grant amounts are not sufficient to
address large-scale poverty, deprivation and inequality in South Africa,
but will continue to increase spending on social assistance as resource
constraints allow.

I would like to underline a point I made during the launch of the report on
the abuse of older people in Soweto last week. The child support grant is
supposed to be given to the care-giver of the child, the person who
actually takes care of the child. This person is not necessary the mother
of the child. If the grandmother is the person who looks after the child,
then the child support grant should be given to the grandmother. This is
what is provided for in our laws.

During the past financial year, the department has managed a poverty relief
allocation totalling R363 million from the 1998-99 to the 2000-01
allocations. To date 80% of these funds have been paid to community
projects; 10% of these funds are committed to payments for community
projects and the remaining 10% is committed to expenditure on
administration, support and capacity building for the projects in the
programme.

The underexpenditure of poverty relief funds by the Department of Social
Development is a phenomenon of the past. An analysis of this expenditure by
sector show that 20% of the projects are in the HIV/Aids sector, 18% are in
the food security sector and 10% are linked to faith-based organisations.
Further analysis shows that 30% of the total poverty relief budget is
devoted to income generation, 16% to urban regeneration and substance
abuse, and 15% to disability.

Our mid-term assessment of the projects funded from the 1998-99 allocation
shows that 70% of the projects were in rural areas and that the largest
number of jobs were created by projects in the food security sector, in
agriculture and poultry projects. I would like to express my gratitude to
the Independent Development Trust, specifically to Mrs Lulu Gwagwa, for
their assistance and the co-operation that she has given us, thus enabling
us to achieve these successes in our poverty relief efforts.

In the 2001-02 financial year, the department will have at least 30% of the
poverty relief projects located in the 30 development nodes identified in
the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Strategy. The poverty relief
programme will continue to focus on its dual objectives, ie income
generation and job creation on the one hand and safety nets and social
welfare on the other.

With respect to eight nodal areas currently identified by Government for
its urban renewal programme, the department currently supports victim
empowerment projects in Mdantsane, Kwa-Mashu, Inanda, Khayelitsha and
Alexandra. Our support for the various types of victim empowerment projects
is part of Government's programme to combat crime against women and
children. As part of this programme, 250 social workers have received
training in the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act.

Ms Miriam Makeba has been outstanding in her work to set up a centre for
abused children, girls and young women. I would like to thank Ms Makeba for
her patience while unacceptable bureaucratic delays were being addressed.
The MEC for social development in Gauteng, Mrs Angie Motshega, and the
premier, Mr Mbhazima Shilowa, are now identifying suitable sites for the
proposed projects.

On a related matter, I will approach the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development to strengthen the implementation of the Child
Maintenance Act. In this, I will be continuing the work that was done by my
predecessor, Mrs Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi and the former Minister of
Justice, Dullah Omar, who, by the way, did everything in their power to
ensure that that Act is implementable.

I have just been told by my colleagues, Kader Asmal and Geraldine Frazer-
Moleketi, that everything has been implemented and amendments have been
effected made to ensure that it works. She tells me that during her time,
they tried to make examples of people with high profiles. I think we will
do the same now - we will continue that work. I only hope that none of our
members here, or any of our people in the public or corporate sector are
involved, because before the law we are all equal, and that action will be
taken. We only appeal in general, to ensure that we do pay, and that our
children live in a better manner.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank those media organisations
that appreciate the importance of focusing public attention on the social
development challenge facing our nation. I thank them for exposing how the
misuse of power negatively affects the rights and interests of older
people, people with disabilities, children and the poorest of the poor.

A number of journalists deserve public recognition for holding the
spotlight on social development issues, ie Ms Charity Bhengu of the
Sowetan, Mr Barry Streak of the Cape Times, Ms Shado Twala of Cape Talk, Ms
Odette Quesnell and Ruda Landman of Carte Blanche and Mr Tim Modise. I
hereby extend my condolences to the Modise family on their recent tragic
loss.

I would also like to recognise those artists who take time out from their
schedules to devote their talents and time to social issues. Mr Hugh
Masekela has been outspoken in his support for the campaign against alcohol
and drug abuse. Mr Joe Mafela -Sdumo - has been active in the campaign
against the abuse of older people.

Both within the Department of Social Development and together with other
departments and civil society organisations, we are making an integrated
and comprehensive response to HIV/Aids. Last year the department published
its first state of the South African population report. The report
investigated the interrelationship between population trends, poverty and
vulnerability. It identified poverty as a central theme in the
vulnerability of women in our society, particularly as regards HIV-
infection.

The state of the South African population report for 2001, which will be
released in September this year, examines the implications of HIV/Aids on
the delivery of social services, and will generate indicators for
monitoring this impact. We have also developed, in collaboration with the
Department of Public Service and Administration and Samdi a training
programme for Government planners on the impact that HIV will have on
service delivery. The programme aims to train planners on the
implementation of the national HIV strategy, and will begin from May 2001
for officials in all three spheres of government.

By far the greatest Aids-related support function confronting the
Department of Social Development is that of caring for orphaned children.
In this regard, another response to HIV/Aids is the implementation and
monitoring of the national integrated plan for children and youth affected
by HIV/Aids. The models of home-based care that we are developing draw from
the experiences of community projects run by faith-based organisations. We
are learning from civil society, and we are working to strengthen the
various dimensions of our collaboration.

The department is extending its partnership with faith-based organisations
in the poverty-relief programmes to find ways of addressing the challenge
of the high cost of burials. The impact of Aids and other fatal poverty-
related diseases at the household level is to plunge families into extreme
poverty. The high cost of modern burials makes it impossible for increasing
numbers of people to see through to the end their family responsibilities
to the dead. This issue is causing deep ruptures in the bonds that define
us as people and the social repacassins are many.

We will be commissioning research into this subject, and we are looking for
donor support for this project. We are also strengthening our partnership
with the business sector. We have been working for a number of years with
Transnet's social development department in our flagship integrated, income-
generating projects for unemployed women with young children. We will soon
be formalising this relationship. We are also exploring possible
collaboration with Johnnic, Compaq and the World Bank to provide support
for income-generating community initiatives that are enviromentally sound
and involve the youth.

Anglo-gold has indicated a willingness to work with the department in areas
pertaining HIV/Aids. Saambou Bank and Comrade Madiba are providing
assistance to schools for disabled children. The soccer fraternity in
Gauteng, in particular Sundowns, Pirates and Kaiser Chiefs, have adopted
Takalani home for the disabled in Soweto. FCB advertising and TAC Tech
Technology are also having discussions with the department about ways in
which they can assist. I appeal to the entire business sector to support
our collaboration in the areas of rural development and urban renewal.

The provision of support for child-headed households is an area of special
need and our partnership has to centre on eradicating poverty, and ensuring
people-centred and sustainable development in our country. In order to
consolidate this emerging partnership with the business sector, I will be
holding a social development summit with the business sector in May this
year.

An important milestone in our effort to institutionalise the partnership
with civil society and Government is encapsulated in the Advisory Board on
Social Development Bill that is scheduled to be presented to the NCOP for
its Second Reading this week. The development and voluntary welfare sector
continue to provide invaluable services to our communities, and through
this Bill we hope to enhance that role.

I would now like to address the improvements that we are making in social
security: The backlog in the processing of applications has been
substantially reduced, and now almost all provinces can process
applications within 35 days. I am sure that we can reduce this norm
further. The re-registration of beneficiaries is still in various stages of
implementation in the provinces. On completion of this project we will
ensure that all beneficiaries have records on the system and receive the
benefits that are rightfully due to them.

While the registration process was necessary to deal with the
maladministration and fraud in the system, its impact was very painful to
many of our people. The elderly and the disabled who have not been brought
back into the system have experienced the worst impacts. We will renew our
efforts to address these impacts during the course of this financial year.
The department will be conducting an inquiry into the state of disabled
people, especially children in the rural areas.

The proposed amendments to the Social Assistance Act of 1992 have been
published for comment and will come into effect during this year. They
address the accrual of payments which are backdated to the date of
application for all grant types, except for the foster care grant, which
has been backdated to the date of the court order.

With regard to people with disabilities, a panel appointed by the director-
general replaces the medical health officer - here I am talking about
permanently disabled people - and pension medical officer in assessing
disabilities. The definitions of permanent and temporary disability have
been clarified and the means test is being looked into. The means test on
income will in the interim remain as it is. For old age pensions, the grant
will accrue from the date of application and the assets means test will
also be looked into.

New guidelines on the review of all grant types have been incorporated in
the proposed amendments. We are also undertaking immediate measures to
improve pension paypoints. Paypoints in the rural areas and urban nodal
points have been prioritised and other paypoints will be improved, starting
with those that service more than 400 beneficiaries. These improvements
will encompass the provision of security, first aid, water and toilets at
paypoints.

In addition, help desks will be established at paypoints and will be
staffed by competent officials who are familiar with the local language and
are equipped with laptops, with downloaded information on beneficiaries. A
small-scale roll-out of help desks has commenced at some of the paypoints
in the Northern Province, KwaZulu-Natal, the Free State, Gauteng and the
Western Cape. A large scale rollout of help desks will begin not later than
1 June this year and at least all the paypoints with more than 100
beneficiaries will be serviced by March 2002.

The MECs and I have held a number of meetings with private pension
contractors CPS, AllPay and PQ Africa, to discuss problems of poor service
delivery. Existing contracts have been analysed to ensure that explicit
standards are included for pension payment services to be delivered, with
penalty clauses for inefficiency and lack of humane conditions. Private
pension paypoint contractors have also been given an opportunity to
identify how they intend improving service delivery. Respect for the human
rights of their clients should be the hallmark of their service. I have
stressed in the strongest possible terms that the current treatment of
pensioners is unacceptable.

The national department is completing work on the uniform norms and
standards to guide provincial departments and service providers on
acceptable professional procedures that must be put in place to deal with
the terrible conditions that are being experienced by pensioners and other
grant beneficiaries. The Social Security National Norms and Standards
Project has been established for national norms and standards to be applied
across all nine provinces. The project will be completed by June 2001.

A norms and standards manual and an implementation strategy to address the
difference, that exist in grant administration procedures, grant
application forms, human resource availability, payment facilities, payment
methods and levels of customer service between provinces, will be included.
The norms and standards manual will be published in the 11 languages of
South Africa.

An audit of welfare infrastructure will be conducted to assess what
resources exist on the ground. This audit is essential to ensure the co-
ordination of Government's infrastructural development programme with basic
social service pensions. In many of the former Bantustans, especially the
former Transkei, the lack of inrfrastructure is cause for serious concern.
Public servants in these areas from both the Department of Social
Development and the Department of Home Affairs work under extremely
difficult conditions.

The committee of inquiry into a comprehensive social security system will
present its report to Cabinet in July 2001. It will recommend short to long-
term measures that will ensure that our social security system is
responsive to the needs of those who have experienced structural
disadvantages and who are at risk and are vulnerable. The committee is
reviewing the national pension system, old age protection, social assistant
grants, unemployment insurance, health funding and insurance. The central
objective is to transform the social security system to enable all sectors
of society, Government, business and civil society to address issues of
poverty and inequality. The committee has engaged in wide consultation and
has undertaken research, which includes the costing of policy options. This
is a significant intergovernmental initiative that is expected to enable
Government to link social and economic objectives.

As an occupational category, artists and cultural workers have
traditionally not had access to the same benefits when they fall retire or
die. I want the committee to ensure that this category of workers is also
covered. The contribution of artists to society, especially during the
struggle against apartheid, has been immense. Today, however, many are
destitute or have left behind many other issues unresolved. The cases of Mr
Nkabinde, popularly known as Mahlathini, and Ray Ntlokwana come to mind in
regard to this. I hope that the committee will look into that.

In the interim I would like to urge and suggest to hon member, Mr Tony
Leon, and Ms Cupido, as well as Ms Helen Zille, to ensure that the children
of Mr Ntlokwana, our well-known African artist, remain in school and are
given the necessary support. Their efforts to assist the poor people in the
Western Cape would be more valuable than a programme of continuous
political point-scoring.

With regard to the transformation of the financing and social welfare
services, a high level task team consisting of MECS for social welfare has
been given the responsibility of reviewing and accelerating the
implementation of financing policy. Private voluntary welfare institutions
receiving state subsidies in some provinces are still operating within an
apartheid paradigm and generally do not serve the majority in need. Certain
welfare organisations have made little effort to ensure that their boards
are representative in terms of race, gender, disability and the population
that they serve.

The task team will examine the implications of welfare financing, review
the efficacy of the financing policy and identify criteria for funding, to
ensure that social development services are accessible and available to
people in rural, urban and informal settlements. Moreover, it will ensure
that equity in service provision is being addressed.

The financing policy is also expected to be the means to promote co-
operative governance in social development. This includes working with and
building the capacity of different spheres of Government and civil society
organisations. The task team will report its findings and recommendations
in May this year.

A more comprehensive approach to child protection is also under
consideration, as the current approach tends to focus mainly on child
abuse. The drafting of comprehensive child care legislation by the South
African Law Commission is being accelerated and it is expected that a draft
Bill will be available by June this year. When the new legislation becomes
operational, it will ensure that children's rights and development are
brought into line with the Constitution.

Improved monitoring systems are being introduced in other areas of social
welfare. The primary function of the Central Drug Authority, which was
established last year, is to oversee and monitor the implementation of the
National Drug Master Plan. The Drug Master Plan also aims to reduce
substance abuse and its related harmful consequences. It strikes a balance
between actions that bring about a decrease in the availability of and
demand for drugs.

I am concerned about the relationship between the increase in violence and
gangsterism, and substance abuse. Aspects of the Drug Master Plan that
focus on youth which have been in the department since 1997 are of critical
importance. The Central Drug Authority will be reporting to Parliament in
June this year on these and related issues. On the question of gambling,
which I mentioned during the course of last week, I think my colleague Mr
Erwin, has already responded to this.

As in other areas of social development, during my provincial visits I saw
community projects and met people who are making positive contributions to
addressing the range of social problems in our country. I would like to
single out the contributions, specifically in drug abuse prevention, made
by Pastor Zacharia Motaung and his team at Carrol Shaw Memorial Centre at
Zuurbekom, Gauteng. Their alcohol and drug abuse regeneration programme for
young men also provides life skills training and is linked to a HIV/Aids
project.

During the course of this financial year, the department will be
undertaking a comprehensive review of social welfare legislation to
determine its relevance and adequacy to address the current challenges
facing the sector. The department has been systematically undergoing a
transformation process. We have changed the paradigm within which we
operate from welfarism to social development, as reflected in our change of
name. We seek to promote services and programmes that enable people to move
out of poverty. We have restructured our programmes, systems and processes
to accelerate social delivery.

A human resource development strategy in line with a ten-point plan and
strategic direction of the national department is also being developed.
This strategy is expected to identify the gaps in human resource
development, given the changed socioeconomic context and the provision of
basic social welfare services that are required of Government. The strategy
is to cover critical areas of skills deficits and reorientation of
officials to social development.

Our understanding of social development is also informed by the principle
of international solidarity, and will continue our efforts on this front.
Last year the Ministry developed a solidarity plan with the people of
Angola. We hope to continue this and to work in other parts of Africa. In
this regard, I would like to single out the contribution made and work done
by the Muslim Relief Organisation and Muslim community in general. Their
contribution to the solidarity campaign in Angola, Burundi and Somalia and
the assistance they provide to poor people is a source of pride for our
country.

I would like to end this budget speech at the point and which I began it,
by acknowledging the protection and promotion of the rights and dignity of
the elderly. The Moral Summit that was held and the debates in the National
Assembly on restoring the moral fibre of our society, have all reiterated
the need to restore and sustain the ethic that says ``any older person is
my parent'', and ``any child is my child''. It is vital that the steady
transformation that is reflected in all aspects of our national life must
improve the social and material conditions of older people and children.

We must all dedicate this year to building unity in action for change. We
must not forget that the United Nations has declared this year the
International Year for Volunteers. We need to ensure that all sectors of
our society have a stake in our country. We must move away from the
patterns of social exclusion and ensure social inclusion and solidarity. In
this regard, we appeal to and encourage our youth to participate with the
same commitment and dedication that they showed in the struggle against
apartheid.

Thousands of our older people throughout the country have spoken out during
the public hearings and given evidence to the ministerial committee. I am
humbled by their experiences and I assure them that Government has heard
their cry. We cherish their continued contributions to the wellbeing of
families and communities in the face of extremely testing social and
material conditions.

The members of the ministerial committee on the abuse, neglect and ill-
treatment of older people have travelled the length and breadth of this
country and persevered in their difficult task. In addition to the main
report, the committee has produced detailed provincial reports that will
assist provincial governments in protecting older persons from neglect,
abuse and exploitation. I thank them for their commitment and the work they
have done. Because of their work, it will not be said that the mothers and
fathers of this nation are forgotten people. From all the foregoing, it is
clear that we are building a caring society.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Director-General of the Department of
Social Development, Ms Angela Bester, for what she has accomplished under
very, very difficult circumstances. The staff in the Ministry and the
department have been dedicated and selfless in their efforts, and I also
thank them. Although we still have a long way to go, there has been a great
improvement, and I am confident that if we continue to work together, to
provide better services and support to our people, they will continue to be
grateful to us all. [Applause.]

Mr E SALOOJEE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, it is in the spirit of renewal
and in recognition of his leadership that I would like to congratulate the
Minister on changing the name of this department to Social Development. I
believe that this means more than a name change. I believe that this is the
result of a fundamental move away from providing the kind of welfare
services that are associated with state charity and dependency on the part
of the recipients.

The name change implies that individuals and communities must become self-
reliant, and it is coming at a time when the ANC-led Government's
commitment to fostering a just and equitable society is beginning to bear
fruit. This timely focus on social development represents a coherent and
integrated policy and delivery framework that will ensure the
transformation of society as we know it, and create the environment
necessary for appropriate human development.

At the core of the social development approach is the belief that
Government must harmonise intervention with programmes for economic
development in order to maximise people's ability to determine for
themselves what their needs are and how these needs are to be met. If one
looks at Government interventions over the last few years, and in
particular this year's Budget, it is clear that our Government is
systematically implementing principles of a social development approach. It
is implementing policies and programmes that target the holistic social
development of a nation and strive to unlock the potential of millions of
South Africans, thusfar hindered by extreme poverty and stark social and
economic inequality.

We in the social development sector have committed ourselves to creating a
vibrant and dynamic human resource capacity, able to participate actively
in the kind of social development that will irreversibly transform this
country into one where the previously excluded majority enjoys full and
complete citizenship. We recognise that the state has an important role to
play in planning and directing economic development. At the same time, we
recognise that there are a range of nongovernmental and community-based
organisations that form an implementation network which is critical to
successful development.

Finally, we recognise that ordinary people must have a real say in how
development interventions impact on them. Therefore seeing the large number
of people in the public gallery is most inspiring, and I want to believe
that this is due to that expression of the ANC's commitment to involve
civil society.

One such intervention is the payment of social security grants to more than
3 million people every month. The old age grant of R540 per month provides
the most basic food security for entire families and therefore sustains
entire communities. We have greatly increased the number of children who
benefit from the child support grant, and we are going to appeal to the
Minister, who is sitting on this side of the House, and to the Minister of
Finance, to give serious thought to the possibility of extending the reach
of the grant by raising the age limit.

If one compares the R19 billion per annum allocation to social security
with what is spent in other developing countries, and given the fact that
we are a young democracy, this is a substantial investment in the most
disadvantaged section of our community. While we are aware of budgetary
constraints, we commend the Minister of Finance for his commitment to link
increases in social grants to inflation in the medium term.

Social security is a fundamental right of our people. We are however
charged with ensuring that we make payments to beneficiaries in a way that
respects their dignity and self-worth. There have been a number of problems
with regard to the conditions under which payments are made, and our
Minister has addressed them.

We are encouraged that he is really sensitive to the concerns expressed by
the recipients of these benefits and by civil society in general. He went
out there to see for himself, and he was moved. He has shown signs that
something is actively going to be done to ensure that service delivery
occurs efficiently and in an environment which respects the dignity of the
recipients.

We trust that the measures that he has started putting in place will have
the effect of immediately alleviating problems at paypoints. We also
believe that local government can become an active participant in the
delivery of services by making available payment halls, drinking water,
sanitation facilities and shelter for beneficiaries.

We further commend the Minister for the appointment of a committee of
inquiry into the comprehensive transformation of our social security
system. Without pre-empting the outcome of the committee's deliberations, I
would like to suggest that we start debating an important question that has
been raised by a number of our social partners. I am referring here to the
idea that the most immediate impact we could have on alleviating poverty
and stimulating people's participation in the economy would possibly be by
making a basic income grant available to all our people. [Interjections.]
That is only a proposal.

The debate need ... [Interjections.] I am not going to be distracted by
that member. The debate need not be limited to an income grant. There are
other innovative possibilities to explore, such as ways of ensuring food
security, which could contribute meaningfully to enhancing the quality of
life of millions of our people. [Interjections.] Other developing nations
have already been moving in this direction, and I am confident that we too
could do the same. [Interjections.]

However, we are a society in transition, which makes it extremely difficult
to realise immediately all the social justice ideals we have repeatedly
expressed. The legacy of structural poverty and the disintegration of
family life because of the effects of denigration and humiliation in our
communities, which you-know-who was responsible for, are taking their toll.
Each day we hear about violence against women and children, and cases of
abuse of older persons.

Last year we commended the Minister for the appointment of a committee of
inquiry into the abuse and neglect of older persons. We are glad to note
that the work of the committee has now been finalised. Its report tells the
most horrendous stories of pain and humiliation experienced by grandmothers
and grandfathers. The recommendations of this committee will now be
translated into enabling legislation and programmes that will focus on
protecting our elderly and restoring the dignified place that they deserve
in our communities.

In relation to the abuse of children, we note with some concern that it is
taking the SA Law Commission a long time to produce proposals for a
comprehensive Child Care Act. It is encouraging to note that they have
signalled that they are expediting that work. While the Law Commission is
completing their work on comprehensive legislation, we call upon them,
should it become necessary, to make serious recommendations on immediate
legislative measures that can be introduced to strengthen the protection
and care of our children. We also want to make a plea to the Department of
Safety and Security that when specialist units are being rationalised,
special attention must be given to ensuring that the services of the SAPS
Child Protection Units are strengthened and that they remain one of the
best resourced services, in the interest of our children.

There are a number of challenges facing the Department of Social
Development that will impact on the implementation of the programmes
detailed in this year's budget. Among them is the need to enhance the
ability of nongovernmental and community-based organisations to assist in
the implementation of development programmes.

The ANC has taken the first steps towards creating a relationship of trust
and co-operation with organisations of civil society. I do not believe
there is any other formation that is so deeply involved in encouraging and
inspiring the emergence of civil society organisations. We now need to
build on and consolidate these partnerships that we have created.

Where there is partnership between government and civil society, there is
community organisation, which in turn broadens people's participation in
the dynamic democratic processes. In fact, South Africa has a long history
of organisations that are rooted in our communities and that have made a
crucial contribution to the survival of communities that were seriously
threatened by underdevelopment and neglect.

The kinds of services we are talking about are daycare centres for our
children and service centres for the aged and persons with disabilities -
this is what this Government is doing. There is a critical need for care-
giving programmes for families infected with and affected by HIV/Aids,
especially in those areas of our country worst hit by the pandemic. We
support those programmes already put into operation through partnerships.

We are greatly encouraged to hear from one of the provinces that they are
actively and innovatively channelling funds in their budgets to
organisations in formerly disadvantaged communities. We also appeal to the
funding agencies set up by our Government to create an enabling rather that
a frustrating environment for development organisations.
Another positive step that our Government has taken is affording tax
incentives to donors who give to nonprofit organisations, especially those
that promote the wellbeing of families and children, care for the destitute
and aged, and help prevent HIV or care for those impoverished by Aids. Tax
breaks for donors are an essential instrument if we want to promote a
nonprofit sector that can assist Government in delivering essential
services to our people.

These challenges are, in part, the result of the structural poverty that is
part of our history. But we face these challenges also because the ANC -
led government is prepared to grapple with the issues of integrated human
development. We acknowledge these challenges because we are committed to a
fundamental transformation in the life opportunities available to all our
people.

No longer do we banish people to the margins of underdevelopment. We have
heard our people, young and old, in the rural areas and in the cities, and
we are responding to them by starting to shape the kind of society we can
all be proud of. This budget takes a courageous step in that direction, and
I therefore support it.

Mr M L DA CAMARA: Chairperson and hon members, ours is a Government so
mired in mediocrity and steeped in self- congratulation, yet so woefully
ineffectual in its fight against poverty that it has totally lost touch
with its own constituents.

The Government's pedestrian attitude towards delivery is best demonstrated
by its insensitive response to the untold hardships that the reregistration
process has caused. Nowhere is this more the case than in the Eastern Cape
where thousands of disability grant recipients have resorted to going to
court to challenge their own government. This is the same attitude that has
been adopted when welfare funds go unspent, yet the Minister responsible
still serves in the Cabinet.

Over and above the meagre increases in grants, this Budget fails on the
following counts. No allowance has been made for the almost certain
increase in the demands for the fostercare grant which pays four times more
than the child support grant. This will surely be taken up by more and more
people. As many as 50% of our rural children have not been registered and
do not possess a birth certificate. Their applications have not been
budgeted for, nor has a basic income grant been catered for.

Although the Taylor commission is considering the introduction of a basic
income grant, this suggestion was curtly dismissed by the Minister of
Finance as ludicrous when the hon Ken Andrew recommended it. I am sure that
the hon Ken Andrew is only too pleased to give Government the lead.
[Interjections.] But above all, no provision has been made for the drastic
increase in the number of children infected and affected by HIV/Aids.

The department also claims there is a shift in focus from welfare grants to
poverty eradication through the poverty relief programmes, which in theory
should be welcome. However, the poverty relief programmes still only
constitute 0,4% of the total social development budget - nowhere near
enough. And even this programme has its own problems. Almost 50% of the
poverty relief funds, an amount of R36,7 million, went unspent last year.
These are the hon the Minister's own Director-General's figures.

According to the Independent Development Trust, many registered projects do
not exist. Where the money goes, who knows? Poor management has also led to
a large amount of these funds not reaching targeted groups. When it comes
to the care of our children, this department's policies and priorities, as
set out by this budget, can only be regarded as a transgression of the Bill
of Rights in our Constitution.

According to the Child Health Policy Institute:


  In South Africa the social security system is incoherent,
  noncomprehensiv,e and has several legislative and administrative
  limitations. In addition, it provides for certain contingencies, such as
  severe disability in childhood, while failing to provide for others, such
  as childhood chronic illnesses.

Even the child support grant, which is the biggest such contingency, is
severely inadequate. Today, R10 would not buy a basket of goods containing
a loaf of bread, a litre of milk and half a dozen eggs. It is therefore not
surprising that the pleasure that the Minister of Finance took in
announcing this mere R10 increase in the child support grant is a pleasure
not shared by those who desperately depend on this income. [Applause.]
This, of course, is compounded by the fact that only children below the age
of seven are entitled to this minute allowance. Another mediocre step has
been taken with very little effect on poverty, but a profound effect on our
society, and in the words of Idasa, it will lead, and I quote:


  ... to other social ills, such as child prostitution, higher HIV/Aids
  rates, and larger numbers of children entering the criminal system who
  were forced to fend for themselves.

In rural areas as many as 50% of children do not possess birth
certificates. This, together with the fact that few courts exist in the
rural areas with the competency to settle such matters, such as the foster
care grant, will mean that beneficiaries in the urban areas will have
greater access to the foster care grant, and yet in rural areas the need is
the greatest. This merely perpetuates another urban bias.

This brings me to the next issue of great importance, an issue that this
budget fails miserably to address. We are faced with a catastrophe of
momentous proportions, a catastrophe that we should have seen coming and
for which we should have been prepared. This catastrophe will be the
greatest challenge that our democracy is yet to face. This catastrophe is
the number of Aids orphans that we are going to have because of our lack of
response.

By all estimates, the current rate of HIV/Aids infection will leave us with
orphans numbering in the millions. If any doubt exists in this regard, here
are some figures we cannot ignore. There are already more than 150 000 Aids
orphans in South Africa today. Already it is estimated that approximately
9% of all children live in child-headed households and that approximately
60% to 80% of children, born to people living with Aids, will not be
infected and will therefore become orphans in the first ten years of their
life.

At this rate, Aids orphans will constitute 9% to 12% of the population in a
province like KwaZulu-Natal by 2010. This must surely be addressed as a
matter of urgency. Regrettably, it is not. [Applause.] Aids Analysis
Africa, which has seen this tragedy unfold in the rest of Africa, puts it
more graphically, and I quote:


  Prospects for orphans are not good at the best of times. In the context
  of the Aids pandemic, they are even bleaker. The extended family or
  family friends may take in orphans, but the growing number of Aids
  deaths, and the capacity of families to absorb these children, is
  reaching its limit. Because of the historic role of the extended family
  there are few established institutions in Africa able and willing to take
  on the task for orphans.

The implication of these facts for the social security network in future in
our country can only result in a greater demand for child support and care
grants. How much longer do we have to wait? How much longer are we going to
sit and twiddle our thumbs while waiting for delivery? [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr M T MASUTHA: Sihlalo, ngicela ukuthi ngiqale ngokubingelela omama
nawobaba abeze lapha namhlanje ukuzosekela inkulumo yethu. [Chairperson,
firstly I take pleasure in saluting fathers and mothers who are here today
to support our debate.]

We, in the ANC, believe that there is no need for a contradiction to exist
between the pursuit of the goals of achieving optimum economic growth and
prosperity, on the one hand, and human or social development on the other.
On the contrary I believe that these goals are mutually supportive and that
they must therefore be pursued simultaneously with the same zeal, passion
and sense of urgency.

In an article published in the Sunday Times of 25 February of this year
entitled ``Top judge warns SA of chaos if the poor are left to rot'', the
deliberation by the President of the Constitutional Court at the Oliver
Shreiner Memorial Lecture, delivered at Wits law school on 22 February, was
quoted extensively. The learned judge premised his deliberation on the
values enshrined in our Constitution, and stated the following, amongst
other things:


  The rule of law, dignity, and equality and freedom are foundations on
  which we can build our future. We need to have an understanding of what
  these values mean and commitment to respect them in our day-to-day lives
  in our dealings with each other. We should realise that if large sections
  of the community live in conditions in which they are unable to sustain
  their dignity, this raises not only moral concerns regarding the way we
  organise our lives, but also creates fault lines that can lead to the
  fragmentation of our society and the lack of respect for law and
  Government.

Judge Chaskalson went on to urge a better understanding for the value of
social justice and the impact that it would have on our society, if greater
attention were given to it by the South African community. He stated that
South Africa might have been saved much suffering if the leaders of the
professions, commerce, industry and other powerful institutions had
followed the example of the late Judge Schreiner who opposed the apartheid
government's attempts to remove coloured people from the voters' roll, and
had been more concerned about values and less about their own interests.

In its report entitled ``South Africa: Transformation for Human
Development, 2000'' the United Nations Development Programme UNDP in
critiquing the South African transformation programme, under the heading:
``An agenda for a human development-driven society by 2010'' states the
following, and I quote:


  The promise of a struggle for emancipation will ring hollow if South
  Africa does not translate political freedom into human development. Human
  development is not an option. Indeed, if there is to be social and
  political stability and economic growth, it is an imperative.

The report proceeds to state, and I quote:


  For South Africa sustainable human development implies a rapid process of
  redress, social reconciliation, nation-building and economic growth, with
  equity alongside the sustainable utilisation of national resources. South
  Africa's journey of liberation and transformation highlights the
  importance of pursuing the human development process in an environment
  that promotes equity, affirmation, self-respect, participation and human
  rights.


  If this is not done, the time bomb of poverty, accompanied by related
  pathologies, and some of the worst forms of violence, particularly
  against women, children and the elderly, will erode the legitimacy and
  power of a democratic state.

In a recent judgment by the Constitutional Court in the famous Grootboom
case, the unresolved question of justifiability of socioeconomic rights was
put to rest in a legal contestation. In that judgement, the enforcement of
the rights of access to adequate housing, as enshrined in the Bill of
Rights under section 26(2), read with section 28(1)(c), which in turn
provides for the right of children to basic nutrition, shelter, basic
health care services and social services, was upheld by a unanimous
decision delivered by Judge Yakoob.

In the case in question, the Constitutional Court confirmed, in part, the
judgment of the Cape Provincial Division of the High Court, in which the
Government was ordered to provide the respondents in the matter, who were
destitute children and their parents, with adequate basic shelter or
housing until they obtained permanent accommodation. In upholding this
decision, the Constitutional Court made an order to the effect that, and I
quote:


  ... the state devise and implement within its available resources a
  comprehensive and co-ordinated programme progressively to realise the
  right of access to adequate housing.

In the light of all these imperatives a question has to be asked, quite
legitimately so, as to how the ANC-led Government which, as the last
general elections showed, enjoys the overwhelming support of all the people
of our country across the board, has responded or is responding to this
challenge.

In January 2000 the Minister of Social Development, Dr Zola Skweyiya,
shortly after coming into office and after conducting a nationwide visit to
provinces to assess the living conditions in which the majority of our
people find themselves, published a statement in which he outlined a ten-
point plan as a way forward towards the building of a caring society and
putting people first for sustainable development. In his opening remarks
the Minister had the following to say, and I quote:


  Let me begin by saying that I have one overriding impression after six
  months in this Ministry, and that is that the welfare system in this
  country is failing those who most need its support.
The third amongst the ten points which the Minister proposed in the
statement is the following, and I quote:


  ... the development of a comprehensive social security system that links
  contributory and noncontributory schemes and prioritises the most
  vulnerable households.

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, last year the hon the
Minister defined ten priorities for the development of a new and equitable
social development system. This ten-point plan was to be developed over a
period of five years. With the appointment of a ministerial committee due
to the report in June this year, which is to investigate a comprehensive
social security system we expected a number of these priorities to have
been addressed. We applaud the shift from conventional welfare concepts and
models, to a new and innovative approach to social development.

The reason I am referring to these is that we have already noticed the
shift in programmes and activity, and we are now looking forward with great
expectation to the report. There is a great need to qualify and quantify
the fundamental changes necessary for the social development departments at
national and provincial level to render a social security service of which
South Africans can be proud.

Over the past years the departments have been engaged in cleaning up the
social grant system. This clean up, ie the elimination of fraud and
corruption, has been successful. However, volume II of the department's
provincial report reveals complaints, particularly against CPS, the vehicle
for pension delivery, that it is not efficient and user-friendly. There are
even reports of CPS security staff demanding money from pensioners.

The hon the Minister paid a number of extensive visits to the provinces to
inspect service delivery, and he himself saw evidence of the problems that
have been of concern to us. The Minister said that the delivery of pensions
by private contractors requires significant improvement, and we totally
agree with that. Tender requirements need to be tightened up and monitoring
of delivery should also be encouraged at community level. Paypoints should
be re-evaluated and local facilities made available. We cannot be a proud
democracy if we do not treat the most vulnerable members of society with
respect.

Members of this House are only too aware of the hardships caused by the
reregistration process, which we agreed was necessary to eliminate fraud.
However, legitimate claimants were not treated with speed and empathy, and
we therefore plead with staff dealing with social grants to treat
pensioners with the courtesy we feel every South African citizen is
entitled to. The level of training for public servants interacting with the
public leaves much to be desired.  As members of Parliament acting on
behalf of pensioners from time to time, we seem to be able to sort out
problems and get the kind of co-operation which appears to be denied those
who need it most.

The emerging thrust of policy away from conventional models to preventative
and community-based models is appreciated. Self-reliance among individuals
and communities is the cornerstone of the IFP philosophy.  We therefore
commend the shift towards involving and capacitating communities with
regard to poverty relief and appropriate programmes for HIV/Aids orphans
and child- headed households. For the latter programmes - HIV/Aids - only
R1,5 million has been allocated per province for a pilot project.
Considering the nature of this problem, this seems to be inadequate.

The reduction in the poverty alleviation programmes by 56% because of
administrative lack of capacity, however financially prudent, is a cause
for concern. Would it not have been more effective to increase the capacity
of the programme management? We will have to monitor the effect of this
decision and reserve judgement. Would it not have been possible to
capacitate existing and emerging NGOs? Do we not have a responsibility to
increase these activities in view of the figures reflected in the latest
copy of Indicator, which lists the results of a recent survey in Gauteng,
the Northern Province and KwaZulu-Natal as having 10% of its households
subsisting on R200 and less, and are 35% on between R200 and R799?

The department states that in terms of the 1996 Nonprofit Organisations
Act, it now has administrative systems in place with regard to the
governance and capacity-building of emerging NGOs. We would like to be
informed of the implication of this, as we believe that NGOs are the key to
effective poverty relief delivery.

Although the provision of social security rests with the provinces, the
national department has developed comprehensive norms and standards for
social security. The Provincial Report, however, reveals that although the
gross national expenditure has increased from R14,3 billion in 1995-96 to
R20,6 billion in 2000-01, the real value of social welfare grants has
declined. Provinces have to face difficult decisions in allocating funds.
According to Idasa, there is a real decline of -2% in the total
consolidated budget for 2000-01.

Accepting that social grants currently form the main component of poverty
relief, we note that ... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, the Vote we are dealing
with today includes poverty relief, which is one of our key performance
areas as the ANC-led Government, for it is our ability to deal with the
scourge of poverty that will give South Africans hope in life.

Let me drink from the cup an internationally renowned author, Sydney
Sheldon:


  The stars are shining on us, watching us living our small lives and
  weeping for us.

Our challenge is therefore to ensure that we deliver and that the stars
shine on us. Of course, the fear of the hon Da Camara will be reduced by
0,4%.

Ke keletso ya me gore re le morafe re kopane go lwantsha lehuma mo nageng
ya rona, ka le sa tlhaole e bile le se na mmala. Mo tekanyetsokabong eno,
R50 milione e neetswe namololeuba kgotsa poverty relief. Ke na le
tsholofelo ya gore lefapha, jaaka gale, le ya go tlhokomela gore go nna le
tsamaiso e e lolameng ya diporogerama kgotsa mananeo otlhe. Kgwetlhokgolo
ya rona ke go inyalanya le se morafe o se tlhokang. Ga re kitla re letla go
nna le bogwenegwene bope mo go se se lebaneng morafe wa rona, ka e bile
morafe ga jaana o itse ditshwanelo tsa ona.

Re akgola Tona ya rona ka matsapa ao a a tsereng go tsibogela lehuma mo
nageng ya rona. Ke la ntlha mo hisitoring ya naga ya rona lehuma le
tsibogelwa ka mananeo a a rileng. Khumanego ka boyona ke tshwantshiso fela.
Serasegolo ke botlhokatiro. Jaanong ke maikarabelo a rona rotlhe go lwa
kgatlhanong le dira tse, botlhokatiro le khumanego. Gopola, kopano ke
maatla!

Ditsela tsa go rarabolola leuba di ka nna pedi. Ya ntlha, ke go lebelela
magae a a senang lotseno gotlhelele, mme sengwe sa dirwa gore go nne le
sengwe se malapa ao a se isang mpeng. Ya bobedi, ke go netefatsa gore
mananeo a tlhagisoditiro kgotsa labour intensive programmes, a mo go one
baagi botlhe, segolo jang ba metseselegae, ba nnang le lotseno, a a
ribololwa.

Jaanong tharabololo ya ntlha ke go netefatsa, jaaka maloko a Palamente gore
re nne le boiketlo fela fa re ka bona legae lengwe le lengwe le na le
bogobe pele go robalwa. Tharabololo ya bobedi yona e tla netefatsa gore
mongwe le mongwe mo nageng ya rona a dire. Se se tla tokafatsa maemo a
ikonomi ya naga ya rona le go busetsa bagaetsho seriti sa bona.

Ke na le tsholofelo ya gore lefapha le na le bokgoni ba go diragatsa
mananeo a ka bonontlhotlho le go sekaseka kwa lehuma le leng lentsi, mme go
se nne le go sekamela felo go le gongwe fela, ka bana ba motho ba kgaogana
tlhogo tsie.

Ke a itse gore go nna le selelo, fa re kopana le batho ba rona, sa gore fa
re lebelela mo ditekanyetsokabong tsa rona kgotsa mananeo a a dirwang, re
lebeletse diporofense di le tharo fela. Go na le mabaka a a rotloetsang go
lebelelwa ga diporofense tseo. Go le gantsi re a ba tlhalosetsa.

Puso eno, e e eteletsweng pele ke mokgatlho wa ANC, e tla netefatsa
tlhabololo ya mafaratlhatlha le bomaitseanape ba ba maleba. Letsema le
thata ka mong. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[It is my desire that as a nation we should all unite against poverty,
because it does not discriminate according to race. In this budget, R50
million has been set aside for poverty relief, and I hope that the
department will ensure the smooth coperation of these programmes. Our
greatest challenge is to meet the needs of our nation. We are not going to
let any form of corruption interfere with what rightfully belongs to our
nation, especially now that the nation knows its rights.

We appreciate the Minister's response to poverty in our country. This is
the first time in the history of our country that we have these kinds of
programmes in response to poverty. Poverty is only an image, the greatest
enemy is unemployment. It is therefore the responsibility of all of us to
fight against unemployment and poverty. Remember, unity is strength.

There are two ways of dealing with poverty. The first way is to look at
families that do not have any income at all and do something about their
situation, to ensure that they also have something to eat before they go to
bed. The second way is to ensure the implementation of programmes such as
the labour intensive programmes, in which people, especially those in the
rural areas, have an income.

The first solution is therefore to ensure, as members of Parliament, that
we will only be at peace when all the families have something to eat before
they go to bed. The second solution would ensure that every citizen of our
country is employed. This will help develop the economy of our country and
restore the dignity of our people.

I have every confidence that the department has the ability to ensure the
smooth implementation of these programmes and identify the poverty-stricken
areas, so as to avoid concentrating on one area only. We have to share the
resources as a nation.

I know that our people are complaining that our budgets or programmes
concentrate on three provinces only. There are specific reasons why we are
concentrating on these three provinces. In most cases we explain things to
our people.

This ANC-led Government, will ensure network development and the provision
of the relevant people. Work is easier when the one who is in charge of it
is present.]

The department makes use of the expertise of agencies such as the
Independent Development Trust to implement the developmental part of
poverty relief and to ensure that funds are used for job creation schemes
in rural areas. This will be done through funding community-based projects.
This is where we are making a concerted effort to teach our people how to
catch fish, and at the same time are addressing unemployment.

The other approach, as the Minister has already said, must be joint
ventures with big business and ensuring that jobs are created. It is here
where the department can utilise the expertise of the Department of Trade
and Industry to devise mechanisms that can ensure that such proposals
become attractive to business.

I am from Taung and I represent a very poor constituency. I have first-hand
experience of how poverty is ruining the lives of our people; how some of
our people have to survive without food for more than two days; how the
indignity of poverty itself is a bondage to our people. This is where I
must give hope to the people, and I will not be able to live with my
conscience if we have not addressed the plight of these people when I leave
Parliament, maybe within the next three years.

In conclusion, as we are going into recess next week, I urge all my
colleagues here, including the executive, to pay visits to at least three
poverty-stricken families during this period, and ask themselves a very
simple question: ``Is this real?'' for it is true that if one wants to talk
the talk, one must walk the walk. [Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Chairperson, every South African has the right of
access to social security for themselves and their dependants, including
appropriate social assistance if they are unable to support themselves and
their dependants. Section 27 (1) and (2) of Chapter 2 of the Constitution,
compels the Government to take legislative action to realise these rights.

Today I am pleased to say that the New NP and the Democratic Alliance
succeeded in forcing the Government to acknowledge its disregard of the
Constitution in this very matter. Over a period of time, I have questioned
the legality of the present regulations on backpay to beneficiaries that
were supplied by the Government. On 7 March 2000 I received a reply from
the hon the Minister that confirmed that there are many South Africans who
have been deprived by the ANC Government of thousands of rands that are
rightfully due to them. In reply to my formal question the hon the Minister
stated, and I quote:


  The present policy of the department is to pay back for three months
  only, from the date of approval. However, if an application takes longer
  than three months to be put into payment, and the inability to do so is
  due to the negligence of the official, then consideration will be given
  to paying back from the date of application. The legislation is
  administratively unjust by contravening the rights of the beneficiary.

The hon the Minister further stated, and I quote:


  The validity of Regulation 11 has been contested as unconstitutional.

At present, regulation 11(1) states that the date of accrual shall be the
date on which the Director-General approves the application of the grant in
terms of Regulation 25(1), provided that the grant shall not accrue for a
period exceeding three months from the date of approval of the grant. I say
this is wrong, hon Minister.

As this regulation is inconsistent with the duty of the state in terms of
section 27(2) of the Constitution to take reasonable legislative and other
measures, within its own available resources, to achieve the progressive
realisation of the rights set out in section 27(1), the hon the Minister
has already issued instructions that the amendment to said said Regulation
11 will not be opposed and that the regulations pertaining to the Social
Assistance Act will be amended accordingly. These amendments to the
regulations are already available in draft form and will be gazetted before
the end of March 2001.

I want to thank the hon the Minister for this honest reply, but I want to
inform him that last Friday, 30 March, not one official in the Eastern Cape
was aware of this development. I would like to know from the hon the
Minister: How is this going to be rectified, and how will the people who
suffered due to this irregularity be compensated?

Die Departement van Maatskaplike Ontwikkeling is die een departement waar
gebrek aan dienslewering 'n direkte invloed het op die lewensomstandighede
van diegene wat op die staat aangewese is. 'n Mens sou verwag het dat die
ANC Regering sy opregtheid oor die verbetering van die lewensgehalte van
die armes en agtergeblewenes juis hier sou bewys, deur 'n voortreflike
program van dienslewering op alle vlakke. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dit is egter juis hier waar die ANC Regering se onvermoë om te lewer vir al
hoe meer Suid-Afrikaners 'n werklikheid word. Lêers raak onverklaarbaar
weg, pensioene word sonder rede gestaak, amptenare daag nie vir tuisbesoeke
op nie, gestremdes en bejaardes moet vir ure in toue staan om hulle geld te
ontvang, om maar slegs 'n paar voorbeelde te noem. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The Department of Social Development is the one department where a lack of
service delivery has a direct impact on the living conditions of those who
are dependent on the state. One would have expected the ANC Government to
prove its sincerity about the improvement of the quality of life of the
poor and the disadvantaged here in particular, by means of a commendable
programme of service delivery at all levels. [Interjections.]

However, it is precisely here where the ANC Government's inability to
deliver is becoming a reality for more and more South Africans. Files
disappear mysteriously, pensions are discontinued without reason, officials
fail to appear for home visits, disabled people and the elderly must queue
for hours to receive their money, to name but a few examples.]

The New NP and the DA then have to step in and help these people with their
problems through our committed involvement within the communities.
Die Regering se benadering tot die bejaarde en kindersorg wys duidelik dat
daar nie omgegee word vir bejaardes en kinders nie. Die bewys hiervoor is
die afname in beskikbare akkommodasie vir bejaardes en kinders in tehuise.
Daar was die afgelope vier jaar 'n afname in staatsondersteunde
akkommodasie van 95% ten opsigte van bejaardes, en 59% ten opsigte van
kinders. Is dit die optrede van 'n regering wat omgee vir en bejaardes en
kinders? [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The Government's approach to the elderly and child care shows clearly that
they do not care about the elderly and children. The proof of this lies in
the decrease in available accommodation for the elderly and children in
homes. In the past four years there has been a decrease of 95% in state-
subsidised accommodation with regard to the elderly, and 59% with regard to
children. Is this the behaviour of a government that cares about the
elderly and children? [Interjections.]]

We should all be committed to improving the quality of life of all these
people. But we will never achieve this if MECs and officials mislead the
hon the Minister and the director-general with regard to performance and
service delivery. I will be failing those people who have put their trust
in the New NP and the DA if I do not tell the hon the Minister that
somewhere, somebody is not telling him the truth.

On 23 January 2001 I asked the hon the Minister a question as to whether
any applications for grants in the Eastern Cape had been outstanding for
more than (a) three months, (b) one year and (c) two years, and if so, how
many in each case? The honest reply from the hon the Minister was that
there were 3 833 applications outstanding for the more than three months,
none for more than a year and none for more than two years. This file I am
carrying here contains the names and information of approximately 200
applications that are known to me to be outstanding for between six months
and four years. I will hand this file over to the hon the Minister after my
speech.  This is proof that somebody is lying to someone somewhere. I do
not know who is lying to whom.

In conclusion, we believe that a comprehensive vision is needed to address
the challenges of an integrated social development strategy, if we agree
that the priorities for social development are the rebuilding of family,
community and social relations; the establishment of an integrated poverty-
eradication strategy; the development of a comprehensive social security
system; action against violence against women and children and the abuse of
the elderly; dealing with the total effect of HIV/Aids in the community;
developing a national strategy for the youth; providing an accessible
social security system; and, lastly, promoting the rights of the disabled.

This will require a total commitment to co-operative governance, in which
all spheres of government will have a vital role to play, with specific
redefining of the role of NGOs and  greater emphasis on the role of CBOs in
the new social development strategy. If we embark on this course with the
commitment that it requires, we will start our journey down the road to
addressing the challenges within the social development sector. Only then
will we be able to say we are serious about the rights and the plight of
those who are in need. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, before we continue with
the business of the House, there are too many private meetings going on in
the House. I have indicated before that if hon members want to have private
meetings, they are quite welcome to conduct these meetings outside the
Chamber.

Nksz X C MAKASI: Mhlali-ngaphambili, baphathiswa, malungu ePalamente nabo
bonke abazali bethu noodade bethu abalapha namhlanje, ndiyabulisa.
Ndinovuyo kakhulu kukuba abazali noodade bethu bezile namhlanje. Le
Palamente babefuna ukuba beze kungena kuyo bayakwazi namhlanje ukungena
kuyo ngenxa ye-ANC. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Intetho yam namhlanje imalunga nokuphatheka kwabantu abadala emakhaya,
ezidolophini nakwiindawo abagcinwa kuzo. Ekhaya sikhule abantu abadala
bekhathalelwe ngendlela emangalisayo. Babefudula bengabantu abaluncedo
ekuhlaleni, kwiintsapho nakuluntu ngokubanzi. Nanjengoko kwaNtu kukho
iqhalo elithi, `Inyathi ibuzwa kwabaphambili', besibuza kubo ke ngoko.
Babefudula bengamathala ekuhlaleni, bengabafundisi-ntsapho, besoloko
becebisa abakhulayo ngentlalo yakwaNtu.

Kwakuye kuthi ukuba umntu omdala akanabo abantu bokumjonga, usapho luhlale
phantsi nezizalwana, kukhethwe umntwana oza kumjonga. Babefundisa abantu
abatsha ngezithethe namasiko akwaNtu, nto leyo eyayisenza ukuba isidima
sikaNtu singapheli. Kwakusithi xa kubalele, iimvula zingani, abantu abadala
babize iinkonde, benyuke intaba, baye kunqulwa uQamata, bacele imvula.
Imvula yayitsho ine emva koko. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms X C MAKASI: Chairperson, hon ministers, hon members of Parliament and
all the parents and our sisters that have come here today, I greet you. I
am very happy that our parents and sisters have come here today. Today they
have entered the Parliament that they wanted to enter because of the ANC.
[Applause.]

My speech today is about the treatment that elderly people in the rural
areas, towns and old-age homes receive.  In our homes the elderly used to
be well looked after when we were still growing up. They used to be very
important people within their families and communities. In African society
there is a proverb that says, ``The buffalo is enquired about from those
ahead'', (which literally means that the young and inexperienced should
seek advice from the old who are more experienced). They used to be sources
of information, teachers or educators, always advising those that were
growing up about the African way of life.

If there was nobody to look after an elderly person, the family and
relatives would sit down and choose a child that would be given the task of
looking after him or her. They taught young people about African customs
and traditional values and that was what maintained African dignity. When
these was little rain and there was a drought, old people would be called
and they would walk up the mountain to talk to Qamata and ask for rain.
Rain would then fall. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, please take your
seat for a moment. Members, the general rule of this House is that a member
speaks to the members of Parliament and not to the gallery.
[Interjections.] The general rule is that the gallery does not respond in
order for the Chair to be able to conduct the business of this House.
[Interjections.] Order! Hon members, if you disagree, you are most welcome
to rise on a point of order. I am merely indicating to you what the rules
of the House are in order that the Chair can keep control of the
proceedings, and that those who are in the gallery are here as visitors.

Nksz X C MAKASI: Indlela yokuphatheka kwabantu abadala itshintshile.
Baphatheke kakubi ngendlela emangalisayo. Ndibulela uRhulumente okhokelwa
yi-ANC ngokunika ingqwalasela kwintlalo yabazali bethu.

UMphathiswa wethu lowa uhleli phaya, uZola Skweyiya, ndiyambulela ngokuthi
akuwabona la masikizi anganyamezeli, koko aseke ikomiti yophando
ngempatheko-mbi yabantu abadala. Siyayibulela kananjalo nekomiti leyo,
ngendlela ethe yaluqhuba ngayo uphando lwayo, ngoba iye yabuya neziphumo
eziphucukileyo.

Iziphumo zophando zisibonise ukuba abantu abadala baphatheke kakubi
ngeendlela ezahlukeneyo. Bashiywa emakhaya bengenabantu bokubajonga imini
yonke, ngelo xesha umntu lowo mdala engakwazi kuzenzela kutya, engakwazi
nokuzihlamba. Bashiywa nabazukulwana ngoonyana neentombi zabo ziye kuhlala
ezidolophini, zingathumeli mali yokuba bondliwe abo bantwana.  Umntu omdala
kufuneke ebondle ngenkam-nkam. Abo bazukulwana baphinda bayihluthe nale
nkam-nkam.

Oomama bethu bathi bakuba badala babonwe njengamagqwirha ezilalini,
babulawe, batshiswe nezindlu. Kananjalo, oomama bethu baba ngamaxhoba
okudlwengulwa lulutsha, ngakumbi olunentsholongwane yeAids ngoba lukholelwa
ekubeni luyazinyanga ngolo hlobo. Lukholelwa ekubeni umntwana ufumana
ukuphila xa athe wazithabathela isondo kumntu omdala ongasenamyeni. Ulutsha
maluyazi into yokuba ayikho into enjalo, koko lusulela abazali bethu
ngeHIV.

Abanye abantu abadala bathi xa beye kwamkela inkam-nkam bafike bengaveli
kuluhlu lokwamkela, kusithiwa umntu wabhubha. Iphinda naleyo ithabathe
ixesha, kube ziinyanga okanye iminyaka phambi kokuba aphinde afumane imali
yakhe.

Singamalungu e-ANC sizimisele ukuba ngabaququzeleli benguqu ekuhlaleni,
sibuyise isidima, imbeko nokhathalelo lwabantu abadala. Injongo
kaRhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC kukubonelela ngeenkonzo ezinokubangela ukuba
abantu bakwazi ukuzinceda, nto leyo eya kubangela ukuba abahlali babajonge
abantu abadala bekunye nabo ekuhlaleni, bengasiwanga kwiindawo zokubagcina
abahlala bebodwa kuzo. Loo nto iya kubangela into yokuba sikwazi
ukubaphatha ngendlela ephucukileyo nenentlonipho ukuze nabo bazibone ukuba
bayafuneka namava abo phakathi kwethu, nasekwakhiweni kwesizwe esimanyeneyo
sabantu bonke baseMzantsi Afrika.

Xa ndibona iindawo ekugcinwa kuzo abantu abadala ndiqaphela ukuba ziindawo
ezikumgangatho wabantu abangahlelelekanga kuphela, loo nto yenza ukuba kube
kunzima ukuba abantu bethu baye kuzo kuba amaxabiso aphezulu. Zona
ezisekuhlaleni azinazo zonke iimfuno zabantu abadala. Kambe ke uRhulumente
uziphethe zonke ezo zinto, uza kuzilungisa.

Kananjalo, siyabulela kuMphathiswa ngonyuselo lwe-R30 alwenzele abamkeli
benkam-nkam.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The treatment of elderly people has changed dramatically. Their treatment
is shocking. I thank the ANC-led government for looking at the social
welfare of our people.

I would like to thank the hon Minister Zola Skweyiya seated over there for
setting up a committee to investigate the ill-treatment of the elderly. We
would like to thank the committee as well for the way it conducted the
investigations as it came up with good results.

The results showed us that the elderly are ill-treated in different ways.
During the day they are left alone at home with nobody to look after them.
The elderly old person is not even able to cook or wash him or herself.
Their sons and daughters go to live in the cities and towns and leave them
to look after their grand children, while they themselves do not send any
money to help feed those children. The elderly person is expected to feed
them from the old-age pension. The grandchildren in turn steal that money
and run off with it.

When our mothers grow old they are seen as witches in the rural areas,
their houses are set alight and they burn to death.  Our mothers are raped
by young people, particularly those that have AIDS, because they believe
that in this way they will be cured. There is a belief among young people
that they will be cured if and when they sleep with an old woman who does
not have a husband. The youth should realise that that is not true, and
that what they are doing is infecting our parents with HIV.

Other elderly people's names do not appear on the lists when pensions are
paid out. They are told that according to the records they are deceased.
Sorting that problem out takes a very long time, and it could be months or
even years before they get their money back.

As members of the ANC we are committed to bringing about change in our
communities, and restoring our dignity and caring for the elderly. The aim
of the ANC-led Government is to provide services that will assist people to
care for and look after the elderly, and not send them to old-age homes
where they are alone. That will enable us to look after them with respect,
so that they too can see that they are still valuable in society and that
their experience can contribute towards unifying the people of South
Africa.

When I look at the old-age homes, I notice that they are places meant only
for those who can afford to pay and that makes it difficult for our people
to go to them, because the costs are very high. Those that we have in our
(previously disadvantaged) communities do not have all the facilities to
meet the needs of the elderly and service is poor. However, the Government
knows about this and is going to correct the situation.

We would also like to thank the Minister for the R30 increase in the old-
age pension.]

When we look back at the history of the pensioners of South Africa, we
remember how black people were abused by the state. There were disparities
in service by other parties and hence a legacy of abuse. The ANC Government
is committed to change. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Njing L M MBADI: Somlomo, Mphathiswa woPhuhliso lweNtlalo-ntle, nabanye
abaphathiswa, umeme abantu abadala, Letha, okokuba babekhona, bakuve xa
usaba esi sithebe ukuze batye. Kodwa ke into eyinqaphuzane yile yokuba
ngokwakokwethu, usiko, kundalashe, abantu abamameli nje kuphela, bayaqhwaba
apho babona izinto zisiza ngakubo. Iya ndothusa ke ngoko into yokuba
uSomlomo abavale umlomo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa pargraph
follows.)

[Prof L M MBADI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Social Development and
other Ministers, Letha (the Minister of Social Development) has invited
people to be present when he cuts up the cake. However, in terms of our
tradition people do not just listen, they applaud when they see things
coming their way. It shocks me, therefore, that the Chairperson has
prohibited them from doing so. [Applause.]]

The Department of Social Development focuses on welfare grants, social
services policy development and monitoring. The provincial governments, on
the other hand, are responsible for funding and delivery of welfare
services and social grants. The Gender Advocacy Programme wants to ensure
the attainment of wellbeing by all citizens, which is translated into
proper and adequate access to welfare services, comprehensive social
security and eradication of poverty. This should be achieved by matching
policy commitment with appropriate budgeting allocations.

We urge the department to put its priorities in the correct sequence in
terms of who is targeted by the budget and who benefits. We are all aware
that appropriate allocations seldom reach their targets due to lack of
capacity and fraud. In his opening address, at the National Consultative
Conference on ``Building a Caring Society Together'', on 20 March 2001, Dr
Skweyiya stressed the reassertion of the vision of a people-centred
society. He said:


  We must begin to strengthen our ability to build ``unity in action'' to
  address the plight of the excluded and poorest members of our society. To
  do this effectively we must have a unified action plan, we must ``see
  with one eye - Ngasonye''!

The budget placed before us by the Minister is an attempt to put in place
democratic, responsive and sustainable systems, as well as measures of
social development to address social exclusion, poverty and inequality.
During 2000 the Minister of Social Development visited various provinces to
assess the state of service delivery in the areas of social assistance,
welfare services and poverty relief projects.

It is heartening to note that the department intends addressing, in the
short and medium term, the key operational and policy concerns identified
by the Minister. One of these is the payment of pensions by private
contractors, which requires significant improvement.

There are problems with respect to the reregistration of pensioners.
Effective implementation of poverty relief projects requires capacity-
building at the community level; and provincial welfare infrastructure,
such as pension paypoints. In addition, administration offices are in need
of upgrading.

Appropriate programmes targeting persons affected by HIV/Aids, especially
Aids orphans and child-headed households, should be implemented soon. While
we welcome the increase of R30 in the social security grant and the
increase of R10 in the child support grant, we feel very strongly that
these amounts fall short of alleviating poverty in the rural areas.

Unemployment and job losses put a strain on these amounts. In some
villages, households of eight and more depend solely on the social security
grant of a grandmother. She has to buy food, clothe her grandchildren, buy
books, and pay school fees. Can she manage with this R570, R70 of which is
used on transport to the paypoints and the grocery shops? It is worse when
the grandmother has a son who has been retrenched by the mines. It is these
sons who abuse their mothers in order to buy tobacco and liquor.

The major problem in the rural areas is accessing the grants - social
security grants, child support grants, disability grants, etc. The same
official who is in charge of making payouts is also in charge of processing
applications.  The Eastern Cape is striving to solve this problem during
the 2001-02 financial year by outsourcing the payment of social grants. The
social security staff will be freed, thus enabling them to perform their
core functions of receiving and processing grant applications, attending to
queries, marketing the social security service in the communities and
servicing welfare pension forums. We support the budget. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, hon Minister, members of the House, this
Saturday will be International Mental Health Day, a day when it is hoped we
will pause and reflect on the plight of those afflicted by the various
aspects of mental illness and disability we find in society today. Whilst
this is an aspect of our lives that is generally considered to be the
responsibility of the Department of Health, the Department of Social
Development also shoulders some of the responsibility by way of social
security and the involvement of its social workers.

It is a fact that mental illness is very often a hidden ailment of society,
sadly so, for it often underpins behavioural disorders that impact
drastically on the ability of society and individuals to function properly.
It is vital that this hidden ailment be acknowledged, diagnosed and treated
in order to put a healing process in place, not only for the individual,
but also in order to provide support for the family involved and, indeed,
for the whole community.

The plight of the profoundly handicapped child, whether it be physically or
mentally affected, is one of the most tragic aspects of any society. The
role of carer for that child, especially in our rural communities, very
often devolves upon his or her grandmother. It is an ongoing task involving
constant care of the child. The current Child Care Act has, as one of its
objectives, the aim of enabling the child, wherever possible, to be taken
back into its family, which is a most worthy objective.

However, if the only family the child has is its grandmother who is taking
good care of it, she will have to become a foster parent in order to access
the child care grant, as it is only payable to the parent or foster parent.
 This can be a long bureacratic process that adds drastically to the burden
already being carried by the grandmother. Could a straightforward sworn
affidavit by a social worker, to say the child is being well looked after,
not suffice for the grandmother to access a child care grant when returning
the child to its parents is clearly not an option?  I was pleased to hear
from the Minister that this problem is to be addressed.

There is also an ongoing need to train those caring for mentally disabled
children, very often mothers or grandmothers, thus giving them ways of
stimulating the child, such as how to do physical exercises and
communicate, and emphasising the vital importance of play. The needs are
endless.

The trend nowadays is to deinstitutionalise patients suffering from mental
illness and disability. Whilst this policy has many merits, both from a
treatment and a financial point of view, it can also place a huge burden on
the family, once again taking on the responsibility of their relatives.
Social workers are having to expand their work to accommodate ongoing
counselling for the family involved. For the patient, the new experience of
living outside is a difficult one. Simple daily routines have to be
retaught when mentally ill patients re-enter society.

Again, the social workers' time, already stretched to the limit, has to
become more elastic as they become part of rehabilitation groups assisting
in this process. The Department of Social Welfare must play an ever-
increasing role in assisting communities to enable these people to manage
their own lives, helping them become useful citizens. That is what social
development is all about.

Partnerships need to be encouraged with NGOs and CBOs to put in place
rehabilitative and developmental programmes to provide support for
discharged patients. This is already happening in a few centres in the
country. We truly need to celebrate the extraordinary and dedicated work
being done by small agencies and societies away from the public eye, some
of it on a purely voluntary basis.

Mental illness and disability are no respecters of persons. They are to be
found in homes and families across the spectrum of society. Nor are they
respecters of departments. Recognition and alleviatory action are needed
from the Departments of Health, Social Development and Education. The
Department of Justice is also frequently involved, because it can and does
happen that people's rights are taken away because they are ill.

I am told this crossover can be difficult. For instance, the policy of the
Department of Education is inclusion where possible in schools. In many
countries in the world this works well, as inclusion of the mentally
disabled child, according to ability, gives the child the maximum chance to
take his or her place in society.

But, on consulting with workers involved in mental health societies, there
is concern because there is a lack of clarity regarding where the cutoff
point should be in terms of ability: from daycare centres to schools and to
special schools. Routinely, children move from the daycare centre to
school. But it happens that mentally handicapped children, having reached
school-going age, continue in daycare because only the main centres have
the special schools needed for them to move on. Ordinary schools lack
trained teachers to provide appropriate education for these children.

These are issues that require focus, planning and perhaps most of all, care
and compassion from ourselves. We are so fortunate in having a Minister of
Social Development who, as he has travelled throughout our country, has
shown himself to be deeply concerned about the plight of the poor, the
marginalised and the needy.

Next Saturday is Mental Health Day, and the motif for the day is a bell.
The cry has gone out: ``Ring the bell for mental health''. Centuries ago in
France, hidden from civilisation, people with mental illnesses were
shackled, maltreated, beaten and ridiculed. They had no rights, no voice
and no reason to be part of society. But liberation finally came and the
French finally melted down those shackles and cast them into one huge bell.
Every time this bell rang it symbolised the freedom and integration of all
people suffering from mental illness. Next Saturday let us remember them
every time we hear a bell ring. [Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Mr Chairperson, 58% of the budget attempts to reform
social services. The question the ACDP poses to the Minister is whether the
Government's ideological solutions are the right ones.

The means test has left thousands of pensioners out of the system and
penniless. The elderly are experiencing extremely severe hardships. The
criteria of the means test have disqualified many from obtaining a pension.
They feel that they are being robbed by this Government of their hard-
earned money as they have, for years, contributed to the economy of this
country. The recommendation of a mandatory contributoly pension scheme for
formal and informal employees has raised major concerns, as many feel that
they will not be the beneficiaries of their contributory and that the state
has colour-coded the distribution of wealth.

Due to the inefficiency and maladministration of the system, many
legitimate beneficiaries were removed from the list and had to re-register,
putting undue stress on the elderly. This system must urgently be reviewed.
The Minister has come out strongly against the gambling policy. The poor,
especially pensioners, are using the little they have to gamble at casinos
and to buy lottery tickets, hoping to strike it lucky, but we know that
that is not the case as they are left in a worst position than before.

The Minister intimated that the Government was under pressure and that not
enough research was done regarding this issue. The ACDP has consistently
reiterated the fallacy of this policy and the destruction it will bring
upon our families and our nation in this House, but the Government pushed
through their ideology and today we have broken, lost and destroyed lives
which this Government must take full responsibility for.
Less than 10% of the entire social security budget is allocated to
children. Major concerns are being raised by communities and civil society
with regard to the R110 child support grant. Far removed from the notion
that the ACDP is advocating a nanny state, immediate action must be taken
by civil society and Government must play a role by empowering families,
the church and private institutions. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I wish to make a
ruling. Seeing that this is the first to be Vote to be discused this year,
I think it would be in order to refresh your memories regarding the various
rulings given by presiding officers as long ago as 16 September 1994.

The presiding officers, at various stages, have made the following points:

Firstly, those who are in the public gallery may neither approve nor
disapprove of what is going on in this Chamber.

Secondly, on 7 June 1995 the presiding officer ruled that it was not
conducive to a debate in this House to have participation from the public
gallery.

Thirdly, on 12 September 1995, again, the presiding officer ruled that
those who are in the gallery are the guests of members, not participants.

Fourthly, on 28 October 1997, again, it was pointed out that it would be
unacceptable for visitors in the public gallery to be allowed to act in any
way that would disrupt the proceedings of the House and, on that occasion,
the Speaker specifically asked all political parties to guard against this.


Fifthly, on 15 March 1997, the presiding officer ruled that members of the
public in the gallery may not express themselves.

Hon members, over the years a numbers of rulings have been made in this
regard. I think is appropriate to call on you and on all parties to assist
in ensuring that these rulings that have been made over a period of time
are given the kind of serious attention that they deserve. [Interjections.]

Dr E E JASSAT: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, in June 1981
the United States Centre for Disease Control published a report on a rare
type of pneumonia in five gay men in Los Angeles. This heralded the start
of the devastating HIV/Aids pandemic throughout the world. It was not until
July 1982 that the term Aids was coined and the following year the HIV
virus was isolated.

At that time no one would have believed that this epidemic would be so
significant or that it would have such an impact on society, particularly
young adults and children. As the epidemic progressed it became apparent
that the main burden would be on the developing world and the main effect
would be on development.

Aids results in increased mobility and mortality. This will have an effect
on both the development process and development indicators. One such
indicator is the human development index (HDI) of the UN development
programme, which is based on three indicators:  Firstly, longevity as
measured by life expectancy at birth; secondly, educational attainment as
measured by a combination of adult literacy and combined primary, secondary
and tertiary enrolment ratios; and Finally, standard of living as measured
by the real GDP per capita.

It has been noted that households with infected adults are less likely to
educate their children. This is because their labour may be required at
home or because the family can no longer afford to carry any of the costs
of education such as school fees, uniforms and books. At the same time the
ability to supply education may be impaired. Teachers are not immune from
infection and we will experience increased mortality rates amongst
teachers.

The World Health Organisation estimated that by the end of last year there
were 10 million orphans worldwide as a result of this pandemic. By 2005
South Africa is expected to have 800 000 orphans, rising to more that 1,95
million in 2010. Orphans are perhaps the most tragic and long-term legacy
of this epidemic.

Many orphans have grown up as street children or will form child-headed
households to avoid being separated from their siblings.  Others will be
brought up by their grandparents or relatives with a limited capacity to
take on parenting responsibilities. All will have been traumatised by the
illness and death of parents, and often by the stigma and secrecy
surrounding HIV/Aids that hampers the bereavement process and exposes
children to discrimination in their community and even in their extended
family.

Orphans will probably be more susceptible to becoming HIV infected through
abuse, sex work or emotional instability, leading to high-risk
relationships.  As children grow up under these conditions, they are at
high risk of developing antisocial behaviour and becoming less productive
members of society. The consequences for affected children and society as a
whole will be profound and tragic.

Throughout Africa, households and communities have a remarkable capacity to
cope with the effects of HIV/Aids, including caring for orphans. However,
even strong coping mechanisms have often broken down under the huge burden
imposed by epidemics. Certain households, for example poor, single parents
or single breadwinners, and households with more than one infected member,
are more vulnerable. In addition, short-term coping may hide long-term
damage to individuals and society, through factors such as reduced
childcare, reduced education, and physical and mental stunting.

In South Africa, the ability of the traditional extended family and
community to cape is likely to be weak, in comparison with many other
African states. Apartheid has left a legacy of disrupted families and
communal life. Rapid urbanisation and the expectation that the state will
provide health care and other support, have further weakened the
traditional coping mechanisms in our country. A 1992 survey indicated that
62% of Sowetans felt that caring for Aids orphans was the Government's
responsibility. Only 28% felt that relatives should take care of these
orphans.

South Africa, unlike many affected countries, does have a formal welfare
system, including institutional care for orphans and foster care support.
Despite the fact that foster care grants are modest, even at current claim
rates, the projected cost implications of HIV/Aids are high.  The cost of
institutional care is prohibitively high. Alternative models to provide
support for vulnerable children and communities need to be explored
urgently. [Time expired.] [Applause.]
Muf T J TSHIVHASE: Mudzulatshidulo, musi u tshi fha mufumakadzi maanḓa, u
vha u tshi khou fha lushaka. Nga Ḽavhuṱanu ḽa dzi 9 dza Luhuhi 2000,
Phuresidennde washu vho ita khuwelelo kha vhathu vhoṱhe vha Afurika
Tshipembe, uri vha kumedzele ṅwaha uno kha u fhaṱa vhuthihi ha u ita
tshanduko, uri hu bveliwe kule na vhuṱungu ha tshifhinga tsho fhiraho, ro
livha kha Afurika Tshipembe ḽa khwiṋe ḽa vhathu vhoṱhe.

Ndi mufumakadzi o bebelwaho mahayani ane a ḓivha u tambula hoṱhe he ra vha
ri khaho. Ro vhona zwoṱhe zwauri, musi u tshi ṱoḓa u vha na mulilo u fanela
u bva wa ya u reḓa khuni. Ro tambulesa zwihulusa nga maanḓa, ri tshi shuma
dzibulasini dza mavhuru. Masimuni eneo ro vha ri tshi wana tshelede ṱhukhu-
ṱhukhu. Vhakalaha vhashu vha tshi khou shuma nga nṱhani ha ``migrant
labour''[u shuma kule na haya]. Zwenezwo zwa ri ita uri zwiṱuku-ṱuku zwe ra
vha ri tshi kona u vhulunga, ri vhulungele vhana vhashu ngauri ro vha ri
tshi khou tambula.

Fhedzi tshifhingani tsho fhiraho, ro tambula nga vhuleme vhunzhi, ngauri
vhunzhi ha vhathu a ro ngo swikelela u vha na shango. A ro ngo kona u
ḓiṱavhela miroho ngauri ro vha ri si na masimu mahulwane, zwenezwo zwo sia
ri tshi khou tambula zwihulwanesa. Vhoramabulasi vha vhatshena vhe vha vha
vhe na shango ḽoṱhe ḽihulwane, vho ita zwauri ri pfe vhuṱungu ho kalulaho.

Ro vha ro tewa nga u shuma iri nnzhi nga maanḓa henengei mabulasini. Hezwo
zwithu zwa ri sia ri tshi khou tambula zwihulusa. Zwa zwino ri khou ri,
Mugaganyagwama hoyu, u khou tea u khwinifhadza vhutshilo ha vhafumakadzi
vha re mahayani, uri vha ṋewe shango ḽihululwane, vha kone u lima-vho
nahone vha ḽi bveledze. Ri a zwi ḓivha zwauri a si Mugaganyagwama wo itwaho
nga muhasho muthihi, ndi mihasho yo ṱanganelanaho.

Arali ra nga sedza u bva 1994, vhutshilo ha vhathu vhashu, ho no
khwinifhadzea mahayani ngauri Muvhuso we vha u khetha, ndi wone wo vha
sumbedzaho zwauri vha fanela u bvela phanḓa na u ḓibveledza, kha sia ḽa zwa
ndimo na ḽa vhubveledzi ha zwithu zwoṱhe zwine ra zwi tama mahayani. Vhathu
vhashu nga vhuphara vha tea u wana thuso ibvaho kha madzangano o ḓiimisaho
nga oṱhe, dzikereke na vhoramabindu, u bveledza lushaka phanḓa.

Zwisiwana zwashu a zwo ngo wana tshumelo ya vhashumelavhapo. Ri fhano roṱhe
ri a zwiḓivha zwauri vhunzhi ha vhathu vha hashu vha mahayani, vho vha vha
sa koni u swikelela madokotela, muthu a vhuya a tou fa. Zwenezwo zwo
sumbedza zwauri vho no vhona zwauri vha khou ya ngafhi nahone vha bva
ngafhi. Ndi nga wonoyu Muhasho wa Vhulondotavhathu hune, zwa vho ḓivhea
zwauri hu na vhathu vha mahayani.

Ndi sa hangwi ṋamusi, u vha ḓivhadza nga ha muṅwe muIndia ane apfi Vinoba,
we a zwi vhona zwauri vhathu vha mahayani, vhane vha vha zwisiwana, vha
khou tea uri vha wane shango kana vha wane ha ndimo huhulwane. O tshimbila
kusi nga kusi a tshi humbela vhoramabulasi vha henengei India uri, vha
thuse havho vhathu nga u vha nea shango, ngauri heḽo shango ḽovha li tshi
wela zwanḓani zwa vhapfumi fhedzi. Hezwo zwo ita uri havho vhathu vha kone
u khwinifhala kha matshilo avho. O kona na u vha gudisa kha univesithi ye
vha vha vha tshi kona u wana pfunzo dzo teaho, uri vha kone-vho u
khwinifhala kha matshilo avho.

Na riṋe fhano Afurika Tshipembe, ri khou vhona vhathu vhashu vho ṱangana na
vhuleme vhuhulwane nga maanḓa. Vhathu vhane vha lingana 87%, vha kona u
shuma vho tou ṋewa mavu ane a lingana 13% fhedzi. U tshi sedza hezwo
zwithu, u wana zwi na vhuṱungu vhuhulwane nga maanḓa. Ri khou ri muhasho
hoyu wo zwi vhona zwauri vhathu vhashu vha mahayani vha fanela u
khwinifhadzwa, zwihulu-hulu ro sedza vhomme, vhe vha tambudzwa nga muvhuso
wa tshiṱalula wa u vha tsikeledza. Vhe vha sala vha tshi tambula mahayani
vhanna vhavho vha si ho.

Nga hezwo zwithu zwoṱhe, ri khou vhona muhasho washu wo ḓiimisela uri
vhathu havha vha wane vhutshilo havho vhu tshi khwinifhadziwa.
Mbekanyamushumo dza 16 dzine ra khou dzi vhona, dzo kona u ḓisela
vhafumakadzi vhane vha lingana 801 na vhana vhane vha lingana 13 zwivhuya.
Nga hezwo zwithu ri khou vhona Muvhuso wo dzhia vhukando vhuhulwane nga
maanḓa, na zwo khwinifhadziwaho mahayani u fana na Kwazulu-Natal na pulane
ine ya vha hone kha vhupo ha Ingwavuma. Hezwi zwithu ndi u kandela phanḓa
nga maanḓa.

Riṋe vha ANC, ri khou zwi vhona zwauri hoyu muhasho a wo ngo sokou vha
hone, wo sedzesa nga maanḓa vhutshilo ha vhathu vhashu vha mahayani.
Zwenezwo-ha ri khou ri vhafumakadzi vha mahayani kha vha ṋewe shango ḽihulu
hune vha kona u ḓibveledza nga dzithandela dzo fhambananaho; dza u fuwa
dzikhuhu, u runga, u vhumba na u vhaḓa hune vhaendelamashango vha ḓo kona u
swika-vho, vha kona u dzhena henengei mashangoni a mahayani vha renga
zwithu zwine vhathu vhashu vha khou vhambadza zwone, zwo dzula tsini na
dzibada vha khou vhambadza uri vha kone u khwinisa ikonomi ya shango ḽashu.

Zwithu zwoṱhe zwine ra khou zwi vhona muhasho hoyu u tshi khou zwi ita, wo
zwi ita nge wa vhona zwauri vhafumakadzi vha mahayani ndi vhone vho
vhaisalesaho nga maanḓa. Ndi vhone vho pfesaho vhuṱungu ha u khethululwa
nga lukanda. Riṋe vha ANC ri khou zwi vhona zwauri hoyu Mugaganyagwama wo
zwi vhona zwauri matshiloni a vhathu vhashu hu tea u vha na u khwinifhala.
Ndi ngazwo ri tshi tikedza hoyu Mugaganyagwama, ri na lutamo luhulu-hulu,
zwihulusa lwa uri arali u tshi khusa-khusanyana tshikwama tshawo wa
engedzedzanyana masheleni, uri vhathu vha mahayani henengei, vha
vhafumakadzi, vha khwinifhale zwihulu-hulu. Ro sedza zwauri vhafumakadzi
vha re henengei mahayani, vhutshilo havho vhu khou thoma u pfala. Vha khou
thoma-vho u ḓiphina nga mitshelo ya mbofholowo ine muṅwe na muṅwe sa
mudzulapo wa Afurika Tshipembe, a khou zwi ḓivha-vho zwauri, ndi lwa u
thoma vhutshiloni hawe a tshi zwipfa zwauri u mudzulapo a re na tshirunzi.

Nga muthihi nga muthihi, naho ro sedza vha mahoro-makangi, ndi lwa u thoma
na vhone-vho vha tshi vho amba vhe fhano, vha tshi ḓifhelwa nga u hanedza
zwauri vhathu vhashu vhutshilo havho vhu khou khwinifhala zwihuluhulu zwi
ngafha. Riṋe vha ANC, ri khou tikedza hoyu Mugaganyagwama, ro lavhelesa
zwihulu vhenevha vhathu vhane vha vha vhafumakadzi vha mahayani. Zwa zwino
ri khou ri u pandamedza hei tshanduko ine ya vha hone, vhutshilo ha khwiṋe
kha vhafumakadzi vha mahayani.

Dzithandela dzine vha vha na dzo, vha zwi vhone zwauri hoyu muhasho wo
dzhenisa tshanḓa zwihulu-hulu, uri vhutshilo havho vhu vhe khwiṋe-vho. Hu
vhe na mishumo mahayani, vha kone u vhambadzela vhaendelamashango. Nahone
vha gudisiwe, vha vhe na dzitakatiki dza zwithu zwa u kona u ṱaṱisana na
vha nnḓa vha maṅwe mashango, vhane khavho hu ṱoḓea zwauri hu vhe na pfunzo.
Ri khou ri Minisiṱa washu vha engedzedze uri vhathu vha si tsha dzula
mikhukhuni vha tshi ḓa ngeno dziḓoroboni. [U vhanda zwanḓa.] (Translation
of Tshivenḓa speech follows.)

[Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Madam Speaker, if you empower a woman, you have
empowered a nation. On Friday, 9 February 2001, our President called on all
South Africans to dedicate this year to building unity in action for
change, to move away from our painful past, towards a better South Africa
for all.

I am a woman who was born in the rural areas, who knows all the sufferings
we went through. We experienced the difficulties of collecting wood for
making fire. We suffered a lot, working for white farmers. On those farms,
we used to get low wages. Our husbands were working far away because of
migrant labour. Therefore, the little that we saved was for our children,
because we were suffering.

But in the past, we suffered many hardships, because many people did not
have access to land. We were unable to plant our own vegetables because we
did not have big farms, and that left us suffering a lot. White farmers,
who had a lot of land, made us suffer a great deal.

We were supposed to work long hours on the farms, and that situation left
us suffering a lot. Now we are saying, this budget must ease the lives of
rural women. They must be provided with a lot of land, so that they can
till and develop it. We are aware that this budget does not come from one
department, but from a variety of them.
Since 1994, our people's lives in the rural areas have changed because of
the Government we voted for. It is the same Government that showed them
that they must keep on developing themselves through farming, and
everything they wished for, in the rural areas. In general, our people must
get assistance from nongovernmental organisations, churches and business to
develop the whole nation.

Our poor people did not have the services of social workers. We all know
that most of our rural people could not gain access to a doctor until
someone died. This shows that they can now see where they come from and
where they are going. It is through this Department of Social Development
that rural people now know this.

Today I do not want to forget to tell hon members about an Indian man,
Vinoba, who saw that poor rural people must have land on which to farm,
because the land was only in the hands of the rich. He walked from village
to village asking farmers in India to help people by giving them land,
because it was only in the hands of rich people. Those things made their
lives better. He managed to educate them at the university, where they
obtained the education they needed to enable them to lead better lives.
We in South Africa are also seeing our people encountering many hardships.
About 87% of the people own only 13% of the land. If one examines those
things, one finds that it is very painful. This department saw the need to
develop rural people, especially mothers, who suffered because of the
oppressive apartheid government. They were left to suffer in rural areas
while their husbands were not there.

Due to all these things, we see our department being prepared to make the
lives of these people easier. The 16 flagship programmes that we see
managed to bring happiness to 801 women and 13 children. Because of all
those things, the Government took a successful step to develop rural people
in places like KwaZulu-Natal and the plan to develop Ingwavuma. These are
great developments.

We, as the ANC, see the importance of this department and that it is
concentrating on the lives of our rural people. Therefore, we are saying
that rural women must be given enough land to develop themselves through
different projects, such as poultry farming, dressmaking and craftwork, so
that they can attract tourists, who come to buy the products they are
selling and that are displayed at the side of the road in the rural areas.
This will promote the economy of our country.

This department is doing all these things, because it saw how rural women
were suffering. They were the victims of racial discrimination. We, as the
ANC, can see that this budget is aimed at developing the lives of our
people. That is why we support this budget. We hope that the Government
will be able to increase the money so that rural people, women, can be
greatly developed. Rural women are starting to lead better lives, to enjoy
the fruits of freedom like any South African citizen, knowing that for the
first time in their lives they can feel that they are citizens with
dignity.

When we look at the opposition parties, we find this is the first time they
are talking here, enjoying themselves denying that our people's lives are
developing. We, as the ANC, support this budget, which is taking rural
women into consideration. Now we are saying.  Speed up change;- provde
better lives for rural women.

They must see that the projects they have are as a result of this
department, to make their lives better. There must be jobs in rural areas
and they must be able to sell to the tourists. Those who need education
must be trained and have tactics to enable them to compete with foreign
countries. We are saying that our Minister must increase the budget, so
that our people do not have to live in shacks when they come to the urban
areas. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Mr J P I Blanché, I hope I
have pronounced your name correctly. If not, please just indicate how it
should be pronounced.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: You pronounced it correctly, Chairperson.

Mnr die Voorsitter, om 'n pensioentrekker R580 per maand te betaal, glo ek,
is 'n skande, as 'n mens in ag neem dat politici se salarisse die afgelope
vyf jaar met ten minste R1 500 per maand en dié van pensioentrekkers met
slegs R150 verhoog het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr Chairperson, I believe that paying a pensioner R580 per month is a
disgrace, If one takes into account that over the past five years the
salaries of politicians have increased by at least R1 500 per month and
those of pensioners by only R150.]
In order to solve the cash paypoint problems and to make more effective and
efficient use of the money allocated towards pension payments, I suggest we
revisit the payment of pension grants by paying them through the banks and
the Post Office. An estimated annual saving of between R200 million and
R300 million could result from this exercise.

To prove my statement, I wish to take the Gauteng province as an example.
In Gauteng the pensions of 105 674 pensioners are paid into their bank
accounts every month at a cost of R1,06 per transaction, which costs the
department R112 014 per month. In the same province, the pensions of the
remaining 305 376 pensioners are paid out at cash paypoints at a cost of
R23 per transaction, which amounts to a total of R7 023 648 per month.

If all Gauteng pensions were paid into either Post Office or bank accounts
of pensioners, we would show a monthly saving of close to R7 million per
month. This, on an annual basis, would bring about a saving of
approximately R83 million in Gauteng, and that is one province only. If
this R83 million were divided among Gauteng's 411 000 pensioners, one could
add another R16 a month to the pension pay packet of pensioners in that
province.
The fingerprint identification system was introduced to combat fraud
perpetrated by dishonest pension recipients and some staff members, and a
central database ... [Interjections.] I am saying that we must go and take
a look at it and revisit it - someone must do his or her job.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: What do you suggest?

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: That is what I am getting to now. [Interjections.]

A central database system was drawn up to ensure that no pension is paid
out to the same person more than once or in more than one province. This
system minimised fraudulent activities, and we must congratulate the staff,
not the ANC, for successfully implementing it.

On the other hand, the cash paypoint system has many negative aspects, as
has been pointed out by the commission. It is costing us R83 million more
per year in one province. Apart from that additional cost, it invites
abuse, neglect and ill-treatment of older people, as spelt out in the
report and by so many speakers this afternoon. On top of that, in Gauteng
alone it has cost two staff members and one pensioner their lives.

It also attracts thieves and unwanted elements to the paypoints and has
forced Government to employ additional staff, with its associated transport
and equipment costs. The commission reports that it draws all sorts of
moneymakers, such as moneylenders and funeral salesmen, to these paypoints.
In fact, in Uitenhage the commission found more moneylenders than
pensioners at the paypoints.

In the Northern Province a pensioner was told to switch from a bank to a
paymaster. In doing so, the pensioner lost three months' pension, and it
now costs the state R22 a month more to pay that pensioner. Again in the
Northern Province ... [Interjections.] I introduced this system as the MEC
for welfare in Gauteng. [Interjections.] Again, the commission has this to
say about the Northern Province:


  It was claimed that in many cases pension committees are more interested
  in pleasing the department and cash paymaster services than the
  pensioners.

That is true. The report elaborates on these allegations and refers to an
incident in Ventersdorp where money was paid into a CPS and was allegedly
not transferred to the pensioners. It also states that in Odi pensioners
were underpaid by the CPS and officials took no notice.

I would like to say to the Minister that he did the right thing by
appointing a commission of inquiry into the treatment of elderly people.
The cash paypoint system needs to be reviewed, for it lends itself to fraud
and mismanagement. I would suggest that the payment be done through bank
and Post Office accounts. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I am waiting for
hon members to finish with the many private meetings so that I can call the
next speaker to the podium.

Ms E GANDHI: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I want to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Minister and the director-general for
making tremendous progress in this department's work. [Applause.]

Before I go on to speak about the situation of children, I just want to
quote something about what happened in the past, because what happened in
the past is what we are reaping today. I want to quote from a publication
which was brought out by the Diakonia Council of Churches in 1987 to mark a
Good Friday service. This leaflet says, and I quote:


  In 1986, 29 260 South Africans were detained - this is an average of 81
  people per day; 29,6% of these were scholars, students and teachers. They
  were detained at home, at schools, at demonstrations or walking in the
  street. Some are 10, 11 or 12 years old. The Detainees' Support Committee
  reports an 8-year-old in detention.

The report goes on to say what happened to these detainees. I just want to
say that my son was also a victim of these detentions, therefore I speak
from first-hand experience. We were informed of the arrest of my son by his
brother, who was also picked up and released together with two friends.

The report goes on to say, and I quote:


  Some are held for a few days, many are held for months. They are kept in
  police stations, in security police headquarters, in communal prison
  cells or in solitary confinement.

Many reported torture and assault while in detention, some were even
killed. My son was never the same after he came out of detention.  These
are the horror stories of torture and harassment our young people have
suffered. Today we are reaping the effects of this sad story.

At a Descom conference held in October 1987, it was found that there was a
significant decrease in detentions after 1986. However, there were other
strategies that the apartheid government came up with. Among these was the
recruitment of "kitskonstabels", municipal police and vigilante groups as a
counter to community resistance. The JMCs, joint management committees,
played a significant role in the education of children and the training of
the unemployed. In general, the government of the time made every effort to
get the desperate, the unemployed and criminal elements to help them in the
elimination of political activists, and, in the process, brutalised a whole
generation of young people.
A conference was held in Harare headed by the late Comrade Oliver Tambo,
and I am sure the hon the Minister might have been present at that
conference. This conference highlighted the plight of our children in this
country and sought the assistance of the United Nations and the
international community in stopping this brutality.

The apartheid system also created the wide gap between the rich and the
poor; ``the rich'' being ``white'' and ``the poor'' being ``black''. Today
we are reaping the fruits of this.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Would the hon Miss Mndende and
Dr Koornhof please come to order? The hon member may proceed.

Ms E GANDHI: This Government has made every effort to improve legislation
to meet the needs of children and to ensure that their rights are at all
times upheld. The Domestic Violence Act makes it mandatory for any party
that has heard of, knows of or has witnessed the abuse of a child or anyone
else to report this incident to the police.

The law imposes a special duty on police to ensure that the victim is
notified of his or her rights and that every effort is made to assist the
victim. Yet brutality in the community, in schools and at home continues to
go unreported. A recent report reveals shocking statistics of child
molestation. Such molestation and brutality are not confined to any one
race group, but are, in fact, prevalent in every race group.

It was only after 1994 that we became signatories to the various
international instruments and to the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child. At present, a team is engaged in looking into the
compiling of a comprehensive children's code.

This Budget has allocated dedicated funds for improvements in
infrastructure development. While poverty and its effects are still a major
problem for us to deal with, the fact is that this Government does have the
will to ensure that every child, and I want to stress the word ``every'' -
not just a few privileged children - in this country is able to enjoy the
rights that he or she is entitled to in terms of the Constitution and these
international instruments.
The Budget strongly indicates this will. While we acknowledge the
shortfalls, we say that with the help of the community and with God on our
side, we shall succeed. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Deputy President, Ministers and hon members,
the MF compliments the Government for providing 58% of the consolidated
national and provincial noninterest allocation towards social services,
including education, health and social development, which is set to
increase steadily over the MTEF period.

Like many other developing countries, South Africa is grappling with the
challenge of harnessing information and communication technologies
effectively to accelerate social development. Most debates in this area
tend to centre on the extent to which the adoption and use of these
technologies can contribute to reducing the massive inequity that exists
between and within societies, more often than not with Africa used as the
focal point for discussion. However, the Internet has seen unprecedented
growth recently, from a loosely organised text-based communications system,
used mainly by the military and academics, to a vast source of disparate
information being used increasingly by the private sector.

The MF compliments the Government's initiative for a special poverty relief
programme of about R1,5 billion a year, which is set to continue over the
next three years. While national Government is responsible for establishing
norms and standards regarding redistribution and equity, thus providing a
framework within which service delivery will occur equitably, a significant
proportion of service delivery that will impact on poverty and inequality
is the responsibility of provincial or local government.

Despite difficulties that may be encountered, local authorities, including
those in which the MF is represented, have generally recognised the need to
change existing mind-sets and institutional arrangements so that
developmental goals might be set. Poverty and inequality are
multidimensional phenomena, and therefore remedial strategies require
effective co-ordination, integration and regulation of policies along
sectoral and vertical lines. Successful delivery of programmmes and
projects aimed at poverty alleviation and reduction of inequality will
depend largely on the extent to which existing institutions function
effectively and equitably.

The total allocation of R12,5 million by the Government towards HIV and
Aids is commendable. HIV/Aids remains the most serious challenge facing the
country and health services. The MF compliments the Government on launching
the HIV/Aids and Sexually Transmitted Diseases Strategic Plan for South
Africa 2000 to 2005, which aims at reducing the number of new HIV
infections, especially among young people, and reducing the impact of
HIV/Aids on individuals, families and communities.

Whilst setting out guiding principles, the plan also identifies four
priority areas, namely prevention, treatment, care and support, monitoring
and evaluation, and human and legal rights. It is remarkable to note that
the 2001 Budget indicated that the single redistributive programme of
Government is the system of social grants. It is significant to note that
for the first time the child support grant has been increased.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, would you take
your seat. Yes, hon Minister?
The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Chairperson, I just wanted to underscore
what you said just now. I thought that the presence of the Deputy President
at least would have some effect on our colleagues. There is far too much
noise here, and I do not think that it is a good reflection on us.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I think I have reminded members on
innumerable occasions that if they do have private meetings and private
discussions, it would be in order for them to leave the Chamber. From where
I sit, I notice the extent to which many members are involved in private
business. That cannot be good for the image or the functioning of this
honourable House.

I think it is in order for the presiding officer to allow a degree of
latitude, but when that becomes licence, I think it is not only
discourteous to the speaker at the podium, but also makes it difficult for
those members of the House who are serious about the business of this House
and would like to hear what is happening in order that they might empower
themselves.

We have asked for your co-operation in this matter. The only recourse that
is left to the Chair, then, is to be more robust, which means that it might
impair the dignity of individual members if we have to call them to order
by name. I have tried, over a period of time, to focus on people who are
causing a disturbance, hoping that that would bring them to order, but even
five or six minutes of concentrated staring seems to have no impact.

Now I wish to make it clear to hon members that the business of this House
is the imperative, and that is why we are here. Freedom of speech requires
not only that someone should have the right to speak, but that they should
have a reasonable audience. I trust that hon members will make it possible
for the Chair to follow the discussions and give everyone the opportunity
to express themselves in this House in an atmosphere that is conducive to
good debate. Hon Miss Rajbally, you may proceed.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, it is significant to note that for the first
time the child support grant has been increased and that the MTEF allows
for inflation-related adjustment to social grants over the medium term. The
MF supports the Social Development Vote. [Applause.]
Mr N S MIDDLETON: Chairperson, hon members, from the outset, I think it is
necessary to continue reminding ourselves of our Constitution. Section 27
of the Bill of Rights says that everyone has the right to have access to
social security. The challenge facing us all in this Government is how to
meet our people's needs within this budget which is allocated to the
department under discussion.

South Africa is one of the few countries in the world, indeed in Africa,
which has such a large public-funded and noncontributory social assistance
programme, consisting of pensions, disability grants, child support grants,
etc, all of which are paid from our public funds. It is time that the
Government looked into ways and means of involving a large section of the
business world to help finance these social programmes in future.

The poverty and disintegration of the social fabric resulting from the past
and even from the present policies of structural problems have indeed
placed a great strain on our nation's resources. What we should be striving
for is finding a balance between social assistance and social insurance, so
as to ease the burden on the fiscus without abdicating our constitutional
obligations.

It must, of course, be noted as well that poverty and malnutrition are no
longer concentrated in the rural communities in particular, but that due to
the movement of people from rural to urban areas, the vast majority of our
people are experiencing the same problems as the rural people. As a result,
our various welfare organisations have not only cut down their services,
but many have also had to shut down. This is even more reason for use to
find a workable, sustainable way of improving the effectiveness of our
social security systems, by targeting those who are in dire need without
playing political games.

The last report on social development reported that the present poverty
rate in South Africa as per race group is 1% white, 5% Indian, 35% coloured
and 61% African. It may be argued, and rightly so, that the oppressive
apartheid regime of the past left South Africa with this legacy of
underdevelopment, a past in which the life of South Africans was designed
by skin colour  and income level.

Also, if the press reports we have read are correct, namely the Minister
has expressed grave concerns about the gambling patterns in our country,
many South Africans will support him in this. We believe that we should
look again at our Gambling Act as it now stands. One has only to visit the
casinos to see what is going on there. [Time expired.]

Ms N M TSHEOLE: Modulasetilo, ke batla go simolola puo ya me ka go nopola
Tona ya Matlotlo, Motlotlegi Trevor Manuel fa a ne a re: [Chairperson, I
want to start my speech by quoting the Minister of Finance, the hon Trevor
Manuel, when he said:]


  The Budget we table today is testimony to the success of our
  transformation policies.

I stand here to add my voice to the testimony on what the Department of
Social Development has achieved. In spite of what my colleagues on the
other side of the House have said, I proudly and obstinately stand before
this House and the South African nation to openly acknowledge the successes
the department has achieved in the delivery of social services. [Applause.]

The introduction of developmental social services in South Africa was a big
leap and it called for many structural adjustments.

Lefapha le ne la tshwanelwa ke go fetola tsotlhe tse di neng di lebagane le
popego ya lona, e leng menagano le badiredi ba lefapha. Ke ka moo go
nnileng le bothata.

Sa ntlha, mafapha a puso e e fetileng a ne a le sometharo, mme ra
tshwanelwa ke go a kopanya. Ke tiro e tona eo. Go gatelela ntlha eno, ke
boela gape kwa puong ya ga Tona ya Matlotlo, Trevor Manuel. E rile fa a bua
a botsa potso, a re: (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The department had to change everything pertaining to its structure,
namely its workers and their mind-set. That is why there was a problem.

Firstly, the previous government had 13 departments, and we were supposed
to merge them. That is our job. To stress this point I go back to the
speech of the Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel. When he spoke he asked
this question:]


  Does the lemon always ripen before the sweet plum?

In response to this question one could say:  Let us not compare the lemon
to the plum. Each has a distinct taste of bitterness. Instead, let us say
the bitterness of a young unripe fruit gives hope of the sweetness to
follow when the fruit ripens. The fruits of our young democracy are still
not ripe, hence their bitterness.

It would be very unfortunate if we allowed ourselves to be misled into
disillusionment by those who compare their fruit tree, which is at least
350 years old, to our seven-year-old fruit tree. Our duty is to listen to
David Diop, again quoted by the hon the Minister, when he said, and I
quote:


  Impetuous son, that tree young and strong
  That tree there
  In splendid loneliness amidst white faded flowers
  That is Africa your Africa
  That grows again patiently and obstinately
  And its fruits gradually acquire
  The bitter taste of liberty.

It is the bitter taste of liberty that our opponents are criticising. They
do not want to think about the legacy they have left this young Government.

The hon Da Camara referred to children who are being abused. The parents of
these children were not brought up in this new dispensation.  It is not
this new dispensation that has distorted and twisted their minds.  Children
born in this dispensation are only seven years old, if that. If they were
conceived on 27 April 1994, they are not seven years old yet.

There is no way in which what we are faced with can be blamed on this
Government. The Government takes the responsibility to make amends, but it
cannot be blamed for the corruption that we are living with.  It is a
legacy that we have inherited. It is like when one is buying an old,
previously owned cars - a second-hand cars - that one has to buy with all
its faults. They have left   this Government a voetstoots legacy. This
country is a voetstoots legacy. [Applause.] Maybe they too are a voetstoots
legacy. They need to be overhauled so that they may acquire a new attitude
to what is happening, and so that they can appreciate the efforts this
department is making.

When we started in 1994, the beneficiaries of the state maintenance grant
numbered only 300 000. In only three years, since 1998, the number of
beneficiaries of the child support grant has reached the one million mark.
Is that not delivery, when compared to 300 000 in 50 years? [Applause.]
They have to consider that.

Let us also look at HIV/Aids orphans. We passionately want to address this
issue. But these orphans are born of parents who do not have self-image,
because they were corrupted by someone else who was supposed to have
planned their future. But we are dealing with that. This is our country. We
are dealing with it and we are facing it. They will see that.

I am going to conclude by quoting Mariam Wright Edelman of Washington DC,
when she says:


  I remember when I was in Mississippi after the excitement of the 1964
  summer project. We are 25 years old, and we are just beginning to get a
  serious national debate about how we should give every child a healthy
  start, a head start, a fair start and a safe start.

She said they were 25 old years in Mississippi then. How old are we in
South Africa? We have already delivered services, a head start, to one
million children. But we are only seven years old! One has to consider
where we come from when one talks. [Applause.]

The hon Van Jaarsveld said that somebody was lying to somebody somewhere.
Yes, he is right. He should tell the people the truth, that they have left
a voetstoots legacy. He should not take advantage of people who do not
understand and tell them lies. We are working; we are proud and we are
determined to fight the problems of this voetstoots legacy, because we do
not have any alternative. We have to work for our people and transform this
country. [Interjections.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Mr Chairperson, can I ask the hon member a
question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, are you willing to
take a question?
Ms N M TSHEOLE: No, Mr Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The hon member is not willing
to take a question. Hon member, will you take your seat, please.

Ms N M TSHEOLE: Let us look at poverty relief projects. We know that the
1998-99 budget ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairperson, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, I have been told by our Chief Whip that we are left with only
five minutes. So, I will not be able to answer all the questions raised by
hon members. What I will do is to write letters to hon members, to answer
almost every question they have asked me. I will not, at this moment, be
able to read all these questions at the same time.

But there is one small thing I wanted to respond to, which relates to
someone who came over here and claimed that they were the ones who first
suggested the basic income grant. Is that true? Do they not remember that
that suggestion came from the Jobs Summit and that they were not at that
summit? [Laughter.] Do they not remember that when I talked last year about
this same basic income grant, His Excellency Tony Leon told me that it was
a good idea, and that he agreed with me? It was only then that these people
started working on that.

But, basically, I would not like to politicise the poverty, the suffering
and the pain of our people. I think our President and the Government of
South Africa have, in general, been telling the entire world about the need
for all of us to be united in the fight and struggle against poverty and
disease. It is generally the duty of every African. I repeat, it is the
duty of every African, including those members, that we should be part and
parcel of that struggle. That is why I am a little bit uneasy about the
approach that is basically being taken by the Democratic Alliance on these
issues. It seems there is a lack of some basic humane thinking within some
members of the Democratic Alliance itself.

I do not want to politicise that. But the basic thing is that our people
are suffering, and all of us should be part and parcel of the struggle
against poverty, HIV/Aids and all forms of violence against women and
children, and that we should work together as South Africans to create a
more caring society, a better South Africa that will enable all of us to be
proud of it.  So I could answer all their questions, but when it comes to
such issues, I would like people to be a little bit more constructive, more
humane and more patriotic. I think greater intelligence is also necessary,
whoever is talking.

I cannot answer all the questions, but there are a few that I would like to
answer very clearly. I have heard and listened to all hon members'
suggestions and I think together we have to work towards that.  With regard
to Mr Van Jaarsveld's question on the regulations, I shall just say to him
that I promised that they would be published on 31 March. But they have
been with his portfolio committee from two weeks now. He should have asked
his chairperson for that before he came here. They were handed to me by the
chairperson of the committee. Basically, I think we should look into that.
I would accept any suggestion by anybody that would improve the service
delivery within the social development department.

I did say from the beginning that there was a problem. Our social welfare
sector has problems that need to be dealt with and confronted immediately,
that cannot be resolved two or three years hence this will take some time.
That is why we are doing everything in our power to ensure that we meet the
demand of almost everybody. That is basically why I chose to go to the
rural areas of South Africa, because I know that that is where the most
suffering is.

When I raised the issue of Mr Ntlokwana, I also thought that because of his
prominence as an artist, the plight of his children would necessarily touch
our hearts. To be very clear, that issue did not come from the ANC. It came
from members of the IFP. I think it was the hon Mr Velaphi Ndlovu who came
to me and said: There is this issue here in Cape Town.  We know these
people very well. He is not a member of the ANC, but we are all just human
beings, so could the Government please help.

It was on that basis that I went knocking on the door of the government of
the Western Cape to try to assist with this matter. There has been very
little, if any, response. That is why I appealed directly to the Leader of
the Opposition, whose party is at the head of an alliance that is ruling
the Western Cape, to ensure that this issue is not politicised.
In conclusion I want to take this opportunity ...

... ndibulele oomama bonke abebelapha, ndithethe nabo ndisithi sibavile
izikhalo zabo. URhulumente wabo ubavile, kwaye uRhulumente uza kusebenza
nabo. Zonke ezi zinto ezibuhlungu ezenzekayo kubo siza kuzama kangangoko
sinakho, singuRhulumente, ukubanceda kwezo zinto ezenziwa, kakhulu,
ngabantu ababi.

Sithi masisebenzisane ekuhlaleni sisonke, sisebenzisane nemibutho engeyiyo
ekaRhulumente, sisebenzisane neecawe zethu, sisebenzisane nabaya bantu
abakholwayo ukuze sikwazi ukwakha ikamva labantwana bethu, sikwazi ukwakha
ingomso labantwana.

Namhlanje asinalo ulwamkelo lweendwendwe zethu apha. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[... to thank all the women who are present here today, and assure them
that we have heard their cries. Their Government has heard them and will
work with them. We as the Government will help them with all the painful
experiences that they have suffered, particularly at the hands of bad
people.
We say let us all work together at community level, work together with
NGOs, with churches and faith-based organisations so as to be able to build
a future for our children.

Today we have organised a reception for our guests here.]

Our reception today will be in Guguletu at the civic centre and we hereby
invite everybody, including the DP and the New NP, to attend. [Applause.]

I would like these two parties to come, so that they can see for themselves
the suffering of the people. Maybe these parties will then be a little bit
more helpful in ensuring that there is peace and security, and will be part
and parcel of South Africa. They should not talk about those people out
there, but must be part and parcel of South Africa.

Please come tonight and let us sit down ...

... sihlale phantsi simamele oomama bethu into abayithethayo, phaya
eGuguletu namhlanje, ukuze sikwazi ukwakha ingomso labantu bakowethu, ukuze
sikwazi ukuthetha sive kakuhle, kubo kanye, okokuba yintoni na ebadlayo
ezintliziyweni.

Ikhutshiwe ingxelo. Kufuneka sisebenzisane senzele ukuba laa nto
eyenzekileyo nale esaqhubekayo ingaphindi yenzeke. Nangamso. (Translation
of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... and hear what our mothers in Guguletu have to say today so that we can
build a future for our people, and hear directly from them what it is that
is troubling them.

A report has been compiled. We must work together so that what has happened
and what is going on right now does not happen again.]

Debate concluded.

           THE SUDDEN ESCALATION OF RURAL VIOLENCE IN SOUTH AFRICA

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mevrou die Speaker, hierdie historiese debat, wat
gesamentlik aangevra is deur die opposisiepartye, weerspieël die rou waarin
ons land verkeer na die skielike opwelling van plaasgeweld verlede week.
Hierdie bewonderenswaardige samewerking van die opposisie moet ook 'n
kragtige boodskap uitstuur aan die Regering en aan die Minister van
Veiligheid en Sekuriteit. Daardie boodskap is dat die mense moeg is vir leë
beloftes en vrotsige regering, en dat hulle kwaad is. Hulle is inteendeel
woedend, omdat hulle nêrens meer beskerm word nie.

Die polisie word gebruik om al die hoëlui van die ANC-regering te omring
met oordrewe veiligheid en sekuriteit, terwyl ons mense in hulle duisende
vermoor word op hulle plase, in hulle huise, in die strate en op die paaie,
omdat hierdie Regering sy werk nie doen nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] In Suid-
Afrika word boere vier maal meer vermoor as die gemiddelde Suid-Afrikaner.
Ons kan nie duld om verder te luister na gekke kletsery van kwansuise redes
waarom dit so is nie. Selfs die agb Tshwete het in Marikana erken dat dit
nêrens in die wêreld so is nie, selfs nie nou in Zimbabwe nie.

Op hierdie oomblik, terwyl ons praat, is 'n boer daar twee maal veiliger as
'n boer hier by ons. As dit ons nie laat dink nie, dan weet ek waaragtig
nie wat ons sal laat dink nie. Dit kan nie so voortgaan nie. Slaan jy
voortdurend aan 'n mens, of 'n groep mense, dan begin hy om terug te slaan.
Dit het alreeds op verskeie plekke in ons land gebeur, waar die publiek in
magtelose woede die reg in hulle eie hand geneem het. Dit is die
onaanvaarbare pad van anargie waar onskuldige mense dikwels geteiken word.

Boonop het dit nou aan die lig gekom, in 'n gesaghebbende Markinor-opname,
dat alreeds twee derdes van boere meen dat hulle eie reg sal moet gebruik
om hulself te beskerm, aangesien die owerheid sy plig versuim. Besef die
Regering die skrikwekkende implikasie hiervan? (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, this historic debate, which was jointly
requested by the opposition parties, reflects the state of mourning in
which our country finds itself after the sudden upsurge in farm violence
last week. This admirable co-operation of the opposition should also send a
powerful message to the Government and to the Minister of Safety and
Security. That message is that the people are tired of empty promises and
an incompetent Government, and that they are angry. On the contrary, they
are outraged, because they are not being protected anywhere any longer.
The police are used to surround all the VIPs from the ANC Government with
excessive safety and security, while our people, in their thousands, are
being murdered on their farms, in their houses, in the streets and on the
roads, because this Government is not doing its work. [Interjections.] In
South Africa four times more farmers are murdered than the average South
African. We can no longer tolerate listening to the ridiculars reasons
being advanced as to why this is the case. Even the hon Tshwete admitted in
Marikana that it is not like this anywhere in the world, not even in
Zimbabwe now.

At this moment, while we are speaking, a farmer there is twice as safe as a
farmer here. If this does not make us think then I really do not know what
will make us think. Things cannot continue in this vein. If one
continuously hits out at a person, or a group of people, eventually they
will start to hit back. This has already happened in various places in our
country where the public, in powerless anger, has taken the law into their
own hands. This is the unacceptable road of anarchy where innocent people
are often targeted.

Moreover, it has now come to light that, in an authoritative Markinor
survey, two thirds of farmers are already of the opinion that they will
have to take the law into their own hands to protect themselves since the
government is neglecting to do so. Does the Government realise the
frightening implications of this?]

In Marikana the hon the Minister announced an excellent plan of action and
the necessary funding and manpower would be made available to combat these
attacks. We praise him for that. The hon the Minister will, however, admit
that we have heard of many such plans over the years, with pretty few
results. This is so, because safety and security are not achieved with
words, but with respect and discipline, respect for the rights of others
and the discipline to enforce it. This is the discipline we have in those
policemen and specialist units that do their duty.

Hobbled as they are, the murder and robbery squads of the platteland [rural
areas] achieve remarkable results in a very short time too. Often they
succeed in apprehending suspects within 36 hours of the crime having been
committed. We praise and thank them for this. This, however, does not
prevent the murders. For that we need respect for the rights of others. In
order to achieve this respect, we need to change the climate in which
farmers find themselves.

Farmers and their families live in a very hostile climate, for which the
ANC is directly responsible. There are too many examples of hate speech
when they besmirch farmers in general. Is it therefore any surprise that
the farming community has become the target of violence and vengeance? The
answer to the question of what can be done about this seems to be very
simple. Cease this vicious campaign to start with. Stop spreading
falsehoods about these people, whom the hon the Minister has identified as
the backbone of the country, which, indeed, they are.

Much as we appreciate the conciliatory stance by the hon the Minister and a
few like him, it is of little use when the rest of the ANC, with the
President's Office in the lead, encourage all and sundry to hate white
farmers on account of their alleged racist misdemanours. The hon the
Minister must convince all his collegues to spread his message of
conciliation wherever they may go. They must stop claiming that farmers
block the path of conciliation. They should stop saying that they are
racist and that they wish to scupper restitution and land reform. This is
simply not true.

Only a few isolated individuals are not keen to assist the disadvantaged in
achieving success in a prosperous economy. In fact the Markinor poll
already indicates that eight out of every ten farmers are committed to
assisting new black farmers to achieve success. There is much more
information in that report which will be of use to the Government. My
advice to ANC members is to go out and buy the Landbou Weekblad this week,
so that they may learn something useful about attitudes in agriculture.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it in order
for the hon member at the podium to suggest in so many words that the
Office of the President is in the lead in terms of inciting violence
against farmers? I do not remember the exact words, but it was something to
that effect.

The SPEAKER: Order! I will have a look at this, but if it is an allegation
against a department rather than an individual, it might be in order. I
will look at the Hansard and rule on it tomorrow.

Dr W A ODENDAAL: [Inaudible.]

Mr A J BOTHA: If members of the ANC read the newspaper, they can then
convey what they have learned to the public at large and contribute
something useful to agriculture for a change.

But we need to look far wider than just the farming community in order to
seek solutions to this wave of violence. This debate of the combined
opposition is a case in point. While we agree to differ on points of
policy, we believe in uniting all South Africans in loyalty to one South
Africa for all its people. We invite the ANC Government to join us in this.

They should stop talking of two nations and how disloyal South African
nonblacks are. We allegedly display this disloyalty by conspiring with
other nonblacks in the rest of the world against our own Government. We
allegedly do so because we believe that blacks cannot govern. This is not
so. The greatest hero of everybody in this House and, indeed, in this
country is Madiba. The last time I looked he appeared to be a black man.
What we do believe is that the inner circle with which the hon the
President has surrounded himself are a sorry lot and what they look like is
of no consequence.

South Africans also believe that the ANC is in collision with its own
supporters and the people of this country. They no longer believe them.
They do not care one iota about the ANC's obsession with race. They do not
care about the colour of delivery, as long as they get more safety,
employment and some hope for a prosperous future for their children. They
wonder about the hon the President's refrain of a better life for all
because they question whom he is talking about. Is it the inner circle of
the ANC, since they are surely the only ones visibly tasting the sweet
fruits of a better life.

Hierdie soete vrugte kan hulle proe, want Suid-Afrika is een van die min
lande ter wêreld wat genoeg kos produseer vir sy eie mense en net een van
sewe in die wêreld wat voedsel uitvoer. Op die vasteland van Afrika is ons
nou, nà die ramp in Zimbabwe, die enigste een wat hom op hierdie prestasie
kan roem. Die rede waarom ons so goed presteer, is die plaaslike kundigheid
en die vernuf om mededingend te kan produseer. Hierdie kundigheid of
``native intelligence'' soos die Engelsman sal sê, is oor baie geslagte
opgebou, maar dit kan net soos 'n veld vinnig in 'n brand vernietig word,
indien die geweld onverstoord voortgaan.

Onsekerheid en onveiligheid sal die vertroue wat benodig word om ons
produksievermoë te behou, so ondermyn dat ons soos 'n sinkgat ineen sal
stort. As dit gebeur, sal daar hongersnood in hierdie land wees soos
waarvan ons in die Bybel lees, want waarmee sal ons dan die kos koop wat
ons benodig van elders?

Ek wil vandag 'n beroep doen op al die boere van al die politieke partye in
hierdie Huis, maar ook op ander met 'n direkte belang in landbou: Kom ons
vorm hier oor allegrense heen 'n forum waar ons koppe bymekaar kan sit om
ons families en kollegas daar buite te beskerm. Kom laat ons saam met
professionele mense, en andere, elke moontlikheid ondersoek om die
platteland weer in ere te herstel. Dit is ons eie kinders, ouers, broers,
susters en vriende wat daar buite ly en sterf. Kom laat ons saamstaan en
hulle beskerm. Kom laat ons verenig as een Suid-Afrikaanse nasie onder ons
eie trotse Suid-Afrikaanse vlag vir die beswil van ons almal. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[They can taste these sweet fruits because South Africa is one of the few
countries in the world which produces enough food for its own people and
only one of seven in the world which exports foodstuffs. On the African
continent we are now, after the Zimbabwean disaster, the only country that
can pride itself on this achievement. The reason we are doing so well, is
the local skill and expertise to be able to produce competitively. This
expertise or "native intelligence" as the English say, has been built up
over many generations, but it can also be destroyed as quickly as a veld is
by a fire if the violence continues undisturbed.

Uncertainty and insecurity will undermine the confidence which we need to
retain our production ability to such an extent that we will collapse like
a sinkhole. If this happens we will experience famine, the like of which we
read about in the Bible, because what will we then use to buy the food we
need elsewhere?

Today I want to make an appeal to all the farmers of all the political
parties in this House, but also to those with a direct interest in
agriculture: Let us form a forum here across all barriers where we can put
our heads together in order to protect our families and colleagues out
there. Come, let us, together with professional people and others,
investigate every possibility to restore the rural areas to their former
glory. Our own children, parents, brothers, sisters and friends are the
ones who are suffering and dying out there. Come, let us stand together and
protect them. Come, let us unite as one South African nation under our own
proud South African flag for our own good. [Applause.]]

Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, on point of order: When you were ruling on
Mr Van den Heever's point of order, while you were speaking and saying that
if it was aimed at a department it could be okay, the hon Mr Odendaal
interjected and said: ``It is the whole ANC leadership.'' I do not think
that that is correct.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, are you saying that that was out of order?

Mr J H MOMBERG: Yes, Madam.

The SPEAKER: I will look at that as well.

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and members of Parliament,
allow me to open my speech on this debate by expressing my utter disgust at
the high level of opportunism of the DP.

On 26 March we all agreed in the portfolio committee meeting that the issue
of police killings and farm killings should be thoroughly debated by the
portfolio committee on 4 April, where the Minister of Safety and Security
would also make an input. The discussion would look for causes and
solutions, instead of political statements being made. We said that once we
had agreed on the way forward, somebody could request a debate in the
Chamber. I see now, on this Order Paper, that most parties were misled by
the DP, except the IFP. The reason for that is that most parties believed
at the time that the issue of crime was a very serious matter. It is very
clear why the DP decided to take this route. They wanted to politicise this
issue again, attack the Government and create an impression that this
country is taking the route of Zimbabwe.
I must emphasise again that crime must not be used for cheap political
point-scoring. The killing of farmers, farmworkers and rural people is a
matter of great concern to us. However, I must also add that no amount of
lamenting and apportioning blame is going to solve the problem. We must
look for a solution. If we can put our heads together, as a nation, we will
find a solution, as we have proved to the whole world that we are a very
capable nation. The loss of life in South Africa - whether through violence
against the police, farmers, farmworkers, taxi operators or councillors -
remains high and unacceptable. We must do something about it.

When we say that something must be done, we do not mean that nothing is
being done, as the previous speaker sought to imply. The President recently
met Agri SA, where the concerns of farmers were thoroughly discussed.
However, we must also admit that there are no easy answers to the
questions: Who is killing the farmers? Is it just plain criminals who kill
with the sole intention of robbing? Is it former employees of the farmers
who were either unfairly dismissed or ill-treated, who are now taking
reveng? Is the aim to rob farmers of their firearms? Are our farms secure
enough to deter would-be attackers or robbers?
The relationship between the farmers and their employees must be
drastically improved, and the major responsibility in this respect lies
with the farmers themselves. If relations are good, farmworkers will be
able to report any suspicious person on a farm and may even be prepared to
defend the farmer, as it has happened on some farms.

The Minister of Safety and Security recently visited farmers to inform them
that the Government is doing everything to stop these senseless killings.
The priority committee on rural safety, representatives of various
Government role-players such as the SAPS, SANDF, Departments of Justice,
Land Affairs and Agriculture, and organised agriculture, have recently been
giving serious attention to farm attacks and the rural protection plan. As
a result, an eight-person task team has been formed to visit provinces. A
committee of inquiry into farm attacks, comprising seven members, has been
formed to look at motives and factors behind farm attacks.

In conclusion, I wish to say that the assertion that there has been a
recent escalation in rural violence is very difficult to understand. I do
not even know the basis of the ascertion. However, what I have in front of
me is clear evidence from the department that there has been a decrease in
attacks on farms and smallholdings.

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Where did you get those statistics?

Mr M E GEORGE: We are not talking about statistics, we are talking about
what is happening in the country. What I have in front of me, as I said,
shows that the assertion that there has been an increase is ill-informed.
However, I must say that even that does not mean that we are saying that
the killings are acceptable. We are doing something about it, and we must
do something about it.

Lastly, I want to say that the approach of the DP, namely that farm
killings or crime only occur in this country when whites are killed, is
unfortunate. We do not want to put a racial connotation on crime. Every
life in South Africa is important - whether it is a white farmer, a black
person in the Northern Province or anywhere in the country. What we must do
as responsible citizens, if there are any responsible citizens on that side
of the House, is put our heads together to fight crime. We must stop using
crime for cheap politicking. [Interjections.] If we do that, we will be
able to do what is right. We have the potential in this country. We have
proved that to the world. Let us put our heads together. The police are
doing their work. Let us encourage them and give them support, instead of
coming here to lament and blame everybody for what is happening in the
country. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker and honourable House, the killing of anybody
with or without a reason is not acceptable at all. The killing of innocent
citizens especially is outrageous. There are a number of farmers who have
been killed, a number of farm occupants who have been killed and a number
of law-abiding police officers who have been killed for no apparent reason,
but merely because they are the police enforcing the law.

All these killings, no matter how many extenuating circumstances these
might be, are not acceptable at all. To take the life of any person is a
crime, and for every crime that has been committed there should be a
prosecution. If the state is not doing all it can to apprehend the
criminals, the people will always conclude that the state is not prepared
to protect innocent citizens at all. [Interjections.]

The work of the police is to protect the citizens of this country without
fail. If the police are failing, the state has to find the reasons for that
failure and deal accordingly with those reasons as a matter of urgency, be
it working hours, salaries, shortage of vehicles or materials, etc.

While the state is looking for a way to redress the problems by assisting
the police to arrest the criminals and enabling them to execute their
duties diligently, we, the law-abiding citizens of this country, should
help the police in their investigations. Let us report what we know about
crime. Let us tell the police who did what, where, when and how. Let us
isolate the criminals from innocent people and let us identify them at
once.

Lastly, I would like to appeal to the people to respect human life. Let us
all respect one another as human beings. Let us value human dignity and
thus uphold the rule of law and basic human rights. The beginning of the
1980s did not have an impact on human dignity, when we were all fighting
for our liberation.  Respect for human life was rejected as something to be
destroyed if needs be, which actually happened. There are other
organisations and formations that condoned the killing of people. I think
those conditions should be reversed now.

People must own up, too, and transform their belief system, because these
wrong policies have an impact on what is going on today. Let those people
who regard the police as stumbling blocks to their achieving their
objectives, stop killing the police or stop regarding them as oppressive
persons. The police are there to ensure the security of citizens and to
uphold the rule of law. Let those people who regard farmers as stumbling
blocks to land acquisition, restitution and reform stop killing farmers,
because land cannot be and will not be allocated through illegal means.

``Kill the boer, kill the farmer'' is a bad slogan. People must reject it.
It is inhuman and obsolete. ``One settler, one bullet'' is also inhuman and
obsolete. Let us reject it in toto. Those who kill farm tenants, because
they think they are a threat to them in the land reform programme, should
cease doing so, as they share common values within the farming environment
and the farming community. Let us all love one another and let us all stop
killing one another like animals. We are human beings. [Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, there is a crisis in the rural areas of South
Africa. It is not just diseases like cholera and foot-and-mouth disease
that have had devastating effects, the greatest crisis is the crisis of
security. The recent spate of attacks and the more than 800 reported
attacks on farms last year clearly show that rural safety is deteriorating
rapidly in this country.

Nearly half of the people of South Africa live in rural areas, which
constitute a vital source of income and livelihood to millions of South
Africans. The welfare and safety of the population should be the main
concern of the Government. Instead we have a Minister of Defence who, when
interviewed by the BBC, refused to accept that South Africa's crime figures
were the highest in the world, refused to admit that there had been
increased violence that was not there before and refused to accept any
responsibility.

The facts are that in 1997 there were 433 attacks and in 2000 more than 800
attacks on farms. Clearly this figure is rising and attacks are more
violent as many of them result in murder. This is the reality.

However, instead of fulfilling their most basic duty to protect farmers and
farmworkers, this Government continues to place emphasis on race, fails to
condemn farm invasions in Zimbabwe and propagates intolerance.  Minister
Mdladlana has said that "farmers should adapt or die". The land rights co-
ordinator Andile Mngxithama has accused white farmers of waging a campaign
of terror against farmworkers; and Minister Kader Asmal had to be
repudiated by Dr Allan Boesak for attacking Christians.

It is alarming that Minister Tshwete has apparently only been driven to
action by agricultural unions threating that they will take the law into
their own hands if the Government cannot protect them. A Markinor survey
reveals that only 3% of farmers believe that the Government is doing its
best to address farm attacks. It is unacceptable that law-abiding citizens
have to become desperate for protection before this Government is willing
to listen to their justified calls for action and delivery.

It has been alleged for some time that some farm attacks are politically
motivated or at least part of an organised campaign. The fact that this
appears to be backed up by a training video on farm attacks should be
followed up urgently by the independent committee set up by the Minister to
investigate the motives behind farm attacks. If the video is evidence of an
organised campaign, it should be referred to the organised crime unit for
thorough and immediate investigation prior to the July deadline for the
committee's report. The committee should also investigate the extent to
which the Government's delay in finalising land claims, the farm invasions
in Zimbabwe, the high prevalence of illegal firearms and hate speech like
hon Mokaba's slogan "kill the boer, kill the farmer" have, each influenced
farm attacks.

However, the Minister cannot cool his heels and wait until this
investigation has been completed. Numerous investigations have already
identified glaring shortcomings in his Rural Protection Plan, such as the
state's lack of detectives and intelligence capabilities, and the security
forces which rarely obtain advance warnings of such attacks. Moreover, once
the perpetrators have disappeared, the detective service frequently lacks
the resources and capacity to arrest the culprits. This needs urgent
attention.

It is of critical importance that farmworkers are actively involved in the
security structures. Minister Tshwete's promise to increasingly involve
farmworkers as police reservists and to train 30 000 new reservists should
therefore be a top priority. Farmers should be encouraged to improve their
security by being allowed tax rebates on security-related expenses.

However, clearly more needs to be done by the Minister. More needs to be
done by the Government, and the Minister of Defence would be better advised
to defend and protect the people of this country than to defend the image
of the Government on television. The SAPS on its own does not seem to have
the capacity.

Focused and regular high-intensity operations in certain areas must be in
place. The conditions in our rural areas are becoming so horrific that it
may very well be time to call for a state of emergency in those areas that
have been worst hit. The SADF must now be called in to support the SAPS and
to secure the rural areas of this country.

Die gevaarligte flikker as 'n land se mense begin glo hul lewens word
daagliks bedreig en hulle word weerloos gelaat. Suid-Afrikaners eis optrede
deur die Regering, en die DA ondersteun hierdie eis. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The warning lights are flashing when a country's people are start to
believe that their lives are being threatened daily and that they are being
left defenceless. South Africans are calling for Government intervention
and the DA supports this demand. [Applause.]]

Moh M A MOLEBATSI: Mme Modulasetilo, Motlatsa-Moporesidente le maloko a a
tlotlegang a Ntlo eno, setlhogo sa ngangisano e e fa pele ga rona gompieno
sa re ``The sudden escalation of rural violence in South Africa.''

Moporesidente wa ANC yo gape e leng Moporesidente wa naga ya Aforika Borwa,
Comrade Thabo Mbeki, fa a ne a bua ka 8 Ferikgong ngwaga ona o, o rile, ke
a mo nopola:


  The people-centred society we seek to build throughout our continent
  requires, among other things, that we should aim to ensure that every
  single African, regardless of age, gender, class, race, ethnicity, or
  belief should live in conditions of freedom, dignity and in the absence
  of fear.

Mokgotlo wa ANC o kgatlhanong le dipolao tsa batho botlhe mo nageng ka
kakaretso. Dintsho ga di tlhoke dipalopalo gore di bonagale. Dintsho tsa
batho bagaabo rona e ka nna tse pedi, lekgolo kgotsa tse di sekete, ga di
batlege mme ke ka moo ANC e yang go kampana le babolai.

Mo Disontageng di se mmaalwa tse di fetileng re bone Tona Steve Tshwete a
tsaya matsapa ka go etela mafelo a Bokone Bophirima mo balemi ba basweu ba
bolailweng bosetlhogo. A bo gape a fetele kwa porofenseng ya Bokone kwa
banna ba Noordelik Rugby Klub ba le robedi ba bolaileng moswa e bong Tshepo
Matloga ba bo ba mo latlhela mo letamong la Sabie ba gopola fa a tlaa jewa
ke dikwena. Mo puong ya gagwe, Motlotlegi Steve Tshwete o nyaditse ka
bogale ditiragalo tse tsa bogatlapa.

Lefapha la Tshireletso le Pabalesego le mametleletse diporojeke tsa
National Crime Prevention Strategy ka ngwaga wa 1995 e e nang le dipilara
di le nne tsa go lwantsha bosenyi. Dipilara tse, ke a di nopola, ya ntlha
ke criminal justice, ya bobedi ke environmental design, ya boraro ke public
values and education, mme ya bone ke transnational crime.

Re tshwanetse ra sekaseka le go tiisa tshwaragano ya tirisano ya foramo ya
sepodisi sa semorafe le sepodisi. Re oketse kgolagano ya diporojeke tse di
600 tse di setseng di le teng tirisong e ya tshwaraganelo.

Fa re bua ka polao ya batho ba gaabo rona re tshwanetse ra tshwaranaga.
Kgetse ya tsie e kgonwa ka go tshwaraganelwa mme e bile ditau di senang
seboka di siiwa ke nong e tlhotsa. Mo ngwageng o o hulereng Palamente e e
fetisitse molao wa taolo ta dithunya, e bong Firearms Control Bill, go leka
gape go fokotsa kelo ya dithunya tse dintsi tse di seng ka fa molaong.

Mokgatlho wa ANC o tshwenyegile tota ka dipolao tsa batho botlhe fela kwa
magaeng, metseng setoropong, ditimeleng, ditekising, tota le mo kgothosong
ya dirori, pogiso mo malapeng go bomme le bana. Fela setlhogo se re lopa go
bua ka dintsho mo metseng ya selegae, ga ke itse gore lebaka e le eng.

Baagi le badiri ba metse ya selegae le bathapi ba kwa teng botlhe ba a itse
gore ga se botlhe ba ba sa saimang, mme bontsi bona bona bo siame e bile ba
tshegetsa le Molaotheo wa naga fa o re, ke a nopola:


  Botlhe ba tla lekana fa pele ga molao.

Re dira boikuelo re ntse re laletsa mekgatlho e mengwe go tshwaraganya
matsogo le mokgatlho wa ANC ka go tokafatsa matshelo a batho ba rona.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Ms M A MOLEBATSI: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and hon members of this
House, the topic which is before us today is: ``The sudden escalation of
rural violence in South Africa.''

The ANC President, who is also the President of our country, Comrade Thabo
Mbeki, when speaking on 8 January, said, and I quote:


  The people-centred society we seek to build throughout our continent
  requires, among other things, that we should aim to ensure that every
  single African, regardless of age, gender, class, race, ethnicity, or
  belief should live in conditions of freedom, dignity and in the absence
  of fear.

The ANC is against the killing of any of the people of our country in
general. It does not take statistics to get murder recognised. The killing
of our people, whether it be 2, 100 or even 1 000, is not acceptable, that
is why the ANC is going to deal thoroughly with this.

In the past few weeks we have seen Minister Steve Tshwete visiting some
areas in the North West, where white farmers were brutally murdered. He
also visited the Northern Province, where eight members of the Noordelikes
Rugby Club murdered a youth, Tshepo Matloga, and threw his body into the
Sabi River, thinking that he would be eaten by crocodiles. In his speech,
the hon Steve Tshwete criticised this cowardly action in strong terms.

In 1995 the Department of Safety and Security amended the National Crime
Prevention Strategy, which has four pillars, to fight against crime. The
first pillar is criminal justice, the second is environmental design, the
third is public values and education and the fourth is transnational crime.

We have to review and enhance co-operation between community policing
forums and the police. We have to increase the connection between the 600
projects which are currently in operation.

When we speak about the killing of our people we have to unite. United we
stand, divided we fall. Last year Parliament passed the Firearms Control
Bill to try to reduce the number of unlicensed firearms.

The ANC is extremely concerned about the killing of our people in rural and
urban areas, trains, minibus taxis and even vehicle hijackings. It also
condemns domestic violence against women and children. But, today's topic
allows us to talk only about killing in rural areas, and I do not
understand why.

Residents and employers in rural areas know that not all the people are
perpetrators. Most of them are very good people who also support our
Constitution when it says, and I quote:
  All will be equal before the law.

We appeal to and at the same time invite other parties to join hands with
the ANC to make our people's lives better.]

The highly charged issue of rural violence has again come under the
spotlight with the recent attacks on and killing of white farmers and black
youths in the Northern Province. However, it is important to note that the
term ``rural violence'' does not single out farm attacks only. It
encompasses a wider definition of violent incidents, such as theft of
livestock, robbery and assault. However, the issue of farm murders remains
a national issue and needs a partnership to address it.

This state of affairs results in the deprivation of rights and being
deprived of their regards people in the rural areas dignity and poses a
threat to the peaceful resolution of differences and rightful participation
in all democratic processes. It is also important to recognise that there
is no single cause of crime in rural violence. The search for a single
cause will merely lead to a simplistic and therefore ineffective solution.
A recent research project by the Institute of Human Rights and Criminal
Justice on farm attacks, for example, found that the motive for over 90% of
these attacks was robbery; only 6% of the offenders claimed they were
seeking revenge against the farmers, and the remaining 4% were unsure of
the reasons for their participation. The study was undertaken by
interviewing 60 ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr S ABRAM: Mevrou die Speaker, ek wil net vir my agb vriend daar sê in
plaas daarvan om te loof, is ek bitter teleurgesteld met die toespraak van
die agb lid Botha, 'n medeboer, en so ook met die toespraak van die agb lid
Gaum.

'n Mens kan nie met sulke toesprake oplossings vind nie. Ongelukkig
vererger ons net die situasie, maar die agb lede het natuurlik seker vir
die galery gepraat. Ongelukkig is daar niemand hier nie en daar is ook nie
'n spitstyd TV-uitsending nie. Hulle is dus nie daar buite gehoor nie en
het hul asem gemors. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I just want to say to my hon friend over there
that instead of praising, I am bitterly disappointed with the speech of the
hon member Botha, a fellow-farmer, and the same holds true for the speech
of the hon member Gaum.

One cannot find solutions with speeches such as these. Unfortunately we are
only exacerbating the situation, but of course the hon members were
probably speaking for the gallery. Unfortunately there is nobody here and
there is no prime time television broadcast either. They were therefore not
heard outside and have wasted their breath.]

I wish to congratulate the hon Minister of Safety and Security on his visit
last week to the bereaved families of the member of the SAPS, farmers and
the innocent youth in the Northern Province who were robbed off their right
to live, and trust that these are small steps towards the great challenge
of ... nation-building which awaits us.

We also salute all the people of Elliot in the Eastern Cape, who stood in
solidarity against perpetrators at the magistrate's court following farm
killings there. We extend our condolences to all victims of wrongdoing in
their darkest hour, irrespective of who the perpetrators were. We also
congratulate the police, who have indicated by their swift actions that
they are now organised and can arrest killers.

Many of my colleagues here this afternoon have focused on the farm-related
matters of security and labour practices. I would like to take this
opportunity to highlight the fact that rural areas have unique underlying
socioeconomic factors that lie at the root of the incidents of violence in
the rural areas. Allow me, though, this one comment regarding the reported
views of the Transvaal Agricultural Union in respect of hon Minister
Tshwete's suggestion that people on farms should be trained to be police
reservists.

Daar word beweer dat die Transvaalse Landbou-unie eintlik teen hierdie plan
gekant is en dat sy lede glo dit sou eintlik beteken dat boere in huisarres
geplaas word. Dit is 'n klug. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is alleged that the Transvaal Agricultural Union is actually opposed to
this plan and that its members believe it would mean that farmers would
effectively be under house arrest. This is farcical.]

This is a nonsensical stance. We want to urge the union to come out of
their closet and become part of this South Africa by accepting that they
should refrain from kneejerk reactions, especially when it comes to efforts
aimed specifically at addressing concerns that they have been raising all
along.

Firstly, there is also the impact of urbanisation over several decades,
combined with a large male migrant labour force. This factor contributes
directly to the unravelling of the socioeconomic fabric in rural areas.
Secondly, we must never underestimate the level of social ills, such as
alcoholism, sexual abuse and child labour, in the rural areas. With the
social and family structures unravelling over many decades, ample scope has
been left for these social ills to breed and escalate. Rural areas are
often cut off from the administrative reach of Government and therefore
basic rights to safety and justice cannot be exercised.

The truth of the matter is that many rural areas are cut off from society
at large. Lack of infrastructure and facilities conspire to break down the
foundations of rural societies. To give just one example, due to a lack of
road and transport infrastructure, children have to walk long distances to
school, often arriving late and always arriving exhausted, before their
school day has even started. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Would the hon Abram
please repeat what he said as he walked past here. That was a most
unparliamentary remark.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, I am not going to ask anybody to repeat
anything. If you have a point of order about something, you have to say
what it is.

Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to you and the House, I am
not prepared to repeat, the dirty word he used to describe what I was
saying.

The SPEAKER: Order! You may actually put your complaint in writing if you
wish, but we cannot ask people to repeat anything.

Mr A J BOTHA: I will put my complaint in writing.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, the ACDP endorses the remarks made by the
Minister of Safety and Security, Steve Tshwete, at Marikana last Thursday
when he said that farmers are the backbone of the economy and must be
protected. To reassure the concerned and mourning farming community, he
continued:


  Do not lose hope, we are going to make it right. I am not going to let
  you down. I will do everything in my power to ensure that you are safe
  and can go on with your lives.

These promises are truly reassuring, and we hope that the Minister will
keep them.

However, the ACDP disagrees with the Minister's call to the farming
community to identify residents from each farm to be trained as reservists.
We actually want to warn the farmers against doing this. Government must
rather use the money they have for this purpose to hire more policemen to
concentrate on policing farms and their environs. Training 30 000
reservists cannot, and should not, replace visible police patrols in the
farming areas. It is the fundamental responsibility of Government to
protect its citizens, and this must be demanded by all, including farmers
who are now being targeted by criminals. Farmers and their workers must
concentrate on producing food instead of patrolling their areas. Patrolling
should be done by the police, and Government must ensure that that happens.

There is a general belief that these attacks on and murders of farmers are
not just criminal, but that they are political. It is possible that this is
an orchestrated effort to intimidate farmers into leaving their land. That
is why the farming community is calling on President Mbeki to publicly and
repeatedly condemn farm attacks and murders. President Mugabe did not do
that in Zimbabwe, but we expect President Mbeki to do that in this country.

The ACDP is calling for an independent commission of inquiry comprising the
police, representatives of the farmers, and, if possible, international
experts, to look into, among other things, allegations that people are
being hired to kill white farmers. One wounded man, who was caught after a
shootout in Greylingstad confessed to having been hired. It is said that
this man had been a security guard and was trained in the use of weapons.
It must be established who hired this man if this is true.
This inquiry should also look into the existence of a group named Blackjack
that, we are told, have a plan to kill all farmers. Allegations of a
document and video on training people how to carry out farm attacks and
murders must also be investigated. Instead of those not targeted denying
such allegations, a representative commission of inquiry must look into
this matter. This will help to allay the fears of the farming community.

Our farmers are feeding the nation and must be protected. They must be
reassured that they have the right to own farms and the right to occupy
them without fear of attack, or intimidation. They must be assured that
they have an important role to play in our new democratic dispensation and
that South Africa needs them. The collapse of our agricultural sector would
be the final blow to our ailing economy.

This country should not be allowed to become like other African countries
that are no longer able to feed themselves because their economies and
agricultural sectors have collapsed. The collapse of law and order always
precedes the collapse of the economy in a country. We call on Government to
change their plan of action before it is too late. It is a fact that law
and order is fast collapsing in this country and that the rule of law is
not being taken seriously by some elements in our society.

The fight against crime will not be won until criminals fear punishment and
imprisonment. The Minister has issued enough threats. Now is the time to
show the public that he means what he says when he threatens to crush
murderers, terrorists and all those involved in organised crime. He has
assured the farming community that he will not let them down and that he
will ensure that they are safe and can go on with their lives. The ACDP
wishes to see that happen because we love, value and appreciate all our
farmers and their workers. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mev die Speaker, misdaad in Suid Afrika is besig om buite
beheer te raak. Swartmense word in Soweto doodgemaak en witmense in
Waterkloof. Niemand kan dit goedkeur nie en misdaad is nie net swart of
wit, soos sommige beweer nie.

Die vraag is wel: Waarom praat ons vandag dan oor geweld op die platteland,
en spesifiek oor plaasmoorde? Ek sê dit is omdat ons hier met iets erger as
gewone misdaad te doen het. Kom ek gee net 'n syfer. Die wêreldsyfer vir
moord is soos volg, 5 uit elke 100 000 mense word vermoor. In Amerika is
die syfer hoër. Dit is 6 uit elke 100 000. In Suid-Afrika, as daar na die
boeremoorde gekyk word, word meer as 250 boere uit elke 100 000 vermoor.
Duidelik is hier iets totaal anders as die normale patroon en daarom is
hierdie debat anders as die misdaaddebat wat ons nog baie keer moet voer om
orals misdaad te bekamp.

Hierdie probleme het daarom spesiale aandag nodig. As my inligting reg is,
het die Regering ongeveer R150 miljoen bestee om die Pagadbomveldtog in die
Kaap te stop. Soortgelyke bedrae is bestee om die onrus in KwaZulu-Natal,
veral nà die Nkabinde-geval, op te los. Hierdie probleem is, myns insiens,
net so erg en verg dieselfde spesiale optrede. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, crime in South Africa is getting out of
control. Black people are being murdered in Soweto and white people in
Waterkloof. Nobody can condone this and crime is not merely black or white,
as some people allege.

The question is: Why are we then talking about violence in rural areas
today, and specifically about farm murders? I say it is because we are
dealing here with something far more serious than common crime. Allow me to
quote a figure. The global murder rate is that 5 out of every 100 000
people are murdered. In America the figure is higher. It is 6 out of every
100 000. If we look at the murder of farmers in South Africa, more than 250
farmers out of every 100 000 are murdered. Clearly this is something
totally different to the normal pattern and that is why this debate is
different to the crime debate which we are going to have to hold many more
times in order to combat crime everywhere.

These problems therefore require special attention. If my information is
correct, the Government spent approximately R150 million to stop the Pagad
bombing campaign in the Cape. Similar amounts have been spent to stop the
unrest in KwaZulu- Natal, particularly following the Nkabinde incident. In
my opinion this problem is just as serious and requires the same special
action.]

Listening to some of the speeches here today, it seems that the farmers are
the villains, and the criminals the victims. The reality is that white
farmers are currently the victims of farm attacks by black criminals. It is
impossible to calculate the effect of these facts on black-white relations
and on the polarisation on racial grounds in South Africa. We really cannot
afford that. When white farmers are portrayed as the villains, it is the
same line of argument as that used by supporters of the Nazis who claimed
that Jews deserved their fate because they were exploiting the Germans.

The current spate of killings visited upon farmers has nothing to do with
any employer-employee relationship, as the killers are usually complete
strangers motivated by something else. According to the third quarter SA
Police Service report of 1998, in 88% of farm attacks there was no
connection between the victim and the attackers.

Die SA Polisiediens se derde kwartaalverslag van 1998 dui aan dat in 88%
van die plaasaanvalle daar geen verband was tussen die slagoffer en die
verdagtes nie. Die vraag is: Is hierdie dan gewone misdaad? Ek is bevrees
ek kan nie sê, ja, dit is, nie. Baie van hierdie moorde is sonder twyfel
meer as net misdaad.

Ek kan nie verklaar waarom iemand by mens se huis inbreek en  die televisie
en, die radio neem en dan tot vier ure lank wag dat die boer moet terugkeer
huis toe om hom te vermoor en daarna vertrek nie. 'n Gewone misdadiger is
te dankbaar as hy inbreek en die mense is nie tuis nie, want dan neem hy
die televisie en hy gee so vinnig as moontlik pad.

As verder na die wreedheid van die moorde gekyk word, is dit nie gewone
misdaad nie. Hoekom word onskuldige en ongewapende vrouens en kinders so
wreed vermoor? Het agb lede al gaan kyk na die toneel van so 'n plaasaanval
met die bloed oor die hele huis versprei? Met boodskappe met 'n politieke
strekking wat in bloed teen die mure geskryf word? Of die dooie boer wie se
lyk gelaat word met voorwerpe oor sy oë? Agb lede kan daarna gaan kyk op
die Internet.

Nie almal is so nie. Natuurlik is daar misdaad. Natuurlik is daar ook
misdaadgevalle, maar dit is die bekommernis. Wat is die oplossing? Ek het
'n paar sekondes oor.

Genl Viljoen het in sy laaste mosie hier voorgestel, en ek wil tog daaruit
lees. Hy sê hy doen 'n beroep op die Regering, en in die besonder die
Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit, om hulle konstitusionele pligte
teenoor die boerderygemeenskap na te kom, want sonder veiligheid en
sekuriteit ly kosproduksie skade. Voorts moet die Regering versoek word om
finansiële hulp en belastingtoegewings aan boere en gemeenskappe te gee ten
einde selfbeskerming te finansier.

Ek dink ons moet aanvaar dat die Regering nie in staat is om orals te kan
bykom nie. Daarom moet die boere gehelp word om hulself te kan help, asook
hulle mense op hul plase, dat hulle self van hulp kan wees. Hulle moet
opgelei word en hulle moet geld gegee word daarvoor.

Tans glo die boeregemeenskap dat die Regering nie ernstig is nie. Die
Regering sal moet 'n gebaar maak deur geld te gee, deur gesien te word daar
waar hy optree, ten einde die boeregemeenskap te help om dit op te los. As
ons Pagad se probleem kon oplos en, KwaZulu-Natal kon rustig kry, dan is
dit ook hoog tyd dat ons hierdie probleem oplos. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The SA Police Service's third quarter report of 1998 indicates that in 88%
of farm attacks there was no connection between the victim and the
suspects. The question is: Is this then ordinary crime? I am afraid I
cannot say, yes, it is. Many of these murders are without doubt more than
mere crime.

I cannot explain why someone would break into a house and take the
television and the radio and then wait up to four hours for the farmer to
return home in order to murder him and then leave. A common criminal is
only too grateful if he breaks in and the people are not home, because then
he takes the television and leaves as quickly as possible.

If one furthermore considers the cruelty of the murders, this is not common
crime. Why are innocent and unarmed women and children murdered so cruelly?
Have hon members been to look at the scene of such a farmer attack, with
blood spattered throughout the entire house? With political messages
written in blood on the walls? Or the dead farmer whose body is left with
objects covering his eyes? Hon members can view these things on the
Internet.

Not all murders are like this. Of course there is crime. Of course there
are also incidents of crime, but that is the concern. What is the solution?
I have a few seconds remaining.

In his last motion here Gen Viljoen moved, and I would like to read from it
where he says that he appeals to the Government, and in particulars the
Minister of Safety and Security, to meet their constitutional obligation
towards the farming community, because without safety and security food
production will suffer. Furthermore, the Government is be requested to give
financial assistance and tax concessions to farmers and the following
community to enable them to finance self-protection.

I think we must accept that the Government is not able to reach all areas.
For that reason the farmers must be assisted to enable them to help
themselves, as well as the people on their farms so that they themselves
can render assistance. They must be trained and they must be given money
for this purpose.

The farming community currently believes that the Government is not
serious. The Government will have to make a gesture by providing money, by
being seen to take action, in order to help the farming community to solve
the problem. If we could solve Pagad's problem and achieve peace in KwaZulu-
Natal, it is high time that we solved this problem too.]

Mr M A MAZIYA: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, it is my
pleasure to participate in this debate. Any increase in violence in South
Africa will always be unacceptable. Therefore, if there is indeed an
increase in cases of violence in rural areas, then we as the Government
will not accept this. Furthermore, it is equally appropriate that an ANC-
led Government shall never be pleased about or accept cases of violence in
rural areas or any part of the country, even if it was on the increase or
decrease. We strive for a South Africa where there is no violence.

The ANC has throughout its history not always relied on or encouraged
violence as a principal strategy, even though at times in our history we
faced opponents who utilised all forms of violence against us and our
supporters. A case in point was when the apartheid government chose to
utilise violence as their chief strategy to crush the ANC. Defiantly, the
ANC never advocated wholesale violence. In fact we encouraged our
supporters to use peaceful protest, albeit in the face of an increasingly
violent regime. All of this illustrates that the ANC will never be a
proponent of violence.

More importantly, it is our belief that for violence to be eradicated,
underlying reasons for violence first need to be tackled. Furthermore, it
is insulting to a victim of violence. We procrastinate, using semantics as
to whether there or is not an increase in violence in rural areas. As soon
as we hear about farmers and their families who have been attacked in their
own homes by thugs, we in the ANC weep with them. When we hear of cases
where farmers attempt to poison and kill farmworkers, we also weep. But we
would be comprehensively irresponsible if we did not realise that there is
not a single block or strata of individuals responsible for acts of
violence. Therefore, if we are to be successful, we need to ensure that our
solutions do not lose sight of history.

Our projects on transforming the social and economic relations in the
country ensure that the direct implementors are the people directly
concerned. Let us accept that rural areas by their very nature and manner
of business operations have major differences in levels of income. The
difference in income between the average farm owner and the average
farmworker, is too vast to imagine. Moreover, the social stratification is
so rigid that it is impossible for a farmworker to radically alter or
improve his or her socioeconomic situation.

The choices are indeed to move to an urban centre, remain in the same
position for the rest of one's life or dramatically improve one's levels of
income by whatever means necessary. The final choice becomes morally more
acceptable when the person one wishes to attack is not regarded by oneself
as being a good person. In fact, one regards this person as a remarkably
cruel individual.

Acts of aggression and violence against farmworkers have less to do with
the change of circumstances but more to do with naked racism and a cruel
outward expression. As the ANC, we maintain that the majority of farmers
and farmworkers are not criminals or racists. Therefore it is our
responsibility to ensure that this majority is not allowed to live in a
situation where they stand a chance of becoming perpetrators of violence.

It is our strongest belief that the structural formations, such as the
agricultural union, need to play a more proactive, constructive and
positive role. The agricultural union will play a decisive role in the
acceleration of land restitution, the transfer of skills and the
eradication of poverty.

In conclusion, the efforts by the Office of the President of the democratic
Republic of South Africa, show a clear commitment to fighting rural
violence. The ANC views the issue of rural violence in a very serious
light. This is within the framework of the National Crime Prevention
Strategy. The prevention of rural crime is based on an ongoing programme of
action, where the SAPS, SANDF, NIA, justice and correctional services are
all active.

However, the Government and the NCPS alone cannot solve the problems of
rural violence. The different farming communities and agricultural sectors
should also participate in mobilising and sustaining crime-prevention
initiatives. [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and hon Minister, what
kind of society are we in South Africa, if we continue to shed the blood of
fellow South Africans? Are we not ashamed when we read bad things in the
media about our country's levels of violence? Are we not sending the wrong
message to the outside world that as a nation we are not civilised?

Crime of any nature is unacceptable and therefore cannot be justified. But
the rate and magnitude at which murders are committed in our country leaves
much to be desired. Many people do not experience any sense of security in
their homes, irrespective of their race and colour. We also need to note
carefully - as the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Mr Tito Mboweni, has said
about parliamentarians - that we should steer clear of irresponsible
comments about certain issues affecting our country. We agree with him
100%, as such comments might affect our currency negatively and do not bode
well for investors as well. But we need to draw a clear distinction between
comments that are constructive and intended to correct undesirable
situations, and those that are destructive.

The facts are that farm killings and the murder of innocent people are a
reality and have to be stopped if we are to create a safe environment which
will be conducive for all South Africas to live in peace, harmony and
tranquillity. In turn, this will inspire investor confidence in our
country. Therefore, the hon the Minister of Safety and Security must act
and give urgent attention to this type of killing and bring this madness to
an abrupt end.

Motswana o rile ga leke le lela fela, le abo le utlwile a magalo. Ke eng go
twe bangwe baa rekwa go bolaya balemirui? A go tlhotlhomisiwe thata gore
sengwe se ka bonwa mme bomenemene ba fokodiwa. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[The elderly have said that the young will always emulate their elders. Why
is it being said that some are being hired to kill farmers? Let there be
investigations so that corruption can be decreased.]

Agriculture is the backbone of any developing country such as ours. It is
therefore imperative that the Government must ensure that the farming
community have stability by providing adequate security. Mobile policing
and modern communication devices are a must to scare off would-be
attackers. Easy access by road to these areas must be improved and
maintained regularly.
Makopo gaa tshidise pitsa mme le rona are emeng ka dinao re tswarane re
itirele. A re iketleleng go bua ka bomorafe, re tsenye mabogo dinameng, re
le bana ba mmala wa sebilo, go rene kutlwano, pula ene. Kana fifing go
tshwaranwa ka diatla.

Motlotlegi Tona Tshwete a tshware ka thata, ntwa e larile. A eme ka dinao,
mme a kgaleme ka lentswe le le tla utlwalang. (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[Let us stand on our own feet, unite and work for ourselves. Let us stop
talking about racism and work harder as black people and let harmony reign.
In times of trouble, we must stand together.

Hon Minister Tshwete must hold on to his seat because the fight is on. He
must stand on his feet and issue reprimands in a loud voice.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, statistics on the killing of people on farms
from various sources, do not give the same figures. But they show that
there is an unacceptable loss of life on farms and reveal the gravity of
the situation. One source says 1 044 people have been killed on farms since
1994. Another source states that since 1994, 460 farmers have been killed.
Between 1992 and 1997, there were 2 730 attacks on farms. The same source
says that the murder figures for mainly white farmers dropped in 2000 to
119 people killed on farms and 804 attacks, from 144 murders and 813
attacks in 1999. These statistics also show that farmers are still being
murdered at a rate of one every three days.

According to the SA Institute of Race Relations, 480 farmers and
farmworkers were killed between 1997 and 2000. The PAC condemns the killing
of farmers and farmworkers, primarily because human life is sacred and the
right to life is a fundamental right. Early societies organised governments
chiefly to secure the lives of their people. Any government which fails to
protect the lives of its own people is a failure.

The PAC has been concerned about killings on the farms because when this
happened in 1994, the PAC was suspected. However, we did say at the time
that we are not cowards. We have never fought a war in which our purported
enemy was not alerted and the cause of that war clearly spelt out. If it
were not that so many commissions have been appointed to look at some of
the problems in this country but have achieved little or nothing, the PAC
would be proposing a commission to investigate the killings of farmers and
farmworkers on the farms.

The PAC believes the NIA and other intelligence agencies must be directed
to pay special attention to the killing of farmers. No farmers must be
killed. No farmworkers must be ill-treated and killed. Their lives are
equally sacred. Farmers and farmworkers are important in this country's
economy. Farming is an important industry. If it collapses, there will be
massive hunger in the country and crime, which is already endemic, will
worsen. Economic development will come to a standstill. Poverty will
increase. Foreign investors will be frightened away. Local investors will
find it impossible to develop this country without the indispensable modern
technology which will be difficult to import or transfer here.

All our dreams of economic development in this country will vanish like
mist. Our country will sink into a quagmire of a Third World economy with
serious repercussions. The PAC urges that more drastic steps be taken to
protect lives on the farms and everywhere else in the country. This
includes police. According to the SA Institute of Race Relations 884 police
members were killed between 1997 and 1999. If this calls for our army to be
involved in fighting crime, let this be done to avoid the consequences of a
collapsed economy due to farm security.

The criminal law of this country also needs to be reviewed. At present it
protects criminals more than law-abiding citizens. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker ... [Interjections.] I would like to remind
that hon member that my name is Rajbally.

The MF condemns all forms of violence. It is always interested in the
promotion of peace and harmony, with the citizens' best interests at heart.
Rural violence had been an ongoing issue even before South Africa achieved
democracy. Yet, it had not been acknowledged. For years, farm labourers had
to endure abuse and, torture and were victims of murder.

The apartheid government, with the co-operation of farmers, used farms in
KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga as mass burial grounds for the freedom
fighters. These very crimes have gone unnoticed. Now, with the new
democratic Government in power, the assault and murder of these very
farmers is gaining widespread media attention and the blame is being
shifted to the masses.

According to the police, preliminary figures show that the trend is towards
a decrease in farm murders.

An HON MEMBER: How do you know?

Miss S RAJBALLY: I am talking of facts. The MF recommends that more
stringent measures be taken to curb the crime rate, such as more criminal
justice personnel and resources in the rural areas, the provision of
transportation and also a terrain that provides cover for the elderly,
women and children whilst promoting safety precautionary skills.

The MF supports the Government's initiative to combat rural violence. This
includes the operational crime strategy or Operation Crackdown which takes
a geographical approach that identifies areas which account for more than
50% of crime statistics and targets resources to these areas. The Rural
Safety Plan is another excellent initiative that integrates its operational
planning with the geographical approach of the SA Police Service's crime-
combating strategy which has the commitment of the Minister of Safety and
Security to improve this plan in conjunction with organised agriculture.

The Government's initiatives are certainly going to work if implemented
strongly. Let us work together to bring peace in our land. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr D A HANEKOM: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, the topic is: The Sudden
Escalation of Rural Violence in South Africa. I do not know if it is
accurate to say that there has been a sudden escalation but I do know, as
indeed all of us do, that violence and abuse is an everyday reality on many
South African farms. That is the truth. I do know, as all of us do, that
many South African farmers - precious South African farmers - have been
brutally murdered on South African farms. Many of those who have been
murdered have been helpless, vulnerable elderly people. Every incident is a
human tragedy.

It is our starting point that every life on a South African farm is a
precious life. Everybody is a precious person. If that is our starting
point, then we must agree that every murder and every act of violence is an
outrage. Every act of violence does damage to our country and, in some way,
affects every one of us. Every life lost is an immense loss. Every person
abused is abuse of a precious person and does huge damage to our country,
and therefore damages every one of us.

I do not believe that the hon member, Andries Botha, did his cause any good
at all. The hon Botha is a farmer. Agriculture is important to all of us,
not just to him. The topic is: violence on farms. He has used the platform
to attack the ANC. He has done nothing to achieve unity, national consensus
and common condemnation of the many wrongs and forms of violence that occur
on South African farms. He did himself, his party and his fellow farmers a
disservice. I honestly mean that. [Applause.] It may not have been his
intention but that was the effect.

The murder of our own people living on farms, farm owners or farmworkers,
is wrong, wrong, wrong. That hon member should not make a political
football out of it. He should not try to get cheap political gain out of a
tragedy. [Interjections.] He does himself and his fellow farmers a
disservice. The condemnation of all forms of violence on farms, every
killing and every abuse, needs to come from all of us, every one of us.

Where do we start to address the problem? I think that the hon Ndlovu made
a very good start when he emphasised the need for us to respect one
another, respect human life and have compassion. Love, he said. He said
people must love one another. One must love one's farmworker. One must love
the person with whom one works. One must love one's fellow human being and
respect one's fellow human being. That is a good starting point. That is a
good starting point. Condemnation of what is wrong needs to come from all
of us. Action needs to come from all of us - action, together.

It is mischievous and misleading to suggest that nothing is being done
about this problem. I am sure that the hon Minister Tshwete will say more
about that. I am really hoping that the Minister will not allow himself to
be distracted by the negative and opportunistic comments made by the
opposition. I think that we have to be honest and say that much has been
done to address this problem. Steve Tshwete has taken up this issue
vigorously. We have to be thankful for that. The truth is, though, that
there is no easy answer to this problem.
We need to properly understand what exactly is happening on South African
farms. We need to understand the causes of crime on farms and the many
complex factors contributing to that crime. We need to understand so that
we can act in the right way. We all agree that more needs to be done. But
who has to do this more? Who has to do the many things that have to be
done? Every one of us have to do something positive about it. It is our
collective responsibility. It is not just the hon Steve Tshwete's
responsibility.

Pointing fingers at those who express their frustrations about the sad
racial legacy of our land and pretending that they are responsible for
violence on farms is definitely not the solution. There are many things
that could be done and that should be done. That is what this debate should
be focusing on, an honest description of the problem and an honest search
for solutions.

Miskien is dr Mulder reg. Miskien is elke geval nie gewone misdaad nie,
maar dit is nie die punt nie. Die punt is dat ernstige geweld plaasvind op
plase, en dat moorde plaasvind. Ons moet dit gesamentlik verdoem, en sterk
verdoem. Ons moet saam 'n atmosfeer skep wat ons sal toelaat om die
probleem saam aan te pak. Die debat gaan oor geweld, nie net oor moorde
nie. Elkeen van ons moet elke vorm van geweld op plase verdoem.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Maybe Dr Mulder is right. Maybe it is not ordinary crime in every case,
but that is not the point. The point is that there is serious violence on
farms, and that murders are committed. We must condemn it collectively, and
condemn it strongly. Together we must create an atmosphere which will allow
us to tackle the problem collectively. This debate is about violence, not
only about murders. All of us must condemn every form of violence on
farms.]

The farmworker who, herself or himself, has been a victim of abuse is not
likely to be a strong partner in the common fight against crime on farms.

We are debating this matter in this Chamber, far from where the problem is,
and far from where the real problem is to be found. It is good that we are
doing so. But the issue needs to be debated in every rural council in our
country and amongst all the stakeholders in the rural areas so that we can
find joint solutions to this massive problem that we are facing. So that is
a task, I believe, that all political parties should give to their
councillors who are working in the rural areas, so that, in those rural
councils, closer to the problem on the ground, we can search for solutions
and bring stakeholders together for common action against this problem.

The police, without community support, cannot on their own solve the
problem. We need to act together and at all cost, avoid any irresponsible
statement, any temptation to get political mileage out of this real human
tragedy which is happening, so that we can jointly tackle this problem
effectively and put an end to it. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, it is of crucial importance that I declare my
interest in this debate very clearly.

I have only one thing on my mind, and that is to stop farm killings, to
stop the brutal killing of a specific section of our people - no political
point-scoring, no window-dressing and no opportunism. It would be
despicable to try to settle any political battle over the dead bodies and
graves of our farmers and their loved ones.

Let there be no doubt about the seriousness of this matter. Farmers in
South Africa - and let us not beat about the bush: white farmers - have
become an endangered species. One out of every seven farm households in
South Africa has experienced the brutality of a farm attack over less than
a decade; more than a thousand killings; more than even by the Mau Mau in
Kenya.

Ons boere se sorgvrye lewe in die natuur het 'n vloek geword, met die
bedreiging van dood en bloed 'n daaglikse werklikheid. Die gevolge op die
hele land is vernietigend. Dit ruk aan die fondamente van 'n vreedsame en
'n voorspoedige Suid-Afrika, om nie eers te praat van die van 'n Afrika
Renaissance nie.

Professor Amie van Wyk van die Teologiese Skool van Potchefstroom skryf in
Beeld:


  Plaasmoorde het tans sulke afmetings aangeneem dat inderdaad van 'n
  krisis gepraat kan word. Dit is 'n tydbom wat die hele samelewing aan
  flarde kan ruk. Ons is naby die punt dat hierdie situasie as 'n oorlog
  van lae intensiteit beskryf kan word.

[Tussenwerpsels.] Enige poging van my om my mense positief te probeer stem
oor hulle toekoms in Suid-Afrika - glo my ek probeer dit doen - loop
homself te pletter in die verwyt: ``Kyk wat gebeur met ons boere op die
plase.'' Vrese en oproepe van ``ethnic cleansing'' word dan gehoor.

Wat kan gedoen word? Ek wil konsentreer net op een saak, die belangrikste:
klimaatskepping. Die Regering moet bewys dat hulle ernstig is oor hierdie
gruwel. Die AEB het verskeie kere vir die Minister gevra om die slagoffers
van plaasmoorde te besoek. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The carefree open-air life of our farmers has become a curse, with the
threat of death and bloodshed an everyday reality. The consequences for the
entire country are crushing. It uproots the very foundations of a peaceful
and prosperous South Africa, not to mention those of an African
Renaissance.

Prof Amie van Wyk of the Potchefstroom School of Theology wrote in Beeld:


  Plaasmoorde het tans sulke afmetings aangeneem dat inderdaad van 'n
  krisis gepraat kan word. Dit is 'n tydbom wat die hele samelewing aan
  flarde kan ruk. Ons is naby die punt dat hierdie situasie as 'n oorlog
  van lae intensiteit beskryf kan word.]

[Interjections.] Any attempt by me to make my people feel positive about
their future in South Africa - believe me, I try to do this - is smashed by
the reproach: ``Look at what is happening to our farmers on the farms.''
Expressions of fear and outcries of ethnic cleansing are then heard.

What can be done? I want to concentrate on only one issue, the most
important: climate creation. The Government must prove that they are
serious about this atrocity. The AEB has asked the Minister several times
to visit the victims of farm murders.]

Personally, I was deeply moved by the meeting between Minister Tshwete and
Mr Moek van Rensburg, as well as the Minister's sympathetic conduct. I
believe Mr Van Rensburg's son did not die in vain and that the tragic
events in Marikana might be the turning point in this tragic chain of
events.
Hoe moet ons te werk gaan om die gewenste klimaat te skep? Plaasmoorde moet
onvoorwaardelik veroordeel word, nie met 'n ja- maar verskoning nie. Enkele
voorbeelde in die verband is: ``Ja, maar hoe is die boere se paraatheid?''.
Erken ons daarmee 'n staat van oorlog, of 'n onverklaarde noodtoestand?
``Ja, maar hoe behandel die boere hulle werkers?'' Dan het plaasmoorde mos
niks anders geword as summiere openbare teregstellings nie, wat van Suid-
Afrika 'n piesangrepubliek maak. Is daar enige bewyse dat boere se ``track
record'' in hierdie verband swakker is as dié van mynkapteins of
fabrieksvoormanne? Wat van Lenasia?

``Ja, maar ... '' sê Minister Lekota toe Tim Sebastian op die program Hard
Talk vra:


  But the attacks on farmers are taking on frightening proportions ...

Die Minister antwoord toe:


  No, that is not so. How many black people were killed in the black areas
  during apartheid?

Het plaasmoorde dan nou 'n manier van regstellende aksie geword oor die
verlede? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ons vra dat die Regering die haatspraak teen die boere moet veroordeel, by
uitstek die wyse waarop geïsoleerde wandade deur wit boere as die reël, en
nie die uitsondering nie, voorgehou word. Veroordeel en stop ongeregverdige
en groeiende kriminalisering en vervolging van wetsgehoorsame boere. Die
Regering moet ophou om plaasmoorde af te maak as gewone roof en misdaad.

'n Gewone rower vat die ander man se goed, en hy gee pad. Daar word nie net
in die eerste plek geroof nie, daar word ingewag, gemartel en geïntimideer.
Alle tekens dui op minstens georganiseerde misdaad. Alle rolspelers moet
betrek word, ook die memorandum van Aksie Stop Plaasaanvalle, by hierdie
ondersoek.

Die reg van wit boere op grondbesit moet erken word. Ek weet nie van een
moord wat plaasgevind het op 'n plaas sonder wettige kaart en transport
nie.

Die kwessie van plaasmoorde het 'n toetssaak geword vir die erns en
opregtheid van die Regering teenoor al die mense van Suid-Afrika.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[How should we go about creating the desired climate? Farm murders should
be condemned unconditionally, not with a yes, but excuse. A few examples in
this regard are: ``Yes, but how prepared are the farmers?'' By saying that,
are we admitting to a state of war, or an undeclared state of emergency?
``Yes, but how do the farmers treat their workers?'' Surely then farm
murders have become nothing but summary public executions, which makes
South Africa a banana republic. Is there any proof that the farmers' track
record in this regard is worse than that of mine captains or factory
foremen? What about Lenasia?

``Yes, but ... '' Minister Lekota said when Tim Sebastian said on the
programme Hard Talk:


  But the attacks on farmers are taking on frightening proportions ...

The Minister replied:


  No, that is not so. How many black people were killed in the black areas
  during apartheid?

Have farm murders now become a kind of affirmative action for the past?
[Interjections.]

We ask that the Government condemn the hate speech against the farmers, and
specifically the way in which isolated misdeeds by white farmers are made
out to be the rule instead of the exception. Condemn and stop unjustified
and increasing criminalisation and persecution of law-abiding farmers. The
Government must stop passing farm murders off as ordinary robbery and
crime.

An ordinary robber takes the other man's goods, and leaves. In the first
place there is not only robbery, but also ambush, torture and intimidation.
All the signs point to at least organised crime. All role-players should be
involved, including the memorandum of Aksie Stop Plaasaanvalle [Action Stop
Farm Attacks], in this investigation.

The right of white farmers to land ownership should be recognised. I do not
know of a single murder that took place on a farm that had no title deed.
The issue of farm murders has become a test case for the seriousness and
sincerity of the Government as regards all the people of South Africa.
[Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, hon members, I would
like, first of all, to thank the hon members Ndlovu, Abrahams and, to a
certain extent, Aucamp for the suggestions they have put forward to equip
us in the department as to what we need to do, and of course, at the same
time, to say to us here, as public representatives, that we have a
responsibility to discharge towards ensuring that the levels of crime in
our country are brought down; that better safety and security is provided
and delivered to those South Africans who are isolated, very vulnerable out
there in the hinterland of our major cities and towns, all by themselves.

The hon Ndlovu says:


  ... we, the law-abiding citizens of this country, should help the police
  in their investigations. Let us report what we know about crime. Let us
  tell the police who did what, where, when and how. Let us isolate the
  criminals from innocent people and let us identify them at once.
That is the key element that is going to place us firmly on the road to
success, to vanquishing the criminals in our country: when we stop finger-
pointing and apportioning blame; when we stop politicising what has become
a scourge of our country; when we take the podium to be heard beyond the
confines of this Chamber by the criminals out there, condemning them and
not condemning one another inside here for things that we do not know.
[Applause.]

What these farmers need to know is that we speak in unison about their fate
and that we are advising one another precisely because we see their safety
as a common responsibility on the shoulders of all of us here, not an
exclusive responsibility of that one and that one. It is not a political
issue. There are many political issues that we can table here and score
points from.

However, there are lives involved and when we say that we need to respond
in unison to this challenge, not because we want to attract the tourists to
South Africa, not because of that, but primarily because safety and
security is not a privilege that is bestowed upon the farming community in
this country, it is their constitutional right. Whether there are tourists
coming or not, we have a responsibility as a Government, as a people,
collectively to say there must be safety and security on those farms for us
to survive as a nation, as a people and as a country. That is of paramount
importance. [Applause.]

That is what emerges from the hon Ndlovu's statement that we must do this
thing together. That is what we were saying to the people at Katlehong
yesterday: that we must do this thing together, because the criminals who
are killing these farmers do not kill on a farm and go to the moon with
their loot. They go to the neighbouring village and take cover there. What
are we doing? That is what emerges from what the hon Ndlovu said. What are
we doing, as the DA, to sensitise those villagers about the necessity for
them to insulate farming communities and those farmworkers on farms? What
are we doing about that, instead of hurling insults?

I was telling the Deputy President that there is nothing that we are going
to get from other parties. It is just going to be an issue of hurling
insults at the ANC, and lying at that, because it is a blatant lie that
there is nothing the Government is doing on those farms. Those farmers will
chase them away if they say that to them, because they know that the
Government is doing something on these farms, together with them.

Concrete suggestions have been placed before them, debated, canvassed and
agreed to with them, and implementation programmes have been assessed and
reassessed and implemented. And where failures were identified, again
together, we sat down and re-evaluated the situation. Together we have
taken a decision to say that we are not going to be meeting in Cape Town
and Pretoria, but right on the farms where things are happening in order to
increase our visibility there as public representatives and also as police
officers. We are, for instance, providing helicopters, not only for
purposes of chasing the criminals that have committed the crime, but also
for preventative purposes, because it is better to ensure that no farmer
dies than swinging  into action after a farmer has been killed. So this key
element of togetherness in the fight against crime is our cutting edge.
There is a great deal that is being done there, and we would like Dr Mulder
to assist us.

I indicated that I did not have the chance to have a follow-up meeting with
Gen Constand Viljoen. He has been very helpful in this regard, unlike Dr
Mulder. He has been very helpful, and he has said to me: ``Minister, where
do you think I can feature?'', and I have identified a specific area which
is problematic, and some of them were very happy about it. The Transvaal
Agricultural Union is a very big problem, and that is where I specifically
and explicitly told the hon Viljoen that I would need his assistance,
because we cannot talk about maximising security for a farming community
that is fragmented. There must be unity there, because the killers are
enjoying the situation in which there are sharp, obvious divisions within
the farming community in this country.

We have a responsibility to bring them together and tell them to unite as
farmers, even if it is only against the criminal element and in respect of
the programmes that we are implementing. They are resisting some of the
programmes, and I do not understand why they do not like the idea of having
trained personnel, who have been trained and equipped by the SA Police
Service and put under the command of the nearest police station with
everything that is needed. But they do not want that. There could be
political reasons for that, but we hope that with the willingness that is
forthcoming from General Viljoen, we will be able to attend to this issue.

We have a problem of sensationalising farm attacks. We talk too much, and
that is why some people are even warning us. For instance, the Governor of
the Reserve Bank had to talk to us about some of the things that we are
saying in Parliament. It is not true that crime has spiralled out of
control in this country, and it is not true that the police are helpless -
that is an exaggeration with a political motive.

They are not going to defeat the ANC around this specific issue in any
election at any given time, even if it were to be tomorrow.
[Interjections.] That member is not going to do it - he must keep quiet,
because he is not just going to do it. [Interjections.] They are not going
to defeat us on this point. The best thing is to make this country a very
safe place - it cannot be done by the police and the ANC alone. It is not a
political issue. [Interjections.] It can be done in our lifetime, of course
- it should not be any other time.

Of course, those people who blamed the PAC for the attacks on farms in 1994
were quite mad, because if they knew the history of the PAC, even in the
heyday of apartheid, they would know that the PAC has never seen action
anywhere. [Interjections.] Why would they take action against farmers all
of a sudden? [Laughter.] So that was a misplaced criticism. But the call
that we are making is that we do this.

There are many things that we are doing regarding this issue. Right now, as
I am addressing the House, there are effective reaction forces on the
ground in the rural communities - it is not something that is still being
contemplated. We discussed it with Mr Grobler, the president of Agri South
Africa. We sit down regularly with him, and we sit down with the President,
as has been mentioned. The President is very much of a flagship in this
campaign - he is there.

It is not true to say that the President has no interest in this matter. I
mean, what president of a country would have no interest in the farming
community, seriously speaking? He is there and he is consulting with them,
not only on their security, but also on their own economic activities and
on what the Government can do to improve their economic activity on the
farms. We are discussing all these things - their exports, imports and what
not - we are discussing a whole wide variety of issues. So there is a great
deal that is being done. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:40.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 30 MARCH 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The vacancy which occurred owing to Chief N Z Mtirara vacating his seat
     with effect from 12 March 2001, was filled with effect from 26 March
     2001 by the nomination of Mr G D Mkono.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services:


     Report of the Judicial Inspectorate for 2000.

                            MONDAY, 2 APRIL 2001

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry on 22 March 2001 submitted
         drafts and memorandums explaining the objects of the following
         proposed Bills, to the Speaker in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         drafts have been referred by the Speaker to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry in accordance with Joint Rule
         159(2):


         (i)           Counterfeit Goods Amendment Bill, 2001
         (ii)    Trade Practices Amendment Bill, 2001
         (iii)   Patents Amendment Bill, 2001
         (iv)    Merchandise Marks Amendment Bill, 2001
         (v)     Consumer Affairs (Unfair Business Practices) Amendment
                  Bill, 2001
         (vi)    Performers' Protection Amendment Bill, 2001
         (vii)   Companies Amendment Bill, 2001
         (viii)  Close Corporations Amendment Bill, 2001
         (ix)    Copyright Amendment Bill, 2001
         (x)     Export Credit and Foreign Investment Reinsurance Amendment
                  Bill, 2001
         (xi)    Industrial Development Amendment Bill, 2001

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on the Housing Amendment
     Bill [B 7B - 2001] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), dated 30
     March 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having considered the subject
         of the Housing Amendment Bill [B 7B - 2001] (National Council of
         Provinces - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with an
         amendment [B 7C - 2001].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on the
     South African Boxing Bill [B 13 - 2001] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 30 March 2001:


         The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having considered
         the subject of the South African Boxing Bill [B 13 - 2001]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 13A - 2001].

                            TUESDAY, 3 APRIL 2001
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Public Enterprises on 27 March 2001 submitted a
         draft of the Alexkor Limited Amendment Bill as well as the
         memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Enterprises and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in
         accordance with Joint Rule 159 (2).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 3 April 2001 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Supreme Court Decree, 1990 (Ciskei) Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2001] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Justice and Constitutional Development - National Assembly).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services:


         (a)     Protocol between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water
              Management of The Netherlands concerning Bilateral Cooperation
              in the Fields of Transport and Infrastructure Development,
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol.


         (c)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Italian Republic on
              Cooperation in the Field of Public Transport, tabled in terms
              of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.


         (e)     Declaration of Intent between the Department of Transport
              of the Republic of South Africa and the Department of
              Transport of Canada concerning Technical Cooperation in
              Transportation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (f)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Declaration of Intent.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development, the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
         Constitutional Development, the Portfolio Committee on Health, the
         Portfolio Committee on Housing, the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs, the Select Committee on Social
         Services, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs, the Select Committee on Public Services, the Select
         Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs and the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Women:


         (a)     Report of the Ministerial Committee on Abuse, Neglect and
              Ill-treatment of Older Persons, Volume 1 (Main Report).


         (b)     Report of the Ministerial Committee on Abuse, Neglect and
              Ill-treatment of Older Persons, Volume 2 (Provincial Reports).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


     Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council of
     Provinces on 3 April 2001 and transmitted for consideration of
     Council's proposed amendments:
     (i)    National Council for Library and Information Services Bill [B
         44B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75)(for proposed amendments,
         see Announcements, Tablings, Committee Reports p 332).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts,
         Culture, Science and Technology for a report on the amendments
         proposed by the Council.

2.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The following member vacated her seat with effect from 31 March
         2001:


         Ndzimande, B M.


     (2)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr M Mpehle vacating his
         seat with effect from 1 April 2001, has been filled with effect
         from 1 April 2001 by the nomination of Dr E A Schoeman.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Report of the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development for
     1999-2000 [RP 37-2001].

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    Report of the Public Service Commission on Survey of Compliance
         with the Batho Pele Policy [RP 168-2000].


     (2)    Report of the Public Service Commission on Investigation into
         Land Administration, Geographic Information System and Fleet
         Management in the Eastern Cape [RP 200-2000].


     (3)    Report of the Public Service Commission on Home Affairs Batho
         Pele and Management Audit Investigations [RP 167-2000].


     (4)    Report of the Public Service Commission on Policy on Reporting
         by the Public Service Commission [RP 169-2000].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancies on Commission
     for Gender Equality, dated 3 April 2001:


         The Ad Hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancies on Commission for
         Gender Equality, in accordance with the recommittal of its
         recommendations by the Speaker, dated 29 March 2001, further
         considered and examined nominations for the filling of vacancies
         on the Commission for Gender Equality.


         The Committee, having reconsidered its recommendations, in terms
         of section 193(5) of the Constitution, nominates the following
         amended list of persons for appointment to the Commission, for the
         amended terms of office, as indicated:


              As full-time commissioners, to commence serving on 1 May 2001,
              or as soon as possible thereafter, for a term of four years:


              1.  Beatrice Ngcobo.
              2.  Manana Tlake.


              As full-time commissioner, to commence serving on 1 May 2001,
              or as soon as possible thereafter, for a term of five years:


              3.  Gertrude Fester.


              As full-time commissioners, to commence serving as soon as
              possible for a term of five years:


              4.  Nombulelo Siqwana-Ndulo.
              5.  Sheila Meintjies.
              6.  Bafana Khumalo.


              As part-time commissioners, to commence serving as soon as
              possible for a term of five years:


              7.  Rashida Manjoo.
              8.  Sophia de Bruyn.
              9.  Themba Kgase.
              10. Teboho Maitse.
              11. Thabisa Dumisa.


     Report to be considered.


